<doc id="334751" wikidata="Q424" url="?curid=334751" title="Cambodia">
<text>Cambodia, officially the Kingdom of Cambodia, is a country in Southeast Asia on the Indochinese Peninsula. It is bordered by Thailand to the northwest, Laos to the north, and Vietnam to the east, and has a coastline along the Gulf of Thailand in the southwest. It spans an area of , dominated by a low-lying plain and the confluence of the Mekong river and Tonlé Sap, Southeast Asia&#x27;s largest lake. It is dominated by a tropical climate and is rich in biodiversity. Cambodia has a population of about 17 million people, the majority of which are ethnically Khmer. Its capital and most populous city is Phnom Penh, followed by Siem Reap and Battambang.

In 802 AD, Jayavarman II declared himself king, uniting the warring Khmer princes of Chenla under the name &quot;Kambuja&quot;. This marked the beginning of the Khmer Empire. The Indianised kingdom facilitated the spread of first Hinduism and then Buddhism to Southeast Asia and undertook religious infrastructural projects throughout the region, the most famous of which is Angkor Wat. In the 15th century, it began a decline in power until, in 1863, Cambodia became a French protectorate. Following Japanese occupation during World War II, Cambodia declared independence from France in 1953. The Vietnam War embroiled the country in civil war during the 1960s, culminating in a 1970 coup which installed the US-aligned Khmer Republic and the takeover of the communist Khmer Rouge in 1975. The Khmer Rouge ruled the country and carried out the Cambodian genocide from 1975 until 1979, until they were ousted during the Cambodian–Vietnamese War. Peace was restored by the 1991 Paris Peace Accords and subsequent United Nations peacekeeping mission, establishing a new constitution, holding the 1993 general election, and ending long-term insurgencies. The 1997 coup d&#x27;état consolidated power under Prime Minister Hun Sen and the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP). 

Cambodia is a constitutional monarchy and multi-party state, although the CPP dominates the political system. The UN designates Cambodia a least developed country. Agriculture remains its dominant economic sector, with growth in textiles, construction, garments, and tourism leading to increased foreign investment and international trade. Corruption, human rights issues and deforestation have remained challenges in Cambodia&#x27;s post-conflict development. The official and most widely spoken language is Khmer, and the most widely practiced religion is Buddhism. The country&#x27;s culture and traditions are shaped by its Angkorean heritage and international influences over its history.

== Etymology ==

The &quot;Kingdom of Cambodia&quot; is the official English name of the country. The English &quot;Cambodia&quot; is an anglicisation of the French &quot;Cambodge&quot;, which in turn is the French transliteration of the Khmer (, ). &quot;Kâmpŭchéa&quot; is the shortened alternative to the country&#x27;s official name in Khmer (, . The Khmer endonym &quot;Kâmpŭchéa&quot; derives from the Sanskrit name &quot;Kambojadeśa&quot;, composed of &quot;Deśa&quot; (&quot;land of&quot; or &quot;country of&quot;) and (&quot;Kamboja&quot;), referring to the descendants of Kambu (a legendary Indian sage from the ancient Indian kingdom of Kamboja). The term &quot;Cambodia&quot; was already in use in Europe as early as 1524, since Antonio Pigafetta cites it in his work &quot;Relazione del primo viaggio intorno al mondo&quot; (1524–1525) as &quot;Camogia&quot;.

Scholar George Coedes refers to a 10th-century inscription of a Cambodian dynastic legend in which the hermit &quot;Kambu Swayambhuva&quot; and the celestial nymph &quot;Mera&quot; unite and establish the Cambodian &quot;Solar&quot; royal dynasty (Kambu-Mera), that begins with the Chenla ruler &quot;Srutavarman&quot; and his son &quot;Sreshthavarman&quot;. Coedes suggests that the &quot;Kambu Swayambhuva&quot; legend has its origins in southern India, as a version of the Kanchi Pallava dynasty creation myth.

Colloquially, Cambodians refer to their country as either Srok Khmer ( , ; meaning &quot;Land of the Khmers&quot;), or the slightly more formal (, ; &quot;Country of Kampuchea&quot;). The name &quot;Cambodia&quot; is used most often in the Western world while &quot;Kampuchea&quot; is more widely used in the Eastern world.

== History ==
=== Prehistory ===
There exists evidence for a Pleistocene human occupation of what later is Cambodia, which includes quartz and quartzite pebble tools found in terraces along the Mekong River, in Stung Treng and Kratié provinces, and in Kampot Province. Some archaeological evidence shows communities of hunter-gatherers inhabited the region during the Holocene: the most ancient archaeological discovery site in Cambodia is considered to be the cave of Laang Spean, which belongs to the Hoabinhian period. Excavations in its lower layers produced a series of radiocarbon dates around 6000 BC. Upper layers in the same site gave evidence of transition to Neolithic, containing the earliest dated earthenware ceramics in Cambodia.

Archaeological records for the period between the Holocene and Iron Age remain equally limited. An event in prehistory was the penetration of the first rice farmers from the north, which began in the third millennium BC. Prehistoric evidence are the &quot;circular earthworks&quot; discovered in the red soils near Memot and in the adjacent region of Vietnam in the latter 1950s. Their function and age are still debated, and some of them possibly date from the second millennium BC. Other prehistoric sites of somewhat uncertain date are &quot;Samrong Sen&quot; (not far from the ancient capital of Oudong), where the first investigations began in 1875, and &quot;Phum Snay&quot;, in the northern province of Banteay Meanchey.

Iron was worked by about 500 BC, with supporting evidence coming from the Khorat Plateau, in what later is Thailand. In Cambodia, some Iron Age settlements were found beneath Baksei Chamkrong and other Angkorian temples while circular earthworks were discovered at the site of Lovea kilometres north-west of Angkor. Burials testify to improvement of food availability and trade, and the existence of a social structure and labour organisation. Kinds of glass beads recovered from sites, such as the Phum Snay site in the northwest and the Prohear site in the southeast, suggest that there were two main trading networks at the time. The two networks were separated by time and space, which indicate that there was a shift from one network to the other at about the 2nd–4th century AD, probably due to changes in socio-political powers.

=== Pre-Angkorian, Angkorian, and Post-Angkor ===
During the 3rd, 4th, and 5th centuries, the Indianised states of Funan and its successor, Chenla, coalesced in what later is Cambodia and southwestern Vietnam. For more than 2,000 years, what was to become Cambodia absorbed influences from India, passing them on to other Southeast Asian civilisations that later became Thailand and Laos.

The Khmer Empire grew out of the remnants of Chenla, becoming firmly established in 802 when Jayavarman II (reigned – ) declared independence from Java and proclaimed themselves a Devaraja. They and their followers instituted the cult of the God-king and began a series of conquests that formed an empire which flourished in the area from the 9th to the 15th centuries. During the rule of Jayavarman VIII the Angkor empire was attacked by the Mongol army of Kublai Khan; the king was able to buy peace. Around the 13th century, Theravada missionaries from Sri Lanka reintroduced Theravada Buddhism to Southeast Asia, having sent missionaries previously in the 1190s. The religion spread and eventually displaced Hinduism and Mahayana Buddhism as the popular religion of Angkor; it was not the official state religion until 1295 when Indravarman III took power.

The Khmer Empire was Southeast Asia&#x27;s largest empire during the 12th century. The empire&#x27;s centre of power was Angkor, where a series of capitals were constructed during the empire&#x27;s zenith. In 2007 an international team of researchers using satellite photographs and other modern techniques concluded that Angkor had been the largest pre-industrial city in the world with an urban sprawl of . The city could have supported a population of up to 1 million people.

After a series of wars with neighbouring kingdoms, Angkor was sacked by the Ayutthaya Kingdom and abandoned in 1432 because of ecological failure and infrastructure breakdown.
The hill tribe people were &quot;hunted incessantly and carried off as slaves by the Siamese (Thai), the Annamites (Vietnamese), and the Cambodians&quot;.

Formerly part of the Khmer Empire, the Mekong Delta had been controlled by the Vietnamese since 1698, with King Chey Chettha II granting the Vietnamese permission to settle in the area decades before.

=== French colonisation ===

In 1863, King Norodom signed a treaty of protection with France. The protectorate of France period lasted until 1953, with a brief interruption while the kingdom was occupied by the Japanese empire from 1941 to 1945 and simultaneously existing as the puppet state of Kingdom of Kampuchea in 1945. Between 1874 and 1962, the total population increased from about 946,000 to 5.7 million. After King Norodom&#x27;s death in 1904, France manipulated the choice of king and Sisowath, Norodom&#x27;s brother, was placed on the throne. The throne became vacant in 1941 with the death of Monivong, Sisowath&#x27;s son, and France passed over Monivong&#x27;s son, Monireth, feeling he was too independently minded. Instead, Norodom Sihanouk, a maternal grandson of King Sisowath was enthroned. The French thought young Sihanouk would be easy to control. Under the reign of King Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia gained independence from France on 9 November 1953.

=== Kingdom (1953–1970)===

In 1955, Sihanouk abdicated in favour of his father to participate in politics and was elected prime minister. Upon his father&#x27;s death in 1960, Sihanouk again became head of state, taking the title of prince. As the Vietnam War progressed, Sihanouk adopted an official policy of neutrality in the Cold War. Sihanouk allowed the Vietnamese communists to use Cambodia as a sanctuary and a supply route for their arms and other aid to their armed forces fighting in South Vietnam. In December 1967 &quot;Washington Post&quot; journalist Stanley Karnow was told by Sihanouk that if the US wanted to bomb the Vietnamese communist sanctuaries, he would not object unless Cambodians were killed.

The same message was conveyed to US President Johnson&#x27;s emissary Chester Bowles in January 1968. In public Sihanouk refuted the right of the U.S. to use air strikes in Cambodia, and on 26 March he said &quot;these criminal attacks must immediately and definitively stop&quot;. On 28 March a press conference was held and Sihanouk appealed to the international media: &quot;I appeal to you to publicise abroad this very clear stand of Cambodia—that is, I will, in any case, oppose all bombings on Cambodian territory under whatever pretext.&quot; Nevertheless, the bombing continued.

=== Khmer Republic (1970–1975) ===
While visiting Beijing in 1970 Sihanouk was ousted by a military coup led by Prime Minister General Lon Nol and Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak. Once the coup was completed, the new regime, which demanded that the Vietnamese communists leave Cambodia, gained the political support of the United States. The North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces, desperate to retain their sanctuaries and supply lines from North Vietnam, launched armed attacks on the new government. The king urged his followers to help in overthrowing this government, hastening the onset of civil war.
Khmer Rouge rebels began using him to gain support. From 1970 until 1972, the Cambodian conflict was largely between the government and army of Cambodia, and the armed forces of North Vietnam. As they gained control of Cambodian territory, the Vietnamese communists imposed a new political infrastructure, which was eventually dominated by the Cambodian communists now referred to as the Khmer Rouge.

Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the North Vietnamese attempt to overrun Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot&#x27;s then second in command, Nuon Chea. NVA units overran Cambodian army positions while the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK) expanded their attacks on lines of communication. In response to the North Vietnamese invasion, US President Richard Nixon announced that US and South Vietnamese ground forces had entered Cambodia in a campaign aimed at destroying NVA base areas in Cambodia (see Cambodian Incursion).

On New Year&#x27;s Day 1975, Communist troops launched an offensive which, in 117 days, led to the collapse of the Khmer Republic. Simultaneous attacks around the perimeter of Phnom Penh pinned down Republican forces, while other CPK units overran fire bases controlling the vital lower Mekong resupply route. A US-funded airlift of ammunition and rice ended when Congress refused additional aid for Cambodia. The Lon Nol government in Phnom Penh surrendered on 17 April 1975, 5 days after the US mission evacuated Cambodia.

=== Khmer Rouge regime (1975–1978) ===


Estimates as to how many people were killed by the Khmer Rouge regime range from approximately 1 to 3 million; a cited figure is 2 million (about a quarter of the population). This era gave rise to the term Killing Fields, and the prison Tuol Sleng became known for its history of mass killing. Hundreds of thousands fled across the border into neighbouring Thailand. The regime disproportionately targeted ethnic minority groups. The Cham Muslims underwent purges with as much as half of their population exterminated. Pol Pot was determined to keep his power and disenfranchise any enemies or potential threats, and thus increased his violent and aggressive actions against his people.

Forced repatriation in 1970 and deaths during the Khmer Rouge era reduced the Vietnamese population in Cambodia from between 250,000 and 300,000 in 1969 to a reported 56,000 in 1984. Most of the victims of the Khmer Rouge regime were not ethnic minorities but ethnic Khmer. Professionals, such as doctors, lawyers and teachers, were targeted. According to Robert D. Kaplan, &quot;eyeglasses were as deadly as the yellow star&quot; as they were seen as a sign of intellectualism.

Religious institutions were targeted by the Khmer Rouge. The majority of Khmer architecture, 95% of Cambodia&#x27;s Buddhist temples, were destroyed.

=== Vietnamese occupation and transition (1978–1992) ===
In November 1978, Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia in response to border raids by the Khmer Rouge and conquered it. The People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) was established as a pro-Soviet state led by the Kampuchean People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party, a party created by the Vietnamese in 1951, and led by a group of Khmer Rouge who had fled Cambodia to avoid being purged by Pol Pot and Ta Mok. It was fully beholden to the occupying Vietnamese army and under the direction of the Vietnamese ambassador to Phnom Penh. Its arms came from Vietnam and the Soviet Union.

In opposition to the newly created state, a government-in-exile referred to as the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) was formed in 1981 from three factions. This consisted of the Khmer Rouge, a royalist faction led by Sihanouk, and the Khmer People&#x27;s National Liberation Front. Its credentials were recognised by the United Nations. The Khmer Rouge representative to UN, Thiounn Prasith, was retained, and he had to work in consultation with representatives of the noncommunist Cambodian parties. The refusal of Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia led to economic sanctions.

Peace efforts began in Paris in 1989 under the State of Cambodia, culminating two years later in October 1991 in a Paris Comprehensive Peace Settlement. The UN was given a mandate to enforce a ceasefire and deal with refugees and disarmament known as the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

=== Kingdom (1993–) ===

In 1993, the monarchy was restored with Norodom Sihanouk reinstated as King, and the first post-war election was coordinated by UNTAC. The election was won by FUNCINPEC led by Sihanouk&#x27;s son Ranariddh in a hung parliament. A power-sharing agreement was agreed with Ranariddh and Hun Sen of the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party both simultaneously being co-Prime Ministers after the CPP threatened to secede part of the country if power was fully transferred to FUNCINPEC. The stability established following the conflict was shaken in 1997 by a coup d&#x27;état led by the co-Prime Minister Hun Sen, who ousted Ranariddh and other parties represented in the government and consolidated power for CPP. After its government was able to stabilize under Sen, Cambodia was accepted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on 30 April 1999. Norodom Sihamoni was crowned Cambodia&#x27;s king in 2004 after his father Sihanouk&#x27;s abdication.

During the late 1990s and early 2000s, reconstruction efforts progressed which led to some political stability through a multiparty democracy under a constitutional monarchy although Sen&#x27;s rule has been marred by human rights abuses and corruption. Cambodia&#x27;s economy grew rapidly in the 2000s and 2010s, and it received considerable investment and infrastructure development support from China as part of its Belt and Road Initiative.A UN-backed war crimes tribunal, the Khmer Rouge Tribunal sought out to investigate crimes committed during the Democratic Kampuchea period and prosecute its leaders. Hun Sen has opposed extensive trials or investigations of former Khmer Rouge officials. In July 2010, Kang Kek Iew was the first Khmer Rouge member found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity in his role as the former commandant of the S21 extermination camp and he was sentenced to life in prison. In August 2014, the tribunal sentenced Khieu Samphan, the regime&#x27;s 83-year-old former head of state, and Nuon Chea, its 88-year-old chief ideologue, to life in prison on war crimes charges for their role in the country&#x27;s terror period in the 1970s.

After the 2013 Cambodian general election, allegations of voter fraud from opposition party Cambodia National Rescue Party led to widespread anti-government protests that continued into the following year. The protests ended after a crackdown by government forces. The Cambodia National Rescue Party was dissolved ahead of the 2018 Cambodian general election and the ruling Cambodian People&#x27;s Party also enacted tighter curbs on mass media. The CPP won every seat in the National Assembly without major opposition, effectively solidifying &quot;de facto&quot; one-party rule in the country.

The global COVID-19 pandemic spread to Cambodia in early 2020. Despite minimising the disease&#x27;s spread for much of 2020 the country&#x27;s health system was put under strain by a major outbreak in early 2021, which prompted several lockdowns. It also had a severe economic impact, with the tourism industry particularly affected due to international travel restrictions.

Prime Minister Hun Sen assumed office and is one of the world&#x27;s longest-serving leaders. He has been accused of crackdowns on opponents and critics. In December 2021, Hun Sen announced his support for his son Hun Manet to succeed him after the next general election in 2023. A July 2023 Human Rights Watch report showed numerous and significant election fraud and vote tampering in the June 2022 commune elections. In the July 2023 election, the ruling Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP) easily won by a landslide in a flawed election, after the disqualification of Cambodia&#x27;s most important opposition, Candlelight Party. On 22 August 2023, Hun Manet was sworn in as the new Cambodian prime minister.

== Geography ==

Cambodia has an area of and lies entirely within the tropics, between latitudes 10° and 15°N, and longitudes 102° and 108°E. It borders Thailand to the north and west, Laos to the northeast, and Vietnam to the east and southeast. It has a coastline along the Gulf of Thailand.

Cambodia&#x27;s landscape is characterised by a low-lying central plain that is surrounded by uplands and low mountains and includes the Tonle Sap (Great Lake) and the upper reaches of the Mekong River delta. Extending outward from this central region are transitional plains, thinly forested and rising to elevations of about above sea level. In Cambodia forest cover is around 46% of the total land area, equivalent to 8,068,370 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 11,004,790 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 7,464,400 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 603,970 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 4% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity). For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.

To the north the Cambodian plain abuts a sandstone escarpment, which forms a southward-facing cliff stretching more than from west to east and rising abruptly above the plain to heights of . This cliff marks the southern limit of the Dângrêk Mountains.

Flowing south through Cambodia&#x27;s eastern regions is the Mekong River. East of the Mekong the transitional plains gradually merge with the eastern highlands, a region of forested mountains and high plateaus that extend into Laos and Vietnam. In southwestern Cambodia two distinct upland blocks, the Krâvanh Mountains and the Dâmrei Mountains, form another highland region that covers much of the land area between the Tonle Sap and the Gulf of Thailand.

In this remote and largely uninhabited area, Phnom Aural, Cambodia&#x27;s highest peak rises to an elevation of . The southern coastal region adjoining the Gulf of Thailand is a narrow lowland strip, heavily wooded and sparsely populated, which is isolated from the central plain by the southwestern highlands.

The most distinctive geographical feature is the inundations of the Tonle Sap, measuring about during the dry season and expanding to about during the rainy season. This densely populated plain, which is devoted to wet rice cultivation, is the heartland of Cambodia. Much of this area has been designated as a biosphere reserve.

=== Climate ===

Cambodia&#x27;s climate, like that of the rest of Southeast Asia, is dominated by monsoons, which are known as tropical wet and dry because of the distinctly marked seasonal differences.

Cambodia has a temperature range from and experiences tropical monsoons. Southwest monsoons blow inland bringing moisture-laden winds from the Gulf of Thailand and Indian Ocean from May to October. The northeast monsoon ushers in the dry season, which lasts from November to April. The country experiences the heaviest precipitation from September to October with the driest period occurring from January to February.

According to the International Development Research Centre and The United Nations, Cambodia is considered Southeast Asia&#x27;s most vulnerable country to the effects of climate change, alongside the Philippines. Nearly all provinces in Cambodia are affected by climate change. Rural coastal populations are particularly at risk. Shortages of clean water, extreme flooding, mudslides, higher sea levels and potentially destructive storms are of particular concern, according to the Cambodia Climate Change Alliance. Climate change has also had a major impact on water levels, ecology and productivity of the Tonlé Sap in recent years, affecting the food security and agriculture of a large proportion of Cambodia&#x27;s population.

Cambodia has two distinct seasons. The rainy season, which runs from May to October, can see temperatures drop to and is generally accompanied with high humidity. The dry season lasts from November to April when temperatures can rise up to around April. Disastrous flooding occurred in 2001 and again in 2002, with some degree of flooding almost every year. Severe flooding also affected 17 provinces in Cambodia during the 2020 Pacific typhoon season.

=== Biodiversity and conservation ===

Cambodia&#x27;s biodiversity is largely founded on its seasonal tropical forests, containing some 180 recorded tree species, and riparian ecosystems. There are 212 mammal species, 536 bird species, 240 reptile species, 850 freshwater fish species (Tonle Sap Lake area), and 435 marine fish species recorded by science. Much of this biodiversity is contained around the Tonle Sap Lake and the surrounding biosphere.

The Tonle Sap Biosphere Reserve is a reserve surrounding the Tonle Sap lake. It encompasses the lake and nine provinces: Kampong Thom, Siem Reap, Battambang, Pursat, Kampong Chhnang, Banteay Meanchey, Pailin, Oddar Meanchey and Preah Vihear. In 1997, it was successfully nominated as a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve. Other key habitats include the evergreen and dry Dipterocarp forests of Mondolkiri province, protected by Keo Seima Wildlife Sanctuary, Phnom Prich Wildlife Sanctuary, and Srepok Wildlife Sanctuary, as well as Ratanakiri province, and the Cardamom Mountains ecosystem, including Preah Monivong National Park, Botum-Sakor National Park, and the Phnom Aural Wildlife Sanctuary and Phnom Samkos Wildlife Sanctuary.

The Worldwide Fund for Nature recognises six distinct terrestrial ecoregions in Cambodia – the Cardamom Mountains rain forests, Central Indochina dry forest, Southeast Indochina dry evergreen forest, Southern Annamite Range tropical forest, Tonle Sap freshwater swamp forest, and Tonle Sap-Mekong peat swamp forest.


The rate of deforestation in Cambodia is one of the highest in the world and it is often perceived as the most destructive, singular environmental issue in the country. Cambodia&#x27;s primary forest cover fell from over 70% in 1969 to just 3.1% in 2007. Since 2007, less than of primary forest remain with the result that the future sustainability of the forest reserves of Cambodia is under severe threat. In 2010–2015, the annual rate of deforestation was 1.3%. The environmental degradation also includes national parks and wildlife sanctuaries on a large scale and many endangered and endemic species are now threatened with extinction due to loss of habitats. Reasons for the deforestation in Cambodia range from opportunistic illegal loggings to large scale clearings from big construction projects and agricultural activities. The deforestation involves the local population, Cambodian businesses and authorities as well as transnational corporations from all over the world.

Plans for hydroelectric development in the Greater Mekong Subregion, by Laos in particular, pose a &quot;real danger to the food supply of Vietnam and Cambodia. Upstream dams will imperil the fish stocks that provide the vast majority of Cambodia&#x27;s protein and could also denude the Mekong River of the silt Vietnam needs for its rice basket.&quot; The rich fisheries of Tonle Sap, the largest freshwater lake in Southeast Asia, largely supply the impoverished country&#x27;s protein. The lake all but disappears in the dry season and then expands massively as water flow from the Mekong backs up when the rains come. &quot;Those fish are so important for their livelihoods, both economically and nutritionally&quot;, said Gordon Holtgrieve, a professor at the University of Washington; he points out that none of the dams that are either built or being built on the Mekong river &quot;are pointing at good outcomes for the fisheries&quot;.

In the 2010s, the Cambodian government and educational system has increased its involvement and co-operation with both national and international environmental groups. A new National Environmental Strategy and Action Plan (NESAP) for Cambodia is to be implemented from late 2016 to 2023 and contains new ideas for how to incite a green and environmentally sustainable growth for the country.

=== Administrative divisions ===
The autonomous municipality () and provinces () of Cambodia are first-level administrative divisions. Cambodia is divided into 25 provinces including the autonomous municipality.

Municipalities and districts are the second-level administrative divisions of Cambodia. The provinces are subdivided into 159 districts and 26 municipalities. The districts and municipalities in turn are further divided into communes () and quarters ().


== Politics ==
=== Government ===

National politics in Cambodia take place within the framework of the nation&#x27;s constitution of 1993. The government is a constitutional monarchy operated as a parliamentary representative democracy. The Prime Minister of Cambodia, currently Hun Manet, is the head of government, while the King of Cambodia (currently Norodom Sihamoni) is the head of state. The prime minister is appointed by the king, on the advice and with the approval of the National Assembly. The prime minister and the ministerial appointees exercise executive power.

Legislative powers are shared by the executive and the bicameral Parliament of Cambodia (, ), which consists of a lower house, the National Assembly (, ) and an upper house, the Senate (, ). Members of the 123-seat National Assembly are elected through a system of proportional representation and serve for a maximum term of five years. The Senate has 61 seats, two of which are appointed by the king and two others by the National Assembly, and the rest elected by the commune councillors from the 24 provinces of Cambodia. Senators serve six-year terms.

On 14 October 2004, King Norodom Sihamoni was selected by a special nine-member Royal Throne Council, part of a selection process that was quickly put in place after the abdication of King Norodom Sihanouk a week prior. Sihamoni&#x27;s selection was endorsed by Prime Minister Hun Sen and National Assembly Speaker Prince Norodom Ranariddh (the king&#x27;s half-brother and current chief advisor), both members of the throne council. He was enthroned in Phnom Penh on 29 October 2004.

Officially a multiparty democracy, in reality, &quot;the country remain[ed] a one-party state dominated by the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party and Prime Minister Hun Sen, a recast Khmer Rouge official in power since 1985. The open doors to new investment during his reign have yielded the most access to a coterie of cronies of his and his wife, Bun Rany&quot;, according to Megha Bahree, a writer on &quot;Forbes&quot;. Cambodia&#x27;s government has been described by Human Rights Watch&#x27;s Southeast Asian director, David Roberts, as a &quot;relatively authoritarian coalition via a superficial democracy&quot;.

Prime Minister Hun Sen vowed to rule until he turned 74. His government was regularly accused of ignoring human rights and suppressing political dissent. The 2013 election results were disputed by the opposition, leading to demonstrations in the capital. Demonstrators were injured and killed in Phnom Penh where a reported 20,000 protesters gathered, with some clashing with riot police. From a humble farming background, Hun Sen was just 33 when he took power in 1985, and was by some considered a long-ruling dictator. Hun Sen was succeeded by his son Hun Manet as Prime Minister in August 2023 following an election that was deemed by independent and foreign media and politicians to be neither free nor fair. Hun Sen remains the de facto ruler of Cambodia through his continued leadership of the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party. Following the 2024 Senate election, Hun Sen became president of the Senate, a role which gives him the power to sign off on laws in the King&#x27;s absence.

Since the 2017 crackdowns on political dissent and free press, Cambodia has been described as a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state.

=== Foreign relations ===
The foreign relations of Cambodia are handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under Prak Sokhon. Cambodia is a member of the United Nations, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund. It is a member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), ASEAN, and joined the WTO in 2004. In 2005 Cambodia attended the inaugural East Asia Summit in Malaysia.

Cambodia has established diplomatic relations with numerous countries; the government reports twenty embassies in the country including many of its Asian neighbours and those of important players during the Paris peace negotiations, including the US, Australia, Canada, China, the European Union (EU), Japan, and Russia. As a result of its international relations, various charitable organisations have assisted with social, economic, and civil infrastructure needs.

While the violent ruptures of the 1970s and 1980s have passed, several border disputes between Cambodia and its neighbours persist. There are disagreements over some offshore islands and sections of the boundary with Vietnam and undefined maritime boundaries. Cambodia and Thailand also have border disputes, with troops clashing over land immediately adjacent to the Preah Vihear temple in particular, leading to a deterioration in relations. Most of the territory belongs to Cambodia, but a combination of Thailand disrespecting international law, Thai troops upbuild in the area and lack of resources for the Cambodian military have left the situation unsettled since 1962.

Cambodia and China have cultivated ties in the 2010s. A Chinese company with the support of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army built a deep-water seaport along stretch of Cambodian coastline of the Gulf of Thailand in Koh Kong province; the port is sufficiently deep to be used by cruise ships, bulk carriers or warships. Cambodia&#x27;s diplomatic support has been invaluable to Beijing&#x27;s effort to claim disputed areas in the South China Sea. Because Cambodia is a member of ASEAN, and because under ASEAN rules &quot;the objections of one member can thwart any group initiative&quot;, Cambodia is diplomatically useful to China as a counterweight to southeast Asian nations that have closer ties to the United States.

Cambodia is the 70th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

=== Military ===
The Royal Cambodian Army, Royal Cambodian Navy, Royal Cambodian Air Force and Royal Gendarmerie collectively form the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces, under the command of the Ministry of National Defence, presided over by the Prime Minister of Cambodia. His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni is the Supreme Commander of the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF), and the country&#x27;s Prime Minister Hun Sen effectively holds the position of commander-in-chief.

The introduction of a revised command structure early in 2000 was a key prelude to the reorganisation of the Cambodian military. This saw the defence ministry form three subordinate general departments responsible for logistics and finance, materials and technical services, and defence services under the High Command Headquarters (HCHQ). The minister of National Defense is General Tea Banh. The Secretaries of State for Defense are Chay Saing Yun and Por Bun Sreu.

In 2010, the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces comprised about 102,000 active personnel (200,000 reserve). Total Cambodian military spending stands at 3% of national GDP. The Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia total more than 7,000 personnel. Its civil duties include providing security and public peace, to investigate and prevent organised crime, terrorism, and other violent groups; to protect state and private property; to help and assist civilians and other emergency forces in a case of emergency, natural disaster, civil unrest, and armed conflicts.

Hun Sen has accumulated highly centralised power in Cambodia, including a &quot;praetorian guard&quot; that &#x27;appears to rival the capabilities of the country&#x27;s regular military units&#x27;, and is allegedly used by Hun Sen to quell political opposition.&#x27; Cambodia signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

=== Political culture ===
The Cambodian People&#x27;s Party (CPP) is the sole dominant-party in Cambodia. The CPP currently commands 120 of the 125 seats in the National Assembly and 55 of 62 seats in the Senate.

Hun Sen and his government have seen much controversy. Hun Sen was a former Khmer Rouge commander who was originally installed by the Vietnamese and, after the Vietnamese left the country, maintains his strong man position by violence and oppression when deemed necessary. In 1997, fearing the growing power of his co-prime minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Hun launched a coup, using the army to purge Ranariddh and his supporters. Ranariddh was ousted and fled to Paris while other opponents of Hun Sen were arrested, tortured, and some summarily executed.

In addition to political oppression, the Cambodian government has been accused of corruption in the sale of vast areas of land to foreign investors resulting in the eviction of thousands of villagers as well as taking bribes in exchange for grants to exploit Cambodia&#x27;s oil wealth and mineral resources. Cambodia is consistently listed as one of the most corrupt governments in the world. Amnesty International currently recognises one prisoner of conscience in the country: 33-year-old land rights activist Yorm Bopha.

Journalists covering a protest over disputed election results in Phnom Penh on 22 September 2013 say they were deliberately attacked by police and men in plain clothes, with slingshots and stun guns. The attack against the president of the Overseas Press Club of Cambodia, Rick Valenzuela, was captured on video.
The violence came amid political tensions as the opposition boycotted the opening of Parliament due to concerns about electoral fraud. Seven reporters sustained minor injuries while at least two Cambodian protesters were hit by slingshot projectiles and hospitalised.

In 2017, Cambodia&#x27;s Supreme Court dissolved the main opposition party, Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), paving the way for a return to a yet more authoritarian political system.

=== Corruption ===

The level of corruption in Cambodia exceeds most countries in the world. Despite adopting an &#x27;Anti-Corruption Law&#x27; in 2010, corruption prevails throughout the country. Corruption affects the judiciary, the police, and other state institutions. Favouritism by government officials and impunity is commonplace. Lack of a clear distinction between the courts and the executive branch of government also makes for a deep politicisation of the judicial system.

Examples of areas where Cambodians encounter corrupt practices in their everyday lives include obtaining medical services, dealing with alleged traffic violations, and pursuing fair court verdicts. Companies deal with extensive red tape when obtaining licenses and permits, especially construction-related permits, and the demand for and supply of bribes are commonplace in this process. The 2010 Anti-Corruption Law provided no protection to whistle-blowers, and whistle-blowers can be jailed for up to 6 months if they report corruption that cannot be proven.

=== Legal profession ===
The Cambodian legal profession was established in 1932. By 1978, due to the Khmer Rouge regime, the entire legal system was eradicated. Judges and lawyers were executed after being deemed &quot;class enemies&quot; and only 6–12 legal professionals actually survived and remained in the country. Lawyers did not reappear until 1995 when the Bar Association of the Kingdom of Cambodia was created.

=== Human rights ===
A US State Department report says &quot;forces under Hun Sen and the Cambodian People&#x27;s Party have committed frequent and large-scale abuses, including extrajudicial killings and torture, with impunity&quot;. According to the 2016 Global Slavery Index, an estimated 256,800 people are enslaved in modern-day Cambodia, or 1.65% of the population.

Forced land evictions by senior officials, security forces, and government-connected business leaders are commonplace in Cambodia. Land has been confiscated from hundreds of thousands of Cambodians over more than a decade for the purpose of self-enrichment and maintaining power of various groups of special interests. Credible non-governmental organisations estimate that &quot;770,000 people have been adversely affected by land grabbing covering at least four million hectares (nearly 10 million acres) of land that have been confiscated&quot;, says Paris-based International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH).

On 14 March 2018, the UN expert on the human rights situation in Cambodia &quot;expressed serious concerns about restrictions on the media, freedom of expression and political participation ahead of a national election in July&quot;. Some critics of the government have been arrested for allegedly spreading fake news about the COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia.

== Economy ==

In 2017, Cambodia&#x27;s per capita income is $4,022 in PPP and $1,309 in nominal per capita. The United Nations designates Cambodia as a least developed country. Most rural households depend on agriculture and its related sub-sectors. Rice, fish, timber, garments, and rubber are Cambodia&#x27;s major exports. The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) reintroduced more than 750 traditional rice varieties to Cambodia from its rice seed bank in the Philippines. These varieties had been collected in the 1960s.

Based on the Economist, IMF: Annual average GDP growth for the period 2001–2010 was 7.7% making it one of the world&#x27;s top ten countries with the highest annual average GDP growth. Tourism was Cambodia&#x27;s fastest-growing industry, with arrivals increasing from 219,000 in 1997 to over 2 million in 2007. In 2004, inflation was at 1.7% and exports at US$1.6 billion.
Oil and natural gas deposits found beneath Cambodia&#x27;s territorial waters in 2005 yield great potential but remain mostly untapped, due in part to territorial disputes with Thailand.
The National Bank of Cambodia is the central bank of the kingdom and provides regulatory oversight to the country&#x27;s banking sector and is responsible in part for increasing the foreign direct investment in the country. Between 2010 and 2012 the number of regulated banks and micro-finance institutions increased from 31 covered entities to over 70 individual institutions underlining the growth within the Cambodian banking and finance sector.

In 2012, Credit Bureau Cambodia was established with direct regulatory oversight by the National Bank of Cambodia. The Credit Bureau further increases the transparency and stability within the Cambodian Banking Sector as all banks and microfinance companies are now required by law to report accurate facts and figures relating to loan performance in the country.

One of the largest challenges facing Cambodia is still the fact that the older population often lacks education, particularly in the countryside, which suffers from a lack of basic infrastructure. Fear of renewed political instability and corruption within the government discourage foreign investment and delay foreign aid, although there has been significant aid from bilateral and multilateral donors. Donors pledged $504 million to the country in 2004, while the Asian Development Bank alone has provided $850 million in loans, grants, and technical assistance. Bribes are often demanded from companies operating in Cambodia when obtaining licences and permits, such as construction-related permits.

Cambodia ranked among the worst places in the world for organised labour in the 2015 International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) Global Rights Index, landing in the category of countries with &quot;no guarantee of rights&quot;.&#x27;

In April 2016, Cambodia&#x27;s National Assembly has adopted a Law on Trade Unions. &quot;The law was proposed at a time when workers have been staging sustained protests in factories and in the streets demanding wage increases and improvements in their working conditions&quot;. The concerns about Cambodia&#x27;s new law are shared not only by labour and rights groups but international organisations more generally. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) Country Office for Thailand, Cambodia and Lao PDR, has noted that the law has &quot;several key concerns and gaps&quot;.

=== Textiles ===
The garment industry represents the largest portion of Cambodia&#x27;s manufacturing sector, accounting for 80% of the country&#x27;s exports. In 2012, the exports grew to $4.61 billion up 8% over 2011. In the first half of 2013, the garment industry reported exports worth $1.56 billion. The sector employs 335,400 workers, of which 91% are female.

Better Factories Cambodia was created in 2001 as a unique partnership between the ILO and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the World Bank Group. The programme engages with workers, employers, and governments to improve working conditions and boost the competitiveness of the garment industry. On 18 May 2018, the Project Advisory Committee (PAC) of the ILO Better Factories Cambodia Programme met in Phnom Penh to provide input into the draft conclusions and recommendations of the BFC&#x27;s independent mid-term evaluation, as well as to discuss options on how to further strengthen the programme&#x27;s transparent reporting initiative. The members of the PAC concurred with the findings of the evaluation related to the impact the programme has had on the Cambodian garment sector and workers, including:
a. contributing to sustained overall growth of the garment industry
b. improving the lives of at least half a million Cambodian workers of factories in the BFC
programme and many more of their family members;
c. ensuring that workers receive correct wages and social protection benefits
d. virtually eliminating child labour in the sector
e. making Cambodia&#x27;s garment factories safer overall
f. creating a &quot;level playing field&quot; for labour across garment sector
g. influencing business practices through (1) using factory data to highlight areas for
improvement and (2) being a core part of risk management strategies of international
brands/buyers.

=== Tourism ===

The tourism industry is the country&#x27;s second-greatest source of hard currency after the textile industry. International visitor arrivals in 2018 topped six million, a ten-fold increase since the beginning of the 21st century. Tourism employs 26% of the country&#x27;s workforce, which translates into roughly 2.5 million jobs for Cambodians.

Besides Phnom Penh and Angkor Wat, other tourist destinations include Sihanoukville in the southwest which has several popular beaches, and Battambang in the northwest, both of which are popular stops for backpackers who make up a significant portion of visitors to Cambodia. The area around Kampot and Kep including the Bokor Hill Station are also of interest to visitors. Tourism has increased steadily each year in the relatively stable period since the 1993 UNTAC elections.

 Most international arrivals in 2018 were Chinese. Tourism receipts exceeded US$4.4 billion in 2018, accounting for almost ten percent of the kingdom&#x27;s gross national product. The Angkor Wat historical park in Siem Reap Province, the beaches in Sihanoukville, the capital city Phnom Penh, and Cambodia&#x27;s 150 casinos (up from just 57 in 2014) are the main attractions for foreign tourists.

Cambodia&#x27;s reputation as a safe destination for tourism has been hindered by civil and political unrest and several high-profile examples of serious crime committed against tourists visiting the kingdom.

Cambodia&#x27;s tourist souvenir industry employs many people around the main places of interest. The quantity of souvenirs produced is insufficient to face the increasing number of tourists. Most products sold to tourists on the markets are imported from China, Thailand, and Vietnam.

=== Agriculture ===

Agriculture is the mainstay of the Cambodian economy. Agriculture accounted for 90 per cent of GDP in 1985 and employed approximately 80 per cent of the workforce. Rice is the principal commodity. Major secondary crops include maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, groundnuts, soybeans, sesame seeds, dry beans, and rubber. The principal commercial crop is rubber. In the 1980s it was an important primary commodity, second only to rice, and one of the country&#x27;s few sources of foreign exchange.

=== Transport ===
The civil war and neglect severely damaged Cambodia&#x27;s transport system. With assistance from other countries, Cambodia has been upgrading the main highways to international standards and most are vastly improved from 2006. Most main roads are now paved.

Cambodia has two rail lines, totalling about of single, gauge track. The lines run from the capital to Sihanoukville on the southern coast. Trains are again running to and from the Cambodian capital and popular destinations in the south. After 14 years, regular rail services between the two cities restarted recently – offering a safer option than road for travellers. Trains also run from Phnom Penh to Sisophon (although trains often run only as far as Battambang). As of 1987, only one passenger train per week operated between Phnom Penh and Battambang but a US$141 million project, funded mostly by the Asian Development Bank, has been started to revitalise the languishing rail system that will &quot;(interlink) Cambodia with major industrial and logistics centres in Bangkok and Ho Chi Minh City&quot;.

Besides the main inter-provincial traffic artery connecting Phnom Penh with Sihanoukville, resurfacing a former dirt road with concrete/asphalt and bridging five major river crossings have now permanently connected Phnom Penh with Koh Kong, and hence there is now uninterrupted road access to neighbouring Thailand and its road network.

Cambodia&#x27;s road traffic accident rate is high by world standards. In 2004, the number of road fatalities per 10,000 vehicles was ten times higher in Cambodia than in the developed world, and the number of road deaths had doubled in the preceding three years.

Cambodia&#x27;s extensive inland waterways were important historically in international trade. The Mekong and the Tonle Sap River, their numerous tributaries, and the Tonle Sap provided avenues of considerable length, including navigable all year by craft drawing and another navigable to craft drawing .

Cambodia has two major ports, Phnom Penh and Sihanoukville, and five minor ones. Phnom Penh, at the junction of the Bassac, the Mekong, and the Tonle Sap Rivers, is the only river port capable of receiving 8,000-ton ships during the wet season and 5,000-ton ships during the dry season.

With increasing economic activity has come an increase in automobile use, though motorcycles still predominate. &quot;Cyclo&quot; (as hand-me-down French) or Cycle rickshaws were popular in the 1990s but are increasingly replaced by &quot;remorques&quot; (carriages attached to motorcycles) and rickshaws imported from India. Cyclos are unique to Cambodia in that the cyclist sits behind the passenger seat.

Cambodia has three commercial airports. In 2018, they handled a record of 10 million passengers. Phnom Penh International Airport is the busiest airport in Cambodia. Siem Reap-Angkor International Airport is the second busiest, and serves the most international flights in and out of Cambodia. Sihanouk International Airport, is in the coastal city of Sihanoukville. Techo International Airport, intended to replace the existing Phnom Penh International Airport as the city&#x27;s main airport, is currently under construction.

=== Science and technology ===

A National Committee for Science and Technology representing 11 ministries has been in place since 1999. Although seven ministries are responsible for the country&#x27;s 33 public universities, the majority of these institutions come under the umbrella of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports.

In 2010, the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports approved a Policy on Research Development in the Education Sector. This move represented the first step towards a national approach to research and development across the university sector and the application of research for the purposes of national development.

This policy was followed by the country&#x27;s first &quot;National Science and Technology Master Plan 2014–2020&quot;. It was officially launched by the Ministry of Planning in December 2014, as the culmination of a two-year process supported by the Korea International Cooperation Agency. The plan makes provision for establishing a science and technology foundation to promote industrial innovation, with a particular focus on agriculture, primary industry and ICTs. Cambodia was ranked 103rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

=== Energy ===

Cambodia has high potential for developing renewable energy resources. Even though the country has not attracted much international investment in renewable energy by 2020, the country serves as a model to learn from for other ASEAN countries in terms of conducting solar power auctions. To attract more investment in renewable energy, the government could improve renewable energy governance, adopt clear targets, develop an effective regulatory framework, improve project bankability and facilitate market entry for international investors. Cambodia is highly vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change and it is advised that the country focuses more on developing renewable energy as part of climate change mitigation measures.

== Demographics ==


The French protectorate of Cambodia condudcted its first official census in 1921. Only men aged 20 to 60 were counted, as its purpose was for the collection of taxes. After the 1962 population census was conducted, Cambodia&#x27;s civil conflicts and instability lead to a 36-year-long gap before the country could have another official census in 1998.

As of 2010, half of the Cambodian population is younger than 22 years old. At a 1.04 female to male ratio, Cambodia has the most female-biased sex ratio in the Greater Mekong Subregion. Among the Cambodian population aged over 65, the female to male ratio is 1.6:1.

The total fertility rate in Cambodia was 2.5 children per woman in 2018.
The fertility rate was 4.0 children in 2000. Women in urban areas have 2.2 children on average, compared with 3.3 children per woman in rural areas. Fertility is highest in Mondol Kiri and Rattanak Kiri Provinces, where women have an average of 4.5 children, and lowest in Phnom Penh where women have an average of 2.0 children.

=== Ethnic groups ===
The vast majority of Cambodia&#x27;s population is of ethnic Khmer origin (95.8%) who are speakers of the Khmer language, the country&#x27;s sole official language. Cambodia&#x27;s population is largely homogeneous. Its minority groups include Chams (1.8%), Vietnamese (0.5%) and Chinese (0.6%).

The largest ethnic group, the Khmers are indigenous to the lowland Mekong subregion in which they inhabit. The Khmers historically have lived near the lower Mekong River in a contiguous diagonal arc, from where modern-day Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia meet in the northwest, all the way to the mouth of the Mekong River in southeastern Vietnam.

The Vietnamese are the second-largest ethnic minority in Cambodia, with an estimated 16,000 living in provinces concentrated in the southeast of the country adjacent to the Mekong Delta. Although the Vietnamese language has been determined to be a Mon–Khmer language, there are very few cultural connections between the two peoples because the early Khmers were influenced by the Indian cultural sphere while the Vietnamese are part of the Chinese cultural sphere. Ethnic tensions between the Khmer and the Vietnamese can be traced to the Post-Angkor Period (from the 16th to 19th centuries), during which time a nascent Vietnam and Thailand each attempted to vassalise a weakened post-Angkor Cambodia, and effectively dominate all of Indochina.

Chinese Cambodians are approximately 0.6% of the population. Most Chinese are descended from 19th–20th-century settlers who came in search of trade and commerce opportunities during the time of the French protectorate. Most are urban dwellers, engaged primarily in commerce.

The indigenous ethnic groups of the mountains are known collectively as Montagnards or Khmer Loeu, a term meaning &quot;Highland Khmer&quot;. They are descended from neolithic migrations of Mon–Khmer speakers via southern China and Austronesian speakers from insular Southeast Asia. Being isolated in the highlands, the various Khmer Loeu groups were not Indianized like their Khmer cousins and consequently are culturally distant from modern Khmers and often from each other, observing many pre-Indian-contact customs and beliefs.

The Cham are descended from the Austronesian people of Champa, a former kingdom on the coast of central and southern present-day Vietnam and former rival to the Khmer Empire. The Cham in Cambodia number under a million and often maintain separate villages in the southeast of the country. Almost all Cham in Cambodia are Muslims.

=== Largest cities ===
=== Languages ===

The Khmer language is a member of the Mon–Khmer subfamily of the Austroasiatic language group. French, once the language of government in Indochina, is still spoken by many older Cambodians, and is also the language of instruction in some schools and universities that are funded by the government of France. There is also a French-language newspaper and some TV channels are available in French. Cambodia is a member of La Francophonie. Cambodian French, a remnant of the country&#x27;s colonial past, is a dialect found in Cambodia and is sometimes used in government, particularly in court. Since 1993, there has been a growing use of English, which has been replacing French as the main foreign language. English is widely taught in several universities and there is also a significant press in that language, while street signs are now bilingual in Khmer and English. Due to this shift, mostly English is now used in Cambodia&#x27;s international relationships, and it has replaced French both on Cambodia&#x27;s stamps and, since 2002, on Cambodian currency.

The Khmer script is derived from the South Indian Pallava script.

=== Religion ===
Theravada Buddhism is the official religion of Cambodia, practised by more than 95 per cent of the population with an estimated 4,392 monastery temples throughout the country. Cambodian Buddhism is deeply influenced by Hinduism and native animism.

The close interrelationship between spirits and the community, the efficacy of apotropaic and luck-attracting actions and charms, and the possibility of manipulating one&#x27;s life through contact with spiritual entities such as the &quot;baromey&quot; spirits originates from the native folk religion. Hinduism has left little trace beyond the magical practices of Tantricism and a host of Hindu gods now assimilated into the spirit world (for example, the important &quot;neak ta&quot; spirit called Yeay Mao is the modern avatar of the Hindu goddess Kali).

Mahayana Buddhism is the religion of the majority of Chinese and Vietnamese in Cambodia. Elements of other religious practices, such as the veneration of folk heroes and ancestors, Confucianism, and Taoism mix with Chinese Buddhism are also practised.

Islam is followed by about 2% of the population. There are three varieties of the religion. Two of which are practised by the Cham people; the third is practiced by the descendants of Malays, who have lived in the country for generations. Cambodia&#x27;s Muslim population is reported to be 80% ethnic Cham.

=== Health ===
Cambodian life expectancy was 75 years in 2021, a major improvement since 1995 when the average life expectancy was 55. Health care is offered by both public and private practitioners and research has found that trust in health providers is a key factor in improving the uptake of health care services in rural Cambodia. The government plans to increase the quality of healthcare in the country by raising awareness of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases.

Cambodia&#x27;s infant mortality rate has decreased from 86 per 1,000 live births in 1998 to 24 in 2018.

In the province with worst health indicators, Ratanakiri, 22.9% of children die before age five.

Cambodia was once one of the most landmined countries in the world. According to some estimates, unexploded land mines have been responsible for over 60,000 civilian deaths and thousands more maimed or injured since 1970. The number of reported landmine casualties has sharply decreased, from 800 in 2005 to 111 in 2013 (22 dead and 89 injured). Adults that survive landmines often require amputation of one or more limbs and have to resort to begging for survival. Cambodia is expected to be free of land mines by 2025 but the social and economic legacy, including orphans and one in 290 people being an amputee, is expected to affect Cambodia for years to come.

In Cambodia, landmines and exploded ordnance alone have caused 44,630 injuries between 1979 and 2013, according to the Cambodia Mine/UXO Victim Information System.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Cambodia ranks 68th out of 127 countries with sufficient data. Cambodia&#x27;s GHI score is 14.7, which indicates a moderate level of hunger.

=== Education ===

The Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports is responsible for establishing national policies and guidelines for education in Cambodia. The Cambodian education system is heavily decentralised, with three levels of government, central, provincial, and district – responsible for its management. The constitution of Cambodia promulgates free compulsory education for nine years, guaranteeing the universal right to basic quality education.

The 2019 Cambodian census estimated that 88.5% of the population was literate (91.1% of men and 86.2% of women). Male youth age (15–24 years) have a literacy rate of 89% compared to 86% for females.

The education system in Cambodia continues to face many challenges, but during the past years, there have been significant improvements, especially in terms of primary net enrolment gains, the introduction of programme based-budgeting, and the development of a policy framework which helps disadvantaged children to gain access to education. The country has also significantly invested in vocational education, especially in rural areas, to tackle poverty and unemployment.
 Two of Cambodia&#x27;s most acclaimed universities are based in Phnom Penh.

Traditionally, education in Cambodia was offered by the wats (Buddhist temples), thus providing education exclusively for the male population. During the Khmer Rouge regime, education suffered significant setbacks. Education has also suffered setbacks from child labour, A study by Kim (2011) reports that most employed children in Cambodia are enrolled in school but their employment is associated with late school entry, negative impacts on their learning outcomes, and increased drop out rates. With respect to academic performance among Cambodian primary school children, research showed that parental attitudes and beliefs played a significant role.

=== Crime ===

In 2017, Cambodia had a homicide rate of 2.4 per 100,000 population.

Prostitution is illegal in Cambodia but yet appears to be prevalent. In a series of 1993 interviews of women about prostitution, three quarters of the interviewees found being a prostitute to be a norm and a profession they felt was not shameful having. That same year, it was estimated that there were about 100,000 sex workers in Cambodia.

On 18 August 2019, Prime Minister Hun Sen signed a directive banning the Finance Ministry from issuing new online gambling licenses, while operators currently holding online licenses would only be allowed to continue operating until those licenses expire. The directive cited the fact that &quot;some foreigners have used this form of gambling to cheat victims inside and outside the country&quot; as justifying the new policy. Cambodia had issued over 150 such licenses before the new policy was announced.

== Culture ==

Various factors contribute to the Cambodian culture including Theravada Buddhism, Hinduism, French colonialism, Angkorian culture, and modern globalisation. The Cambodian Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts is responsible for promoting and developing Cambodian culture. Cambodian culture not only includes the culture of the lowland ethnic majority, but also some 20 culturally distinct hill tribes colloquially known as the Khmer Loeu, a term coined by Norodom Sihanouk to encourage unity between the highlanders and lowlanders.

Rural Cambodians wear a krama scarf which is a unique aspect of Cambodian clothing. The sampeah is a traditional Cambodian greeting or a way of showing respect to others. Khmer culture, as developed and spread by the Khmer empire, has distinctive styles of dance, architecture, and sculpture, which have been exchanged with neighbouring Laos and Thailand throughout history. Angkor Wat (&quot;Angkor&quot; means &quot;city&quot; and &quot;Wat&quot; means &quot;temple&quot;) is the best-preserved example of Khmer architecture from the Angkorian era along with hundreds of other temples that have been discovered in and around the region.

Traditionally, the Khmer people have a recorded information on &quot;Tra&quot; leaves. &quot;Tra&quot; leaf books record legends of the Khmer people, the Ramayana, the origin of Buddhism and other prayer books. They are taken care of by wrapping in cloth to protect from moisture and the climate.

Bon Om Touk (Cambodian Water &amp; Moon Festival), the annual boat rowing contest, is the most attended Cambodian national festival. Held at the end of the rainy season when the Mekong River begins to sink back to its normal levels allowing the Tonle Sap River to reverse flow, approximately 10% of Cambodia&#x27;s population attends this event each year to play games, give thanks to the moon, watch fireworks, dine, and attend the boat race in a carnival-type atmosphere.

Popular games include soccer, kicking a &quot;sey,&quot; which is similar to a footbag, and chess. Based on the classical Indian solar calendar and Theravada Buddhism, the Cambodian New Year is a major holiday that takes place in April. Recent artistic figures include singers Sinn Sisamouth and Ros Serey Sothea (and later Preap Sovath and Sokun Nisa), who introduced new musical styles to the country.

Every year, Cambodians visit pagodas across the country to mark the Pchum Ben (Ancestors&#x27; Day). During the 15-day festival, people offer prayers and food to the spirits of their dead relatives. For most Cambodians, it is a time to remember their relatives who died during the 1975–1979 Khmer Rouge regime.

=== Cuisine ===

Rice is the staple grain, as in other Southeast Asian countries. Fish from the Mekong and Tonlé Sap rivers is also an important part of the diet. The supply of fish and fish products for food and trade was per person or 2 ounces per day per person. Some of the fish can be made into prahok for longer storage.

The cuisine of Cambodia contains tropical fruits, soups and noodles. Key ingredients are kaffir lime, lemon grass, garlic, fish sauce, soy sauce, tamarind, ginger, oyster sauce, coconut milk and black pepper. Some delicacies are &quot;num banhchok&quot; (នំបញ្ចុក), fish amok (អាម៉ុកត្រី) and &quot;aping&quot; (អាពីង). The country also boasts various distinct local street foods.

French influence on Cambodian cuisine includes the Cambodian red curry with toasted baguette bread. The toasted baguette pieces are dipped in the curry and eaten. Cambodian red curry is also eaten with rice and rice vermicelli noodles. Probably the most popular dine out dish, &quot;kuyteav&quot;, is a &quot;pork broth&quot; rice noodle soup with fried garlic, scallions, green onions that may also contain various toppings such as beef balls, shrimp, pork liver or lettuce. Kampot pepper is reputed to be the best in the world and accompanies crab at the Kep crab shacks and squid in the restaurants on the Ou Trojak Jet river. The cuisine is relatively unknown to the world compared to that of its neighbours Thailand and Vietnam.

Cambodians drink plenty of tea, grown in Mondulkiri Province and around Kirirom. &quot;te krolap&quot; is a strong tea, made by putting water and a mass of tea leaves into a small glass, placing a saucer on top, and turning the whole thing upside down to brew. When it is dark enough, the tea is decanted into another cup and plenty of sugar added, but no milk. Lemon tea , made with Chinese red-dust tea and lemon juice, is refreshing both hot and iced and is generally served with a hefty dose of sugar. Regarding coffee, the beans are generally imported from Laos and Vietnam – although domestically produced coffee from Ratanakiri Province and Mondulkiri Province can be found in some places. Beans are traditionally roasted with butter and sugar, plus various other ingredients that might include anything from rum to pork fat, giving the beverage a strange, sometimes faintly chocolatey aroma.

Cambodia has several industrial breweries, located mainly in Sihanoukville Province and Phnom Penh. There are also a growing number of microbreweries in Phnom Penh and Siem Reap. , there are 12 brewpubs or microbreweries in Cambodia. Rice wine is a popular alcoholic drink. Its quality varies widely and it is often infused with fruits or medicinal herbs. When prepared with macerated fruits or spices, like the Sombai liqueur, it is called &quot;sra tram&quot; (soaked wine).

=== Sports ===

Football (soccer) is one of the most popular sports, although professional organised sports are not as prevalent in Cambodia as in western countries because of the economic conditions. Soccer was brought to Cambodia by the French and became popular with the locals. The Cambodia national football team managed fourth in the 1972 Asian Cup, but development has slowed since the civil war.

Western sports such as basketball, volleyball, bodybuilding, field hockey, rugby union, golf, and baseball are gaining popularity. Volleyball is by far the most popular sport in the country. Native sports include traditional boat racing, buffalo racing, Pradal Serey, Khmer traditional wrestling and Bokator. Cambodia first participated in the Olympics during the 1956 Summer Olympic Games sending equestrian riders. Cambodia also hosted the GANEFO Games in 1966 and recently, the SEA Games in 2023.

=== Dance ===

Cambodian dance can be divided into three main categories: Khmer classical dance, folk dance, and social dances. The exact origins of Khmer classical dance are disputed. Most native Khmer scholars trace modern dance forms back to the time of Angkor, seeing similarities in the temple engravings of the period, while others hold that modern Khmer dance styles were learned (or re-learned) from Siamese court dancers in the 1800s.

Khmer classical dance is the form of stylised performance art established in the royal courts of Cambodia exhibited for both entertainment and ceremonial purposes. The dances are performed by intricately costumed, highly trained men and women on public occasions for tribute, invocation or to enact traditional stories and epic poems such as Reamker, the Khmer version of the Ramayana. Known formally as &quot;Robam Preah Reach Troap&quot; ( &quot;theater of royal wealth&quot;) it is set to the music of a pinpeat ensemble accompanied by a vocal chorus.

Cambodian folk dance, often performed to mahori music, celebrates the various cultural and ethnic groups of Cambodia. Folk dances originated in the villages and are performed, for the most part, by the villagers for the villagers. The movements are less stylised and the clothing worn is that of the people the dancers are portraying, such as hill tribes, Chams or farmers. Typically faster-paced than classical dance, folk dances display themes of the &quot;common person&quot; such as love, comedy or warding off evil spirits.

Social dances are those performed by guests at banquets, parties or other informal social gatherings. Khmer traditional social dances are analogous to those of other Southeast Asian nations. Examples include the circle dances Romvong and Romkbach as well as &quot;Saravan&quot; and &quot;Lam Leav&quot;. Modern western popular dances including Cha-cha, Bolero, and the Madison, have also influenced Cambodian social dance.

=== Music ===
Traditional Cambodian music dates back as far as the Khmer Empire. Royal dances like the Apsara Dance are icons of the Cambodian culture as are the Mahori ensembles that accompany them. More rural forms of music include &quot;Chapei&quot; and &quot;Ayai&quot;. The former is popular among the older generation and is most often a solo performance of a man plucking a Cambodian guitar (&quot;chapei&quot;) in between a cappella verses. The lyrics usually have moral or religious theme.

&quot;A Yai&quot; can be performed solo or by a man and woman and is often comedic in nature. It is a form of lyrical poetry, often full of double entendres, that can be either scripted or completely impromptu and ad-libbed. When sung by a duo, the man and women take turns, &quot;answering&quot; the other&#x27;s verse or posing riddles for the other to solve, with short instrumental breaks in between verses. &quot;Pleng kaah&quot; (lit. &quot;wedding music&quot;) is a set of traditional music and songs played both for entertainment and as accompaniment for the various ceremonial parts of a traditional, days-long Khmer wedding.

Cambodian popular music is performed with western style instruments or a mixture of traditional and western instruments. Dance music is composed in particular styles for social dances. The music of crooner Sinn Sisamouth, Ros Sereysothea, and Pen Ran from the 1960s to the 1970s is considered to be the classic pop music of Cambodia. During the Khmer Rouge Revolution, many classic and popular singers of the 1960s and 1970s were murdered, starved to death, or overwork to death by the Khmer Rouge. and many original master tapes from the period were lost or destroyed.

In the 1980s, Keo Surath, (a refugee resettled in the United States) and others carried on the legacy of the classic singers, often remaking their popular songs. The 1980s and 1990s also saw the rise in popularity of &quot;kantrum&quot;, a music style of the Khmer Surin set to modern instrumentation.

The Australian hip hop group Astronomy Class has recorded with Kak Channthy, a native-born Cambodian female singer.

The Dengue Fever rock and roll band features a Cambodian female singer and back-up band from California. It is classified as &quot;world music&quot; and combines Cambodian music with Western-style rock.

== See also ==

* Index of Cambodia-related articles
* Outline of Cambodia
* Landmines in Cambodia

== References ==
=== Citations ===

=== Cited sources and further reading===

* Deth, Sok Udom, and Serkan Bulut, eds. &quot;Cambodia&#x27;s Foreign Relations in Regional and Global Contexts&quot; (Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, 2017; comprehensive coverage) full book online free.
** Path Kosal, &quot;Introduction: Cambodia&#x27;s Political History and Foreign Relations, 1945–1998&quot; pp 1–26 
* Strangio, Sebastian. &quot;Cambodia: From Pol Pot to Hun Sen and Beyond&quot; (2020)
* Un, Kheang. &quot;Cambodia: Return to Authoritarianism&quot; (2019) excerpt 
* 
== External links ==

* Cambodia. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Cambodia from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived 3 July 2008)
* Cambodia profile from the BBC News
* Cambodia at &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Cambodia from International Futures

; Government
* King of Cambodia, Norodom Sihanouk Official website of former King Norodom Sihanouk 
* Official Royal Government of Cambodia Website (English Version)
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
* Ministry of Tourism (archived 2 February 2002)

Civil society
* Cooperation Committee for Cambodia)
* Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (archived 30 December 2010)
* Cambodian Centre for Human Rights
* Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
* Action IEC Working For Cambodian Community Education Through Media and Culture
* Freedom in the World 2011: Cambodia..
* Freedom of the Press 2011: Cambodia. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="0" end="8" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="25" end="44" title="Cambodia" label="Kingdom of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="62" end="76" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="84" end="105" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="Indochinese Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="125" end="133" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="152" end="156" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="175" end="182" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="226" end="242" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="340" end="346" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="357" end="366" title="Tonlé Sap" label="Tonlé Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="425" end="441" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="562" end="567" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="607" end="617" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711" start="631" end="640" title="Siem Reap" label="Siem Reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="645" end="655" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q379239" start="669" end="682" title="Jayavarman II" label="Jayavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="743" end="749" title="Chenla Kingdom" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="819" end="831" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="837" end="855" title="Indianised kingdom" label="Indianised kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="888" end="896" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="906" end="914" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="1033" end="1043" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919413" start="1077" end="1093" title="Post-Angkor Period" label="decline in power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="1128" end="1147" title="French Protectorate of Cambodia" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919422" start="1159" end="1178" title="Japanese occupation of Cambodia" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1186" end="1198" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638486" start="1218" end="1242" title="Cambodia (1953–1970)" label="independence from France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1256" end="1267" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817206" start="1293" end="1302" title="Cambodian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919446" start="1338" end="1347" title="1970 Cambodian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1970 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054184" start="1379" end="1393" title="Khmer Republic" label="Khmer Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="1428" end="1439" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760415" start="1443" end="1447" title="Fall of Phnom Penh" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="1465" end="1482" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="ruled the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="1503" end="1521" title="Cambodian genocide" label="Cambodian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="1578" end="1602" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Cambodian–Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092854" start="1630" end="1654" title="1991 Paris Peace Accords" label="1991 Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="1670" end="1705" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations peacekeeping mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025150" start="1752" end="1773" title="1993 Cambodian general election" label="1993 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992530" start="1786" end="1808" title="Cambodian conflict (1979–1998)" label="long-term insurgencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002716" start="1814" end="1835" title="1997 Cambodian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1997 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="1876" end="1883" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="1892" end="1921" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1945" end="1968" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="1973" end="1984" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154154" start="2023" end="2039" title="Politics of Cambodia" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="2070" end="2093" title="least developed country" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694022" start="2095" end="2106" title="Agriculture in Cambodia" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533965" start="2198" end="2205" title="Tourism in Cambodia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071764" start="2271" end="2281" title="Corruption in Cambodia" label="Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063682" start="2283" end="2302" title="Human rights in Cambodia" label="human rights issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251677" start="2307" end="2320" title="Deforestation in Cambodia" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="2440" end="2445" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044106" start="2489" end="2497" title="Buddhism in Cambodia" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233484" start="2518" end="2525" title="Culture of Cambodia" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="2987" end="2994" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399135" start="3209" end="3214" title="Kambu Swayambhuva" label="Kambu"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="3257" end="3271" title="Mahajanapadas" label="Indian kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586782" start="3275" end="3282" title="Kambojas" label="Kamboja"/>
<link wikidata="Q310922" start="3368" end="3385" title="Antonio Pigafetta" label="Antonio Pigafetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q663757" start="3509" end="3522" title="George Coedes" label="George Coedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="3604" end="3610" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="3783" end="3789" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="3977" end="3983" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="3984" end="3999" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="4402" end="4413" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="4473" end="4479" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="4484" end="4493" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q837889" start="4552" end="4563" title="Stung Treng Province" label="Stung Treng"/>
<link wikidata="Q785896" start="4568" end="4574" title="Kratié Province" label="Kratié"/>
<link wikidata="Q748470" start="4593" end="4608" title="Kampot Province" label="Kampot Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="4660" end="4675" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="4709" end="4717" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25679727" start="4810" end="4821" title="Laang Spean" label="Laang Spean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621515" start="4844" end="4854" title="Hoabinhian" label="Hoabinhian"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="4916" end="4927" title="radiocarbon" label="radiocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5011" end="5020" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5150" end="5158" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349587" start="5352" end="5362" title="Earthworks (archaeology)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17127302" start="5387" end="5395" title="red soil" label="red soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221903" start="5402" end="5407" title="Memot" label="Memot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431796" start="5687" end="5693" title="Oudong" label="Oudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817" start="5797" end="5813" title="Banteay Meanchey Province" label="Banteay Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="5890" end="5904" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5951" end="5959" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q111438630" start="5991" end="6007" title="Baksei Chamkrong" label="Baksei Chamkrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953700" start="6093" end="6098" title="Lovea" label="Lovea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="6747" end="6764" title="Indianised kingdom" label="Indianised states"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="6768" end="6773" title="Kingdom of Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057118" start="6793" end="6799" title="Chenla" label="Chenla"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6943" end="6948" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="7047" end="7059" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q379239" start="7136" end="7149" title="Jayavarman II" label="Jayavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="7190" end="7194" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266534" start="7223" end="7231" title="Devaraja" label="Devaraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859071" start="7285" end="7293" title="God-king" label="God-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q879224" start="7432" end="7447" title="Jayavarman VIII" label="Jayavarman VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="7486" end="7492" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="7501" end="7512" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="7599" end="7608" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="7622" end="7640" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495118" start="7876" end="7891" title="Indravarman III" label="Indravarman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="8026" end="8032" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="8461" end="8478" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292089" start="8565" end="8575" title="Khmer Leu" label="hill tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013469" start="8632" end="8638" title="Slavery in Asia" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="8756" end="8768" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935106" start="8829" end="8844" title="Chey Chettha II" label="Chey Chettha II"/>
<link wikidata="Q559803" start="8957" end="8969" title="Norodom of Cambodia" label="King Norodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="9017" end="9039" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="protectorate of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919422" start="9114" end="9145" title="Japanese occupation of Cambodia" label="occupied by the Japanese empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16673775" start="9215" end="9235" title="Kingdom of Kampuchea (1945)" label="Kingdom of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="9663" end="9679" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10146" end="10157" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="10209" end="10219" title="neutral country" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10227" end="10235" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="10653" end="10680" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="US President Johnson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q880817" start="10690" end="10704" title="Chester Bowles" label="Chester Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919446" start="11288" end="11313" title="Cambodian coup of 1970" label="ousted by a military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q313400" start="11344" end="11351" title="Lon Nol" label="Lon Nol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701376" start="11372" end="11383" title="Sirik Matak" label="Sirik Matak"/>
<link wikidata="Q817206" start="11800" end="11809" title="Cambodian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="11811" end="11822" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="12412" end="12419" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q379225" start="12451" end="12460" title="Nuon Chea" label="Nuon Chea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8711543" start="12515" end="12543" title="Communist Party of Kampuchea" label="Communist Party of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12659" end="12672" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="12813" end="12832" title="Cambodian Incursion" label="Cambodian Incursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="13440" end="13472" title="Cambodian genocide" label="killed by the Khmer Rouge regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340590" start="13610" end="13624" title="Killing Fields" label="Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="13641" end="13651" title="Tuol Sleng" label="Tuol Sleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922522" start="13810" end="13825" title="Ethnic groups in Cambodia" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="13838" end="13842" title="Cham (Asia)" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928611" start="14170" end="14180" title="Vietnamese Cambodian" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097982" start="14448" end="14464" title="Robert D. Kaplan" label="Robert D. Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329429" start="14505" end="14516" title="yellow badge" label="yellow star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480618" start="14645" end="14663" title="Khmer architecture" label="Khmer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="14816" end="14832" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="invaded Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="14902" end="14937" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="14965" end="14975" title="Eastern Bloc" label="pro-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q369942" start="15175" end="15181" title="Ta Mok" label="Ta Mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785731" start="15439" end="15483" title="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea" label="Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051895" start="15610" end="15655" title="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front" label="Khmer People&amp;#x27;s National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="15932" end="15950" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15953" end="15966" title="Modern Cambodia#Peace efforts and the free elections" label="Peace efforts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16000" end="16017" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea#Transition: State of Cambodia (1989–1993)" label="State of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092854" start="16068" end="16104" title="1991 Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Comprehensive Peace Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="16208" end="16257" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="16306" end="16314" title="Monarchy of Cambodia" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="16333" end="16349" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025150" start="16378" end="16401" title="1993 Cambodian general election" label="first post-war election"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="16421" end="16426" title="UNTAC" label="UNTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117815" start="16452" end="16461" title="FUNCINPEC" label="FUNCINPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q381817" start="16489" end="16498" title="Ranariddh" label="Ranariddh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="16504" end="16519" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="16577" end="16584" title="Hun Sen" label="Hun Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="16592" end="16621" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290075" start="16695" end="16721" title="Samdech Euv Autonomous Zone" label="secede part of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002716" start="16840" end="16856" title="1997 clashes in Cambodia" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="17081" end="17119" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q57319" start="17146" end="17162" title="Norodom Sihamoni" label="Norodom Sihamoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="17371" end="17381" title="multi-party system" label="multiparty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="17400" end="17423" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063682" start="17468" end="17487" title="Human rights in Cambodia" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071764" start="17492" end="17502" title="Corruption in Cambodia" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q622035" start="17504" end="17527" title="Economy of Cambodia" label="Cambodia&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025204" start="17649" end="17654" title="Cambodia–China relations" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="17670" end="17694" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q332488" start="17732" end="17752" title="Khmer Rouge Tribunal" label="Khmer Rouge Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q336412" start="17964" end="17976" title="Kang Kek Iew" label="Kang Kek Iew"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="18026" end="18035" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="18041" end="18064" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="18109" end="18131" title="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum" label="S21 extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q379203" start="18211" end="18224" title="Khieu Samphan" label="Khieu Samphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379225" start="18282" end="18291" title="Nuon Chea" label="Nuon Chea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586971" start="18442" end="18473" title="2013 Cambodian general election" label="2013 Cambodian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025162" start="18524" end="18554" title="Cambodia National Rescue Party" label="Cambodia National Rescue Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15529576" start="18562" end="18597" title="2013–2014 Cambodian protests" label="widespread anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025162" start="18701" end="18731" title="Cambodia National Rescue Party" label="Cambodia National Rescue Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353153" start="18759" end="18790" title="2018 Cambodian general election" label="2018 Cambodian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="18806" end="18835" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805866" start="18866" end="18876" title="Mass media in Cambodia" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q83888864" start="19040" end="19076" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia" label="COVID-19 pandemic spread to Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="19266" end="19275" title="COVID-19 lockdowns" label="lockdowns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19324" end="19340" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism#Cambodia" label="tourism industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109524717" start="19370" end="19403" title="Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="international travel restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q584554" start="19462" end="19498" title="List of current state leaders by date of assumption of office" label="world&amp;#x27;s longest-serving leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024351" start="19620" end="19629" title="Hun Manet" label="Hun Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413914" start="19655" end="19684" title="2023 Cambodian general election" label="next general election in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="19698" end="19716" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413914" start="19843" end="19851" title="2023 Cambodian general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640181" start="20021" end="20038" title="Candlelight Party" label="Candlelight Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255736" start="20217" end="20220" title="10th parallel north" label="10°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255490" start="20225" end="20229" title="15th parallel north" label="15°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705849" start="20246" end="20250" title="102nd meridian east" label="102°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706194" start="20255" end="20260" title="108th meridian east" label="108°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="20332" end="20339" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="20396" end="20412" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="20552" end="20561" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="20604" end="20616" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="20742" end="20757" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="20771" end="20783" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="21103" end="21117" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="21277" end="21293" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q939398" start="21530" end="21547" title="Dângrêk Mountains" label="Dângrêk Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089661" start="21853" end="21870" title="Cardamom Mountains" label="Krâvanh Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423200" start="21879" end="21895" title="Dâmrei Mountains" label="Dâmrei Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="21990" end="22006" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q539772" start="22054" end="22065" title="Phnom Aural" label="Phnom Aural"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="22631" end="22648" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="22750" end="22758" title="monsoons" label="monsoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="22999" end="23015" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q868017" start="23292" end="23333" title="International Development Research Centre" label="International Development Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23338" end="23356" title="The United Nations" label="The United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534952" start="23525" end="23551" title="Climate change in Cambodia" label="affected by climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064457" start="23605" end="23629" title="Water supply in Cambodia" label="Shortages of clean water"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="23883" end="23892" title="Tonlé Sap" label="Tonlé Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q80291453" start="24432" end="24459" title="2020 Pacific typhoon season" label="2020 Pacific typhoon season"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="24517" end="24529" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582968" start="24556" end="24580" title="seasonal tropical forest" label="seasonal tropical forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28185406" start="24599" end="24624" title="List of trees of Cambodia" label="180 recorded tree species"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="24630" end="24638" title="riparian" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="24665" end="24671" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="24703" end="24710" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="24749" end="24758" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710698" start="24921" end="24948" title="Tonle Sap Biosphere Reserve" label="Tonle Sap Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="24978" end="24987" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q502148" start="25038" end="25050" title="Kampong Thom Province" label="Kampong Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q652818" start="25052" end="25061" title="Siem Reap Province" label="Siem Reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q810923" start="25063" end="25073" title="Battambang Province" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q834464" start="25075" end="25081" title="Pursat Province" label="Pursat"/>
<link wikidata="Q877468" start="25083" end="25098" title="Kampong Chhnang Province" label="Kampong Chhnang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817" start="25100" end="25116" title="Banteay Meanchey Province" label="Banteay Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q506646" start="25118" end="25124" title="Pailin" label="Pailin"/>
<link wikidata="Q629538" start="25126" end="25140" title="Oddar Meanchey Province" label="Oddar Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q502151" start="25145" end="25157" title="Preah Vihear Province" label="Preah Vihear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="25203" end="25209" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="25210" end="25227" title="Biosphere Reserve" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q580593" start="25278" end="25296" title="Dipterocarp forest" label="Dipterocarp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="25301" end="25311" title="Mondolkiri" label="Mondolkiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774097" start="25335" end="25363" title="Keo Seima Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Keo Seima Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186578" start="25365" end="25395" title="Phnom Prich Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Phnom Prich Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898832" start="25401" end="25426" title="Mondulkiri Protected Forest" label="Srepok Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q747846" start="25439" end="25449" title="Ratanakiri" label="Ratanakiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089661" start="25468" end="25486" title="Cardamom Mountains" label="Cardamom Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930319" start="25508" end="25536" title="Preah Monivong National Park" label="Preah Monivong National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350416" start="25538" end="25563" title="Botum-Sakor National Park" label="Botum-Sakor National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186563" start="25573" end="25603" title="Phnom Aural Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Phnom Aural Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186580" start="25608" end="25639" title="Phnom Samkos Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Phnom Samkos Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="25646" end="25671" title="Worldwide Fund for Nature" label="Worldwide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="25696" end="25718" title="terrestrial ecoregions" label="terrestrial ecoregions"/>
<link wikidata="Q78490072" start="25737" end="25768" title="Cardamom Mountains rain forests" label="Cardamom Mountains rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948428" start="25770" end="25798" title="Central Indochina dry forest" label="Central Indochina dry forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q842139" start="25851" end="25865" title="Annamite Range" label="Annamite Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940784" start="25944" end="25956" title="swamp forest" label="swamp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251677" start="25972" end="25997" title="deforestation in Cambodia" label="deforestation in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="26145" end="26159" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="26294" end="26308" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="26693" end="26708" title="illegal logging" label="illegal logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810605" start="26955" end="26980" title="Hydropower in the Mekong River Basin" label="hydroelectric development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246672" start="26988" end="27012" title="Greater Mekong Subregion" label="Greater Mekong Subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="27017" end="27021" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="27084" end="27091" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="27321" end="27330" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="27363" end="27377" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="27711" end="27735" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603535" start="28222" end="28227" title="green growth" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="28248" end="28259" title="sustainability" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252589" start="28448" end="28457" title="Provinces of Cambodia" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062951" start="28872" end="28892" title="Constitution of Cambodia" label="constitution of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="28914" end="28937" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="28952" end="28965" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="28966" end="28990" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999325" start="28996" end="29022" title="Prime Minister of Cambodia" label="Prime Minister of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024351" start="29034" end="29043" title="Hun Manet" label="Hun Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="29052" end="29070" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="29082" end="29098" title="King of Cambodia" label="King of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57319" start="29110" end="29126" title="Norodom Sihamoni" label="Norodom Sihamoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="29135" end="29148" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234896" start="29238" end="29255" title="National Assembly of Cambodia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="29316" end="29331" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="29334" end="29351" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="29389" end="29398" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320418" start="29399" end="29421" title="Parliament of Cambodia" label="Parliament of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="29599" end="29626" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153989" start="29804" end="29823" title="Commune Council (Cambodia)" label="commune councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252589" start="29836" end="29857" title="provinces of Cambodia" label="provinces of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57319" start="29916" end="29932" title="Norodom Sihamoni" label="Norodom Sihamoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993870" start="29971" end="29991" title="Royal Council of the Throne" label="Royal Throne Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="30080" end="30096" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q381817" start="30213" end="30230" title="Norodom Ranariddh" label="Norodom Ranariddh"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="30488" end="30517" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="30555" end="30566" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997395" start="30721" end="30729" title="Bun Rany" label="Bun Rany"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="30782" end="30788" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586971" start="31152" end="31165" title="2013 Cambodian general election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="31506" end="31514" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024351" start="31549" end="31558" title="Hun Manet" label="Hun Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q121296744" start="31840" end="31860" title="2024 Cambodian Senate election" label="2024 Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="32101" end="32116" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294408" start="32198" end="32225" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (Cambodia)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771428" start="32232" end="32243" title="Prak Sokhon" label="Prak Sokhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="32293" end="32303" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="32313" end="32340" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="32364" end="32386" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="32394" end="32399" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="32416" end="32419" title="WTO" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="32469" end="32485" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="32525" end="32545" title="diplomatic relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="32939" end="32944" title="Civil engineering" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="33039" end="33053" title="border dispute" label="border dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="33207" end="33226" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q168329" start="33289" end="33307" title="Cambodian-Thai border dispute" label="clashing over land"/>
<link wikidata="Q45949" start="33336" end="33355" title="Preah Vihear Temple" label="Preah Vihear temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="33742" end="33771" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="33843" end="33859" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q466000" start="33863" end="33880" title="Koh Kong province" label="Koh Kong province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="33940" end="33952" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="34040" end="34070" title="Territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="effort to claim disputed areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="34078" end="34093" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="34451" end="34469" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490375" start="34493" end="34513" title="Royal Cambodian Army" label="Royal Cambodian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925654" start="34515" end="34535" title="Royal Cambodian Navy" label="Royal Cambodian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935224" start="34537" end="34562" title="Royal Cambodian Air Force" label="Royal Cambodian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374211" start="34567" end="34584" title="Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia" label="Royal Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q928226" start="34607" end="34635" title="Military of Cambodia" label="Royal Cambodian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867382" start="34662" end="34690" title="Ministry of National Defence (Cambodia)" label="Ministry of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999325" start="34713" end="34739" title="Prime Minister of Cambodia" label="Prime Minister of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="34924" end="34942" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922569" start="35329" end="35337" title="Tea Banh" label="Tea Banh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088596" start="35380" end="35394" title="Chay Saing Yun" label="Chay Saing Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="36256" end="36300" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="36333" end="36362" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q648198" start="36720" end="36730" title="Strongman (politics)" label="strong man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002716" start="36892" end="36896" title="1997 Cambodian Coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063682" start="37094" end="37114" title="Human rights in Cambodia" label="political oppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="37473" end="37494" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667873" start="37520" end="37542" title="prisoner of conscience" label="prisoner of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055828" start="37592" end="37602" title="Yorm Bopha" label="Yorm Bopha"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="38003" end="38013" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025162" start="38263" end="38293" title="Cambodia National Rescue Party" label="Cambodia National Rescue Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="38410" end="38420" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="39528" end="39539" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="39872" end="39891" title="US State Department" label="US State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q769308" start="39939" end="39968" title="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Cambodian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013469" start="40160" end="40168" title="Slavery in Asia" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867354" start="40222" end="40243" title="Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction (Cambodia)" label="Forced land evictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q730498" start="40787" end="40828" title="International Federation for Human Rights" label="International Federation for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41113" end="41121" title="COVID-19 misinformation#Efforts to combat misinformation" label="arrested"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549308" start="41146" end="41155" title="fake news" label="fake news"/>
<link wikidata="Q83888864" start="41166" end="41195" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="41351" end="41374" title="least developed country" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="41449" end="41453" title="Rice" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204921" start="41529" end="41566" title="International Rice Research Institute" label="International Rice Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="41763" end="41788" title="Annual average GDP growth" label="Annual average GDP growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="42285" end="42293" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q284843" start="42299" end="42324" title="National Bank of Cambodia" label="National Bank of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="43577" end="43599" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="43900" end="43939" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="International Trade Union Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="44476" end="44509" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="46590" end="46603" title="hard currency" label="hard currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="46939" end="46952" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="47009" end="47019" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q876549" start="47161" end="47167" title="Kampot (city)" label="Kampot"/>
<link wikidata="Q852089" start="47172" end="47175" title="Kep, Cambodia" label="Kep"/>
<link wikidata="Q559155" start="47190" end="47208" title="Bokor Hill Station" label="Bokor Hill Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="47331" end="47336" title="UNTAC" label="UNTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q652818" start="47564" end="47582" title="Siem Reap Province" label="Siem Reap Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48362" end="48365" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="48431" end="48435" title="Rice" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="48494" end="48499" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="48501" end="48508" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="48510" end="48524" title="sweet potatoes" label="sweet potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q338219" start="48526" end="48536" title="Bambara groundnut" label="groundnuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="48538" end="48545" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="48548" end="48559" title="sesame seed" label="sesame seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="48577" end="48583" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q855717" start="49446" end="49454" title="Sisophon" label="Sisophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="49497" end="49507" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="49650" end="49672" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375645" start="50085" end="50093" title="Koh Kong (city)" label="Koh Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="50556" end="50562" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q939958" start="50571" end="50586" title="Tonle Sap River" label="Tonle Sap River"/>
<link wikidata="Q978743" start="50879" end="50885" title="Bassac River" label="Bassac"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="50937" end="50947" title="river port" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="50975" end="50978" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="51209" end="51223" title="Cycle rickshaw" label="Cycle rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054163" start="51557" end="51589" title="Phnom Penh International Airport" label="Phnom Penh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511570" start="51626" end="51664" title="Angkor International Airport" label="Siem Reap-Angkor International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113291" start="51754" end="51784" title="Sihanouk International Airport" label="Sihanouk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="51812" end="51825" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q106616277" start="51827" end="51854" title="Techo International Airport (Cambodia)" label="Techo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q625679" start="52891" end="52929" title="Korea International Cooperation Agency" label="Korea International Cooperation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="53143" end="53166" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="53236" end="53252" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="54822" end="54833" title="Mondulkiri Province" label="Mondol Kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q747846" start="54838" end="54851" title="Ratanakiri Province" label="Rattanak Kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="55062" end="55067" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="55107" end="55121" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="55245" end="55250" title="Chams" label="Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="55259" end="55269" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588045" start="55281" end="55288" title="Chinese Cambodian" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="55328" end="55334" title="Khmer people" label="Khmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="55449" end="55467" title="Mekong River" label="lower Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="55604" end="55616" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="55816" end="55828" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="55891" end="55900" title="Mon–Khmer" label="Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="56023" end="56045" title="Indian cultural sphere" label="Indian cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360368" start="56083" end="56106" title="Adoption of Chinese literary culture" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919413" start="56182" end="56200" title="Post-Angkor Period" label="Post-Angkor Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="56264" end="56271" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="56276" end="56284" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="56378" end="56387" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588045" start="56390" end="56407" title="Chinese Cambodian" label="Chinese Cambodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="56588" end="56607" title="French Protectorate of Cambodia" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292089" start="56753" end="56763" title="Khmer Loeu" label="Khmer Loeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="56898" end="56910" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="57231" end="57243" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="57254" end="57260" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="57576" end="57590" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="57610" end="57619" title="Mon–Khmer" label="Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="57637" end="57659" title="Austroasiatic language" label="Austroasiatic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="57667" end="57673" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="57710" end="57719" title="French Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="57993" end="58008" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025153" start="58010" end="58026" title="Cambodian French (linguistics)" label="Cambodian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="58642" end="58654" title="Khmer script" label="Khmer script"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="58675" end="58687" title="South Indian" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104320" start="58688" end="58702" title="Pallava script" label="Pallava script"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="58722" end="58731" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="58732" end="58740" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="58941" end="58949" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="58961" end="58968" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="59050" end="59060" title="apotropaic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040434" start="59446" end="59453" title="neak ta" label="neak ta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051022" start="59474" end="59482" title="Yeay Mao" label="Yeay Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="59533" end="59550" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="59687" end="59698" title="Chinese folk religion" label="folk heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="59714" end="59726" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="59732" end="59738" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="59912" end="59923" title="Cham people" label="Cham people"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="59970" end="59976" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="60120" end="60135" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="60529" end="60532" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="60533" end="60537" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="60539" end="60546" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="60585" end="60606" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690982" start="60721" end="60731" title="Health in Ratanakiri Province" label="Ratanakiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484094" start="60807" end="60816" title="Land mines in Cambodia" label="landmined"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="60881" end="60890" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="61163" end="61173" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11047097" start="61808" end="61847" title="Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (Cambodia)" label="Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="62832" end="62852" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="63149" end="63160" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097857" start="63252" end="63264" title="Child labour in Cambodia" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251021" start="63736" end="63771" title="Prostitution in Cambodia" label="Prostitution is illegal in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="63933" end="63937" title="norm (social)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="64665" end="64683" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="64685" end="64693" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985804" start="64695" end="64713" title="French culture" label="French colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="64715" end="64721" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="64745" end="64758" title="globalization" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866728" start="64764" end="64807" title="Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, Cambodia" label="Cambodian Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370078" start="64926" end="64933" title="Khmer Krom" label="lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292089" start="65026" end="65036" title="Khmer Loeu" label="Khmer Loeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="65055" end="65071" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786410" start="65156" end="65161" title="krama" label="krama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401901" start="65196" end="65214" title="Cambodian clothing" label="Cambodian clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410101" start="65220" end="65227" title="sampeah" label="sampeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="65349" end="65361" title="Khmer empire" label="Khmer empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="65469" end="65473" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="65478" end="65486" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="65507" end="65517" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641020" start="65835" end="65857" title="Palm-leaf manuscript" label="&amp;quot;Tra&amp;quot; leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209940" start="66070" end="66081" title="Bon Om Touk" label="Bon Om Touk"/>
<link wikidata="Q939958" start="66315" end="66330" title="Tonle Sap River" label="Tonle Sap River"/>
<link wikidata="Q845399" start="66624" end="66631" title="footbag" label="footbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961613" start="66717" end="66735" title="Cambodian New Year" label="Cambodian New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485020" start="66822" end="66836" title="Sinn Sisamouth" label="Sinn Sisamouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982405" start="66841" end="66857" title="Ros Serey Sothea" label="Ros Serey Sothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q425816" start="66869" end="66881" title="Preap Sovath" label="Preap Sovath"/>
<link wikidata="Q25679311" start="66886" end="66896" title="Sokun Nisa" label="Sokun Nisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="66979" end="66985" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373783" start="67018" end="67027" title="Pchum Ben" label="Pchum Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="67241" end="67252" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="67369" end="67378" title="Tonlé Sap" label="Tonlé Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q791259" start="67501" end="67507" title="avoirdupois" label="ounces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222463" start="67562" end="67568" title="prahok" label="prahok"/>
<link wikidata="Q139430" start="67594" end="67613" title="cuisine of Cambodia" label="cuisine of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465934" start="67679" end="67690" title="kaffir lime" label="kaffir lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="67692" end="67703" title="lemon grass" label="lemon grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="67713" end="67723" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="67725" end="67734" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="67736" end="67744" title="tamarind" label="tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="67746" end="67752" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q780827" start="67754" end="67766" title="oyster sauce" label="oyster sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="67768" end="67780" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="67785" end="67797" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19695011" start="67825" end="67837" title="num banhchok" label="num banhchok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350424" start="67856" end="67865" title="fish amok" label="fish amok"/>
<link wikidata="Q208172" start="68056" end="68064" title="baguette" label="baguette"/>
<link wikidata="Q716004" start="68183" end="68198" title="rice vermicelli" label="rice vermicelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213650" start="68255" end="68262" title="kuyteav" label="kuyteav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322949" start="68298" end="68309" title="rice noodle" label="rice noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939235" start="68310" end="68314" title="noodle soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="68334" end="68343" title="scallions" label="scallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="68345" end="68357" title="scallion" label="green onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238238" start="68405" end="68415" title="beef balls" label="beef balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="68417" end="68423" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="68748" end="68767" title="Mondulkiri Province" label="Mondulkiri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q747846" start="69331" end="69350" title="Ratanakiri Province" label="Ratanakiri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="69355" end="69374" title="Mondulkiri Province" label="Mondulkiri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q220966" start="69669" end="69691" title="Sihanoukville Province" label="Sihanoukville Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="69696" end="69706" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="69761" end="69771" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711" start="69776" end="69785" title="Siem Reap" label="Siem Reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="69802" end="69809" title="brewpub" label="brewpub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="69814" end="69828" title="microbrewery" label="microbreweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142986" start="69842" end="69851" title="Rice wine" label="Rice wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22236234" start="70020" end="70026" title="Sombai" label="Sombai"/>
<link wikidata="Q318925" start="70372" end="70403" title="Cambodia national football team" label="Cambodia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q548634" start="70426" end="70440" title="Asian Cup 1972" label="1972 Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q57589" start="70704" end="70727" title="Dragon boat" label="traditional boat racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q967197" start="70745" end="70757" title="Pradal Serey" label="Pradal Serey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641667" start="70759" end="70786" title="Khmer traditional wrestling" label="Khmer traditional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394188" start="70791" end="70798" title="Bokator" label="Bokator"/>
<link wikidata="Q145703" start="70855" end="70880" title="Cambodia at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q833790" start="70889" end="70899" title="Equestrian at the Summer Olympics" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q608004" start="70933" end="70939" title="GANEFO" label="GANEFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="70972" end="70981" title="SEA Games" label="SEA Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815157" start="70985" end="70989" title="2023 SEA Games" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037715" start="71066" end="71087" title="Khmer classical dance" label="Khmer classical dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="71249" end="71255" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427954" start="71779" end="71786" title="Reamker" label="Reamker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="71813" end="71821" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149344" start="71944" end="71951" title="pinpeat" label="pinpeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355815" start="72034" end="72040" title="mahori" label="mahori"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="72349" end="72354" title="Cham people (Asia)" label="Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080806" start="72735" end="72747" title="circle dance" label="circle dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586192" start="72749" end="72756" title="Romvong" label="Romvong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361460" start="72761" end="72769" title="Romkbach" label="Romkbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q208370" start="72867" end="72874" title="Cha-cha-cha (dance)" label="Cha-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830404" start="72876" end="72882" title="Bolero" label="Bolero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276118" start="72892" end="72899" title="Madison (dance)" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="73014" end="73026" title="Khmer empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148773" start="73050" end="73056" title="Apsara" label="Apsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q65427884" start="73210" end="73214" title="Ayai" label="Ayai"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="73377" end="73387" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="73661" end="73670" title="Ad libitum" label="ad-libbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485020" start="74289" end="74303" title="Sinn Sisamouth" label="Sinn Sisamouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982405" start="74305" end="74320" title="Ros Sereysothea" label="Ros Sereysothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930581" start="74326" end="74333" title="Pen Ran" label="Pen Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="74428" end="74450" title="Khmer rouge" label="Khmer Rouge Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925966" start="74877" end="74884" title="kantrum" label="kantrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676085" start="74913" end="74924" title="Northern Khmer people" label="Khmer Surin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="74972" end="74979" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q500659" start="75078" end="75090" title="Dengue Fever (band)" label="Dengue Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="75205" end="75216" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975301" start="75296" end="75330" title="Index of Cambodia-related articles" label="Index of Cambodia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112219" start="75333" end="75352" title="Outline of Cambodia" label="Outline of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484094" start="75355" end="75376" title="Landmines in Cambodia" label="Landmines in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="75981" end="75999" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="76007" end="76034" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="76125" end="76133" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="76154" end="76177" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="76233" end="76254" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334755" wikidata="Q928434" url="?curid=334755" title="Hamoud bin Mohammed of Zanzibar">
<text>Sayyid [[Sir]] Hamoud bin Mohammed Al-Busaidi, GCSI (c. 1853 – 18 July 1902) (ruled 27 August 1896 - 18 July 1902) (), was the 7th Sultan of Zanzibar.

==Biography==
Hamoud became sultan with the support of the British consul, Sir Basil Cave, upon the death of Sayyid Hamad bin Thuwaini. Before he could enter the palace, another potential contender for the throne, Sayyid Khalid bin Barghash, seized the palace and declared himself sultan. The British responded the next day, 26 August 1896, by issuing an ultimatum to Khalid and his entourage to evacuate the palace by 9:00 am on 27 August. When he refused, Royal Navy warships fired on the palace and other strategic locations in the city, causing Khalid and his group to flee. According to the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot;, the resultant Anglo-Zanzibar War was the shortest war in history, and the same day Hamoud was able to assume the title of sultan, more indebted to the British than ever.

Hamoud demanded that slavery be abolished in Zanzibar and that all the slaves be manumitted except in the case of concubines (manumitted in 1909.).

On his death in 1902, he was succeeded by his oldest son, Sayyid Ali bin Hamud.

==Legacy==
By his wife, Sayyida Khanfora bint Majid Al-Busaid (daughter of the first Sultan of Zanzibar), he had ten children:

*Sayyid Ali bin Hamud Al-Busaid, 8th Sultan of Zanzibar
*Sayyid Majid bin Hamud Al-Busaid
*Sayyid Saud bin Hamud Al-Busaid
*Sayyid Taimur bin Hamud Al-Busaid
*Sayyid Faisal bin Hamud Al-Busaid
*Sayyid Muhammed bin Hamud Al-Busaid
*Sayyida Matuka bint Hamud Al-Busaid (who married Sayyid Khalifa bin Harub Al-Busaid, 9th Sultan of Zanzibar)
*Sayyida Boran bint Hamud Al-Busaid (who married Sayyid Said bin Ali, the son of the fourth Sultan of Zanzibar)
*Sayyida Mishan bint Hamud Al-Busaid (twin with Boran)
*Sayyida Hakima bint Hamud Al-Busaid

==Honours==
*Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) – 1894

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q305198" start="0" end="6" title="Sayyid" label="Sayyid"/>
<link wikidata="Q928434" start="7" end="45" title="Hamoud bin Mohammed of Zanzibar" label="[[Sir]] Hamoud bin Mohammed Al-Busaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="47" end="51" title="GCSI" label="GCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="141" end="149" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867133" start="227" end="241" title="Basil Cave" label="Sir Basil Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q561747" start="268" end="286" title="Hamad bin Thuwaini of Zanzibar" label="Hamad bin Thuwaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q470598" start="373" end="392" title="Khalid bin Barghash of Zanzibar" label="Khalid bin Barghash"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="610" end="620" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="630" end="635" title="Naval gunfire support" label="fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="754" end="784" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q170850" start="806" end="824" title="Anglo-Zanzibar War" label="Anglo-Zanzibar War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170850" start="833" end="856" title="Anglo-Zanzibar War" label="shortest war in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="995" end="1004" title="Abolitionism" label="abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="1044" end="1054" title="Manumission" label="manumitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197547" start="1077" end="1087" title="concubinage in Islam" label="concubines"/>
<link wikidata="Q705143" start="1272" end="1296" title="Majid bin Said of Zanzibar" label="first Sultan of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q423630" start="1329" end="1376" title="Ali bin Hamud of Zanzibar" label="Ali bin Hamud Al-Busaid, 8th Sultan of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q982863" start="1608" end="1659" title="Khalifa bin Harub of Zanzibar" label="Khalifa bin Harub Al-Busaid, 9th Sultan of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q423643" start="1746" end="1771" title="Ali bin Said of Zanzibar" label="fourth Sultan of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="1879" end="1935" title="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334756" wikidata="Q7072311" url="?curid=334756" title="OBERAC">
<text>The acronym OBERAC stands for: &#x27;operating balance excluding revaluations and accounting changes&#x27;.

The government of New Zealand uses OBERAC as an indicator of current cash flow.

The OBERAC is not an accurate indicator of what the government has to spend, i.e. it is not the cash surplus. Instead, the OBERAC includes capital expenditure, State Owned Enterprise retained profits, capital gains and many other minor issues.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="4" end="11" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072311" start="12" end="18" title="OBERAC" label="OBERAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="127" end="138" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047513" start="178" end="187" title="cash flow" label="cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="350" end="372" title="State Owned Enterprises" label="State Owned Enterprise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334763" wikidata="Q718828" url="?curid=334763" title="Robert Reich">
<text>Robert Bernard Reich (; born June 24, 1946) is an American professor, author, lawyer, and political commentator. He worked in the administrations of presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, and served as Secretary of Labor from 1993 to 1997 in the cabinet of President Bill Clinton. He was also a member of President Barack Obama&#x27;s economic transition advisory board.

Reich has been the Chancellor&#x27;s Professor of Public Policy at the Goldman School of Public Policy at UC Berkeley since January 2006. He was formerly a lecturer at Harvard University&#x27;s John F. Kennedy School of Government and a professor of social and economic policy at the Heller School for Social Policy and Management of Brandeis University. In 2008, &quot;Time&quot; magazine named him one of the Ten Best Cabinet Members of the century, and in the same year &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; placed him sixth on its list of Most Influential Business Thinkers.

Reich has published numerous books, including the best-sellers &quot;The Work of Nations&quot; (1991), &quot;&quot; (2004), &quot;&quot; (2007), &quot;Aftershock&quot; (2010), &quot;Beyond Outrage&quot; (2012), and &quot;Saving Capitalism&quot; (2015). The Robert Reich–Jacob Kornbluth film &quot;Saving Capitalism&quot; debuted on Netflix in November 2017, and their film &quot;Inequality for All&quot; won a U.S. Documentary Special Jury Award for Achievement in Filmmaking at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival. He is board chair emeritus of Common Cause and blogs at Robertreich.org.

== Early life and career ==
Reich was born to a Jewish family in Scranton, Pennsylvania, the son of Mildred Freshman (née Dorf) (1919–2006) and Edwin Saul Reich (1914–2016), who owned a women&#x27;s clothing store. As a teenager, he was diagnosed with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, also known as Fairbank&#x27;s disease, a genetic disorder that results in short stature and other symptoms. This condition made Reich a target for bullies and he sought out the protection of older boys; one of them was Michael Schwerner, who was one of the three civil rights workers murdered in Mississippi by the Ku Klux Klan in 1964 for the registration of African-American voters. Reich cites this event as an inspiration to &quot;fight the bullies, to protect the powerless, to make sure that the people without a voice have a voice&quot;.

Reich attended John Jay High School in Cross River, New York, where he received a National Merit Scholarship. He graduated from Dartmouth College in 1968 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in history, &quot;summa cum laude&quot;. While at Dartmouth, Reich went on a date with Hillary Rodham (later Clinton), then an undergraduate at Wellesley College. He won a Rhodes Scholarship to study Philosophy, Politics, and Economics at University College, Oxford. While studying at Oxford, Reich first met Bill Clinton, also a Rhodes Scholar. Although Reich was drafted to serve in the Vietnam War, he did not pass the physical examination; due to his dysplasia condition, Reich is only tall, shorter than the required minimum height of . Reich subsequently earned a J.D. from Yale Law School, where he was an editor of the &quot;Yale Law Journal&quot;. At Yale, he was a classmate of Bill Clinton, Hillary Rodham, Clarence Thomas, Michael Medved, and Richard Blumenthal.

From 1973 to 1974, Reich served as a law clerk to Judge Frank M. Coffin, chief judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. From 1974 to 1976, he was an assistant to U.S. Solicitor General Robert Bork, under whom he had studied antitrust law while at Yale. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter appointed him director of the Policy Planning Staff at the Federal Trade Commission. From 1980 until 1992, Reich taught at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, where he wrote a series of books and articles, including &quot;The Next American Frontier&quot; and &quot;The Work of Nations&quot;.

== Tenure as Secretary of Labor ==

Bill Clinton incorporated Reich&#x27;s thinking into his 1992 campaign platform, and after Clinton won the election, he appointed Reich to head economic policy for the presidential transition.

Reich joined the administration as Secretary of Labor. On January 21, his nomination was confirmed unanimously and without controversy, along with a slate of Clinton appointees.

In the very early days of the administration, Reich was seen as one of the most powerful members of the Clinton cabinet, both for his friendship with the President and his ambitious agenda for the Department of Labor. Reich envisioned Labor as the nucleus of a cluster of agencies, including the departments of Commerce and Education, which could act in tandem to break down traditional bureaucratic barriers. Consistent with the 1992 Clinton platform and his writings before taking office, Reich called for more federal spending on jobs training and infrastructure.

Reich also took initiative to expand his flexible power as an economic advisor-at-large to the President. As a member of the National Economic Council, Reich advised Clinton on health care reform, education policy, welfare reform, national service initiatives, and technology policy, as well as deficit reduction and spending priorities. He also actively engaged independent government agencies, such as the Federal Communications Commission, to take a labor-focused approach to regulation. He referred to himself as &quot;secretary of the American work force&quot; and &quot;the central banker of the nation&#x27;s greatest resource&quot;.

However, he butted heads with deficit hawks on the administration&#x27;s economic team, including budget director Leon Panetta and Federal Reserve chair Alan Greenspan, a holdover from the Reagan administration whom Clinton reappointed. Reducing the deficit was the administration&#x27;s top economic priority, placing Reich&#x27;s economic agenda on hold. He later credited Hillary Clinton with keeping him apprised of goings-on within the White House.

During his tenure, he implemented the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and successfully lobbied to increase the national minimum wage.

===NAFTA===

Throughout his first year in office, Reich was a leading proponent of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which was negotiated by the George H. W. Bush administration and supported by Clinton following two side agreements negotiated to satisfy labor and environmental groups. Reich served as leading public and private spokesman for the Clinton administration against organized labor, who continued to oppose the Agreement as a whole.

In July 1993, Reich said that the unions were &quot;just plain wrong&quot; to suggest NAFTA would cause a loss of American employment and predicted that &quot;given the pace of growth of the Mexican automobile market over the next 15 years, I would say that more automobile jobs would be created in the United States than would be lost to Mexico... [T]he American automobile industry will grow substantially, and the net effect will be an increase in automobile jobs.&quot; He further argued that trade liberalization following World War II had led to the &quot;biggest increase in jobs and standard of living among the industrialized nations [in] history.

In a September 1993 to the Center for National Policy think tank, Reich said, &quot;Great change demands great flexibility -- the capacity to adapt quickly and continuously, to change jobs, change directions, gain new skills. But the sad irony is that massive change on the scale we are now facing may be inviting the opposite reaction: a politics of preservation, grounded in fear.&quot; Reich specifically said opposition to NAFTA &quot;has little to do with the agreement and much to do with the pervasive anxieties arising from economic changes that are already affecting Americans.&quot; In October, Reich addressed the biannual AFL-CIO convention in San Francisco, where Economic Policy Institute economist Thea Lea mocked Reich&#x27;s view as a &quot;field-of-dreams&quot; theory of job creation. His remarks were generally well-received, though only briefly mentioning NAFTA; he focused on the Clinton administration&#x27;s approach to the National Labor Relations Board and day-to-day business regulation and management-labor relations.

In advance of the final vote, Reich personally lobbied members of Congress to support the Agreement. The bill passed the House 234–200 on November 17 and the Senate 61–38 on November 20; President Clinton signed it in to law on December 8.

Over twenty years later, in opposing the Trans-Pacific Partnership as &quot;NAFTA on steroids&quot;, Reich repudiated his position. He further admitted that he regretted &quot;not doing more to strengthen [NAFTA]&#x27;s labor and environmental side-agreements&quot;, though he denied supporting an expedited &quot;fast-track&quot; legislative process without opportunity for amendment.

===Return to influence (1995–1997)===
By August 1994, Reich had largely been sidelined on policy by the deficit hawks in the administration. With the approval of the White House, he delivered the first of four major speeches on the emergence of a new &quot;anxious class&quot; of Americans concerned with increased global competition and technological change.

After a disastrous showing for the Democratic Party in the November 1994 midterm elections, Reich returned to the forefront of the Clinton economic team. Clinton reframed his agenda around a set of Reich proposals: middle-class tax cuts, a boost in the minimum wage, tax deductions for college tuition, federal grants to help workers upgrade their skills, and a ban on strike replacements.

In a speech to the Democratic Leadership Council shortly after the election, Reich called for cutting corporate subsidies, which he labeled &quot;corporate welfare&quot;, as the only possible means to afford jobs training programs. In a concession to the new Republican congress, Reich said that many federal job training programs did not work and that there was a need to consolidate programs that work and eliminate those that did not. After the speech, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Commerce Secretary Ron Brown attempted to distance the administration from Reich&#x27;s corporate welfare comments. However, Bentsen soon resigned; Reich continued to attack corporate welfare.

In February 1995, Reich met opposition within the administration over his proposal to ban government contractors from permanently replacing striking workers. Clinton sided with Reich, re-establishing his central role in the administration&#x27;s economic policy.

Reich gave weekly speeches attacking the new Republican majority, with his central message being the need to adapt to an &quot;information-based&quot; economy and the continued need for job re-training. He said, &quot;We can&#x27;t get the mass production economy back. The challenge now is of a different kind, and many have found it difficult to adapt. This is a major social transformation.&quot; On a Chicago call-in radio show, he said, &quot;You are on a downward escalator. You have a lot of job insecurity because of the tidal wave of corporate downsizing and restructuring.&quot;

In December 1995, Reich delivered a commencement speech at the University of Maryland, College Park, in which he decried the increasing tendency of wealthy, educated Americans to divide themselves from the general population as &quot;the secession of the successful America&quot;.

===Resignation and memoir===
In 1996, between Clinton&#x27;s re-election and second inauguration, Reich decided to leave the department to spend more time with his sons, then in their teen years.

By April 1997, he published his experiences working for the Clinton administration in &quot;Locked in the Cabinet&quot;. Among those he criticized in the tell-all were Clinton advisor Dick Morris, former AFL-CIO head Lane Kirkland, and Federal Reserve Board chairman Alan Greenspan, a leading deficit hawk whom he considered &quot;the most powerful man in the world&quot;. In the book, Reich criticizes the Democratic Party as &quot;owned by&quot; business and Washington as having two real political parties during his tenure: the &quot;Save the Jobs&quot; party, which wanted to maintain the status quo, and the &quot;Let &#x27;Em Drown&quot; party.

After publication of the book, Reich received criticism for embellishing events with invented dialogue which did not match C-SPAN tapes or official transcripts of meetings. The paperback release of the memoir revised or omitted the inventions. In one story, members of the National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) confronted Reich with curses and shouts of &quot;Go back to Harvard!&quot; In the revised version of the NAM story, Reich is instead hissed at. The foreword to the paperback contained an explanation, in which Reich says that &quot;memory is fallible&quot;.

The memoir has since been called &quot;a classic of the pissed-off-secretary genre&quot; by Glenn Thrush.

== After the Clinton administration ==
Reich became a professor at Brandeis University, teaching courses for undergraduates as well as in the Heller School for Social Policy and Management. In 2003, he was elected the Professor of the Year by the undergraduate student body.

On January 1, 2006, Reich joined the faculty of UC Berkeley&#x27;s Goldman School of Public Policy. Since then, he has taught a popular undergraduate course called Wealth and Poverty, in addition to his graduate courses. Reich is also a member of the board of trustees for the Blum Center for Developing Economies at the University of California, Berkeley. The center is focused on finding solutions to address the crisis of extreme poverty and disease in the developing world. In February 2017, Reich criticized UC Berkeley&#x27;s decision to host Donald Trump supporter Milo Yiannopoulos. Following protests on the Berkeley Campus Reich stated that although he didn&#x27;t &quot;want to add to the conspiratorial musings&quot; he wouldn&#x27;t rule out the possibility the &quot;agitators&quot; were a right-wing false flag for Trump to strip universities of federal funding.

===2002 campaign for Governor of Massachusetts===

In 2002, he ran for Governor of Massachusetts, losing in the Democratic primary to Shannon O&#x27;Brien. He also published an associated campaign book, &quot;I&#x27;ll Be Short&quot;. Reich was the first US gubernatorial candidate to support same-sex marriage. He also pledged support for abortion rights and strongly condemned capital punishment. His campaign staff was largely made up of his Brandeis students. Although his campaign had little funding, he narrowly came in second out of six candidates in the Democratic primary with 25% of the vote; O&#x27;Brien went on to lose the general election to Republican future two-time presidential candidate and U.S. Senator Mitt Romney.

In early 2005, there was speculation that Reich would once again seek the Democratic nomination for Governor of Massachusetts. He instead endorsed the then-little-known candidacy of Deval Patrick, who had previously served as Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights in the Clinton Administration. Patrick won the party&#x27;s endorsement, a three-way primary with nearly 50% of the vote, and the general election in November 2006.

===Political commentary===
In 2004, Reich published &quot;&quot;.

In addition to his professorial role, he was a weekly contributor to the American Public Media public radio program Marketplace, and a regular columnist for &quot;The American Prospect&quot;, which he co-founded in 1990. He has also frequently contributed to CNBC&#x27;s &quot;Kudlow &amp; Company&quot; and &quot;On the Money&quot;.

In 2010, his weekly column was syndicated by Tribune Content Agency. Since at least the summer of 2016, Reich has contributed an opinion column to &quot;Newsweek&quot;.

In 2013, he teamed up with filmmaker Jacob Kornbluth to produce the documentary &quot;Inequality for All&quot;, based on his book &quot;Aftershock&quot; which won a Special Jury Award at the Sundance Film Festival. In 2017, he again teamed up with Jacob Kornbluth to produce the documentary &quot;Saving Capitalism&quot;, based on his book of that name. Netflix chose the film to be a Netflix Original Documentary. In the documentary, Reich posits that large corporations began in the late 1960s to use financial power to purchase influence among the political class and consolidate political power, highlighting in particular the influence of the 2010 Citizens United ruling that allowed corporations to contribute to election campaigns. In the documentary, he advocates for grassroots political mobilization among working class Americans to countervail the political power of corporate America.

In 2022, Reich was featured in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; season finale &quot;Poorhouse Rock&quot;, where he briefly explains the economic decline of the American middle class during a musical sequence.

== Political stances ==


In an interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 2008, Reich explained that &quot;I don&#x27;t believe in redistribution of wealth for the sake of redistributing wealth. But I am concerned about how we can afford to pay for what we as a nation need to do [...] [Taxes should pay] for what we need in order to be safe and productive. As Oliver Wendell Holmes once wrote, &#x27;taxes are the price we pay for a civilized society.

In response to a question as to what to recommend to the incoming president regarding a fair and sustainable income and wealth distribution, Reich said: &quot;Expand the Earned Income Tax Credit—a wage supplement for lower-income people, and finance it with a higher marginal income tax on the top five percent. For the longer term, invest in education for lower income communities, starting with early-childhood education and extending all the way up to better access to post-secondary education.&quot;

Reich is pro-union, saying: &quot;Unionization is not just good for workers in unions, unionization is very, very important for the economy overall, and would create broad benefits for the United States.&quot; Writing in 2014, he stated that he favors raising the federal minimum wage to $15/hr across three years, believing that it will not adversely impact big business, and will increase higher value worker availability.

Reich also supports an unconditional and universal basic income. On the eve of a June 2016 popular vote in Switzerland on basic income, he declared that countries will have to introduce this instrument sooner or later.

While affordable housing has been a central issue in Reich&#x27;s activism, in July 2020 Reich opposed a high-density development project in his own neighborhood in Berkeley. He supported making a 120-year-old triplex a landmark to prevent the construction of a 10-apartment building, one of which would be deed restricted to be rented to a low income tenant, citing &quot;the character of the neighborhood&quot;. During an interview with W. Kamau Bell the following month, Reich reaffirmed his support for affordable housing &quot;in every community I&#x27;ve been involved in&quot;, and critiqued the development for replacing the house with &quot;condos selling for one and a half million dollars each&quot;.

Although a supporter of Israel, Reich has criticized Israel&#x27;s settlement building in the occupied Palestinian territories. More recently, Reich has spoken out against the &quot;bloodbath&quot; in Gaza, and declared &quot;we must restrict U.S. arms sales to Israel.&quot;

In September 2005, Reich testified against John Roberts at his confirmation hearings for Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

On April 18, 2008, Reich endorsed Barack Obama for President of the United States. During the 2008 primaries, Reich published an article that was critical of the Clintons, referring to Bill Clinton&#x27;s attacks on Barack Obama as &quot;ill-tempered and ill-founded&quot;, and accusing the Clintons of waging &quot;a smear campaign against Obama that employs some of the worst aspects of the old politics&quot;.

Reich endorsed Bernie Sanders for President of the United States in 2016, and both Sanders and Elizabeth Warren in 2020. After Sanders ended his 2016 campaign, Reich urged Sanders&#x27;s supporters to back eventual Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.

On May 31, 2020, Reich declared that &quot;by having no constructive response to any of the monumental crises now convulsing America, Trump has abdicated his office.&quot; Since at least 2021, Reich has publicly supported President Donald Trump&#x27;s removal from Twitter and other social media platforms. In an April 2022 op-ed published on &quot;The Guardian&quot;, he criticized Elon Musk&#x27;s efforts to take over Twitter, opining that the &quot;libertarian vision of an &#x27;uncontrolled&#x27; internet&quot; is &quot;dangerous rubbish&quot;.

In 2022, Reich called Florida Governor Ron DeSantis a &quot;fascist&quot;.

In October 2023, Reich authored &quot;The last adult in the room&quot;. In the essay, he characterized Joe Biden as, &quot;shrewd, careful, and calibrated&quot; and expressed gratitude that Biden &quot;is in charge&quot; at a time &quot;when the kids are on a rampage&quot;.

In 2025, Reich has been vocal against a second Donald Trump administration, criticizing its association with Project 2025. Reich additionally characterized the administration as &quot;dangerous,&quot; highlighting Project 2025 as a plan to &quot;dismantle the US government.&quot;

== Social media ==
In 2015, with Jacob Kornbluth, Reich founded Inequality Media, which produces video content of Reich. This includes a &quot;Resistance Report&quot; (a 15- to 30-minute video published on social media), and the weekly Youtube show &quot;The Common Good&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Reich married British-born lawyer Clare Dalton in Cambridge, UK, in 1973; they divorced in 2012. During their marriage, the couple had two sons: Sam, CEO and owner of Dropout (previously known as CollegeHumor), and Adam, a sociology professor at Columbia University. Reich subsequently married photographer Perian Flaherty.

Reich was born with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, a form of dwarfism also known as &quot;Fairbank&#x27;s disease&quot; and stands 4 feet 11 inches tall, an issue he publicly addressed in a July 2023 Blog post titled &quot;Why I&#x27;m So Short&quot;.

In 2020, Reich wrote letters to the City of Berkeley Landmarks Preservation Commission objecting to the construction of ten housing units (including one low-income unit) on a lot near Reich&#x27;s home.

In 2023, Reich appeared in a cameo role in &quot;Dropout America 2&quot;, the first episode of the 6th season of Dropout&#x27;s &quot;Breaking News&quot;, providing a fictional account of his son Sam&#x27;s life.

== Awards ==
* Bruno-Kreisky Award, best political book of year (&quot;Supercapitalism&quot;), 2009
* Václav Havel Foundation VIZE 97 Prize, October 2003, for his writings in economics and politics.
* Louis Brownlow Award (best book on public administration), National Academy of Public Administration, 1984

== Written works ==

=== Books ===

* 1982: &quot;Minding America&#x27;s Business: The Decline and Rise of the American Economy&quot; (with Ira Magaziner), 
* 1983: &quot;The Next American Frontier&quot;, 
* 1985: &quot;New Deals: The Chrysler Revival and the American System&quot; (with writer John Donahue), 
* 1987: &quot;Tales of a New America: The Anxious Liberal&#x27;s Guide to the Future&quot;, 
* 1989: &quot;The Resurgent Liberal: And Other Unfashionable Prophecies&quot;, 
* 1990: &quot;The Power of Public Ideas&quot; (editor), 
* 1990: &quot;Public Management in a Democratic Society&quot;, 
* 1991: &quot;The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st Century Capitalism&quot;, 
* 1997: &quot;Locked in the Cabinet&quot;, 
* 2000: &quot;The Future of Success: Working and Living in the New Economy&quot;, 
* 2002: &quot;I&#x27;ll Be Short: Essentials for a Decent Working Society&quot;, 
* 2004: &quot;&quot;, 
* 2007: &quot;&quot;, 
* 2010: &quot;Aftershock: The Next Economy and America&#x27;s Future&quot;, (updated edition 2013)
* 2012: &quot;Beyond Outrage: What Has Gone Wrong with Our Economy and Our Democracy, and How to Fix It&quot;, 
* 2015: &quot;Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few&quot;, 
* 2017: &quot;Economics in Wonderland&quot;, 
* 2018: &quot;The Common Good&quot;, 
* 2020: &quot;The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It&quot;, 

=== Plays ===

* &quot;Milton and Augusto&quot; (reading, University of California Berkeley, Center for Latin American Studies, September 2013)
* &quot;Public Exposure&quot; (East Coast premier, Wellfleet Harbor Actor&#x27;s Theater, June 2005; West Coast premier, Santa Rosa Theater, June 2008)

=== Filmography ===

These documentaries, and additional social media movies, have been made in collaboration with Jacob Kornbluth.

* 2013: &quot;Inequality for All&quot;
* 2017: &quot;Saving Capitalism&quot;

== See also ==

* 2008–09 Keynesian resurgence
* &quot;Journal of Women, Politics &amp; Policy&quot; – Reich sits on the editorial board
* &quot;The Trap&quot; (TV series), BBC documentary featuring Reich
* List of Jewish United States Cabinet members

== References ==

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;The Guardian&quot; contributor page
* From the Left, blog by Reich
* The American Prospect articles by Robert Reich
* UC Berkeley bio
* on the Fediverse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q718828" start="0" end="20" title="Robert Reich" label="Robert Bernard Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="160" end="171" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="176" end="188" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="204" end="222" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="255" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton#Administration" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="269" end="281" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="317" end="329" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580240" start="445" end="476" title="Goldman School of Public Policy" label="Goldman School of Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="480" end="491" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="542" end="560" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="568" end="604" title="John F. Kennedy School of Government" label="John F. Kennedy School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707390" start="658" end="704" title="Heller School for Social Policy and Management" label="Heller School for Social Policy and Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="708" end="727" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="738" end="754" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730994" start="1222" end="1237" title="Jacob Kornbluth" label="Jacob Kornbluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516353" start="1331" end="1349" title="Inequality for All" label="Inequality for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070213" start="1435" end="1462" title="2013 Sundance Film Festival" label="2013 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197252" start="1494" end="1506" title="Common Cause" label="Common Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="1603" end="1625" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="1790" end="1819" title="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia" label="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354034" start="2040" end="2057" title="Michael Schwerner" label="Michael Schwerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q635051" start="2105" end="2128" title="murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner" label="murdered in Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="2136" end="2148" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241699" start="2382" end="2402" title="John Jay High School (Cross River, New York)" label="John Jay High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q106777848" start="2406" end="2427" title="Cross River, New York" label="Cross River, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="2449" end="2475" title="National Merit Scholarship Program" label="National Merit Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="2495" end="2512" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2528" end="2550" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="2569" end="2584" title="summa cum laude" label="summa cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="2638" end="2668" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham (later Clinton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="2695" end="2712" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="2723" end="2741" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="2751" end="2786" title="Philosophy, Politics, and Economics" label="Philosophy, Politics, and Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="2790" end="2816" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="2860" end="2872" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2940" end="2951" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="3121" end="3125" title="Juris Doctor" label="J.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="3131" end="3146" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571386" start="3184" end="3200" title="Yale Law Journal" label="Yale Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="3269" end="3284" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832789" start="3286" end="3300" title="Michael Medved" label="Michael Medved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023708" start="3306" end="3324" title="Richard Blumenthal" label="Richard Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443706" start="3383" end="3398" title="Frank M. Coffin" label="Frank M. Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="3419" end="3462" title="U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="3506" end="3528" title="U.S. Solicitor General" label="U.S. Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="3529" end="3540" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="3568" end="3581" title="antitrust law" label="antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="3616" end="3628" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="3688" end="3712" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="3756" end="3792" title="John F. Kennedy School of Government" label="John F. Kennedy School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q105571909" start="4154" end="4177" title="Presidential transition of Bill Clinton" label="presidential transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="4215" end="4233" title="Secretary of Labor" label="Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="4269" end="4278" title="Advice and consent" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232634" start="5052" end="5077" title="National Economic Council (United States)" label="National Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="5335" end="5368" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="5683" end="5695" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="5722" end="5736" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="5944" end="5959" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433309" start="6062" end="6090" title="Family and Medical Leave Act" label="Family and Medical Leave Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="6148" end="6160" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="6250" end="6285" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="6323" end="6355" title="George H. W. Bush administration" label="George H. W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059789" start="7310" end="7336" title="Center for National Policy" label="Center for National Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="7917" end="7924" title="AFL-CIO" label="AFL-CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="7960" end="7985" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q517958" start="8041" end="8056" title="Field of Dreams" label="field-of-dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="8231" end="8261" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="8612" end="8637" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="Trans-Pacific Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048742" start="9215" end="9228" title="economic anxiety" label="anxious class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="9273" end="9291" title="globalization" label="global competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892454" start="9378" end="9409" title="1994 United States elections" label="November 1994 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="9688" end="9707" title="strikebreaker" label="strike replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="9729" end="9758" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172508" start="9856" end="9873" title="corporate welfare" label="corporate welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q455401" start="10185" end="10198" title="Lloyd Bentsen" label="Lloyd Bentsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193187" start="10222" end="10231" title="Ron Brown" label="Ron Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q871337" start="10782" end="10819" title="information economy" label="&amp;quot;information-based&amp;quot; economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="11314" end="11350" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q463009" start="11914" end="11925" title="Dick Morris" label="Dick Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400324" start="11947" end="11960" title="Lane Kirkland" label="Lane Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="11997" end="12011" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="12506" end="12512" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336837" start="12656" end="12693" title="National Association of Manufacturers" label="National Association of Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063251" start="13050" end="13062" title="Glenn Thrush" label="Glenn Thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="13132" end="13151" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707390" start="13207" end="13253" title="Heller School for Social Policy and Management" label="Heller School for Social Policy and Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580240" start="13408" end="13439" title="Goldman School of Public Policy" label="Goldman School of Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="13662" end="13696" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860370" start="13913" end="13930" title="Milo Yiannopoulos" label="Milo Yiannopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13942" end="13973" title="2017 Berkeley protests#February 1" label="protests on the Berkeley Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="14156" end="14166" title="false flag" label="false flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784437" start="14271" end="14278" title="2002 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="In 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="14291" end="14316" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="14332" end="14342" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488921" start="14354" end="14374" title="Shannon O&amp;#x27;Brien (Massachusetts politician)" label="Shannon O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="14513" end="14530" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="14560" end="14575" title="abortion rights" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035721" start="14589" end="14617" title="Capital punishment debate in the United States" label="condemned capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="14943" end="14954" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11100" start="15139" end="15152" title="Deval Patrick" label="Deval Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="15183" end="15209" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381771" start="15533" end="15554" title="American Public Media" label="American Public Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="15555" end="15567" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770940" start="15576" end="15587" title="Marketplace (radio program)" label="Marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519769" start="15623" end="15644" title="The American Prospect" label="The American Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="15719" end="15723" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744973" start="15737" end="15757" title="Kudlow &amp;amp; Company" label="Kudlow &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773318" start="15774" end="15786" title="On the Money (2013 TV series)" label="On the Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998655" start="15840" end="15862" title="Tribune Content Agency" label="Tribune Content Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="15948" end="15956" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730994" start="16002" end="16017" title="Jacob Kornbluth" label="Jacob Kornbluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516353" start="16051" end="16069" title="Inequality for All" label="Inequality for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="16156" end="16178" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="16319" end="16326" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092602" start="16618" end="16633" title="Citizens United v. FEC" label="Citizens United"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="16900" end="16912" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q111043553" start="16939" end="16953" title="Poorhouse Rock" label="Poorhouse Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16991" end="17036" title="American middle class#Increasing inequality" label="economic decline of the American middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17118" end="17136" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="17203" end="17227" title="redistribution of wealth" label="redistribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="17433" end="17454" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="17696" end="17720" title="Earned income tax credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="18044" end="18049" title="trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="18498" end="18520" title="universal basic income" label="universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18538" end="18591" title="2016 Swiss referendums#Basic income referendum" label="June 2016 popular vote in Switzerland on basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="18984" end="18999" title="Covenant (law)" label="deed restricted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198597" start="19116" end="19129" title="W. Kamau Bell" label="W. Kamau Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="19457" end="19476" title="Israeli settlement" label="settlement building"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="19493" end="19516" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="19710" end="19722" title="John G. Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="19756" end="19804" title="Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court" label="Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="19841" end="19853" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="20236" end="20250" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="20316" end="20332" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="20607" end="20612" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="20705" end="20717" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="20738" end="20745" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20822" end="20834" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="20856" end="20865" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q111725317" start="20873" end="20901" title="Elon Musk purchase of Twitter" label="efforts to take over Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="20926" end="20937" title="libertarian" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20198851" start="21048" end="21064" title="Florida governor" label="Florida Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105215" start="21065" end="21077" title="Ron DeSantis" label="Ron DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="21086" end="21093" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="21205" end="21214" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="22009" end="22018" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924893" start="22104" end="22107" title="Sam Reich" label="Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059933" start="22126" end="22133" title="Dropout (media company)" label="Dropout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036407" start="22155" end="22167" title="CollegeHumor" label="CollegeHumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="22205" end="22224" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="22304" end="22333" title="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia" label="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="22345" end="22353" title="dwarfism" label="dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059933" start="22854" end="22861" title="Dropout (media company)" label="Dropout"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="23057" end="23069" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771871" start="23081" end="23094" title="VIZE 97 Prize" label="VIZE 97 Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915969" start="23404" end="23417" title="Ira Magaziner" label="Ira Magaziner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730994" start="25053" end="25068" title="Jacob Kornbluth" label="Jacob Kornbluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516353" start="25085" end="25103" title="Inequality for All" label="Inequality for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q47353472" start="25124" end="25141" title="Saving Capitalism" label="Saving Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613061" start="25167" end="25195" title="2008–09 Keynesian resurgence" label="2008–09 Keynesian resurgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763597" start="25204" end="25243" title="Journal of Women, Politics &amp;amp; Policy" label="Journal of Women, Politics &amp;amp; Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276933" start="25288" end="25320" title="The Trap (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Trap&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130197948" start="25356" end="25400" title="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members" label="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325419" start="25595" end="25604" title="Fediverse" label="Fediverse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334765" wikidata="Q3022218" url="?curid=334765" title="Demon Internet">
<text>Demon Internet was a British Internet service provider, initially an independent business, later operating as a brand of Vodafone. It was one of the UK&#x27;s earliest ISPs, offering dial-up Internet access services from 1 June 1992. According to the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, it &quot;sparked a revolution by becoming the first to provide genuinely affordable access to the internet in the UK&quot;.

In 1997 Demon was bought by Scottish Telecom, a wholly owned subsidiary of the private utility company ScottishPower. Scottish Telecom rebranded as Thus plc in October 1999 and floated on the London Stock Exchange. Thus plc fully demerged from ScottishPower in 2002. Thus became part of Cable &amp; Wireless plc, and then part of Cable &amp; Wireless Worldwide following a split of its parent. The company was purchased as part of the acquisition of Cable &amp; Wireless Worldwide by Vodafone Group on 27 July 2012. Demon then operated as a brand of Vodafone.

From 1996 to 2006 Demon operated a subsidiary ISP business in the Netherlands. It was sold to KPN in June 2006 and its operations transferred to their XS4ALL subsidiary.

In January 2019, Vodafone announced its intention to close Demon and migrate its 15,000 remaining customers to more modern services.

==History==
Demon Internet was born out of Demon Systems, a bespoke business software development company formed by Cliff Stanford, Grahame Davies and Owen Manderfield. In a discussion of the need for a home-oriented dialup IP service on the CIX boards, Stanford suggested that if 200 people stepped up with a year&#x27;s subscription, he would use Demon&#x27;s infrastructure to create such a service.

Dismissing the idea that the Demon name might upset those with religious convictions, Cliff Stanford laughingly said he had considered getting the numbers &quot;666&quot; incorporated in the dial up.

The original Demon service was hosted using mainly Apricot servers including a gigantic pair of LSI towers named &quot;gate&quot; and &quot;post&quot;.

When Demon started, WinSock was still a new concept that was not widely available and MS-DOS users were generally expected to download Internet connection software based on the KA9Q implementation of TCP/IP. Other platforms able to connect to the service included OS/2 Warp, Amiga, Archimedes, Atari, Linux and Mac. In 1995 the company acquired Chris Hall and Richard Clayton&#x27;s Turnpike suite for Windows.

Its first service was the &quot;standard dial-up&quot; (SDU) - full TCP/IP access on a static IP address with a user chosen 4 to 8 character &quot;nodename&quot; (later 3–16 character &quot;hostname&quot;) in the &quot;.demon.co.uk&quot; domain &quot;e.g. example.demon.co.uk&quot;. This allowed users to receive SMTP mail and other IP traffic direct to their computers. It was possible to operate independently of Demon or to make use of Demon&#x27;s mail, news and IRC servers.

Demon was the first ISP to pioneer SDU service priced at £10 a month plus VAT (£10 only for the founder members), described in the sales literature as a &quot;tenner a month&quot;. The low price attracted enough new customers that it was profitable and served to expand Internet usage in the UK.

Demon Internet received a healthy boost in user numbers when the &quot;UK Internet Book&quot;, written by pioneering internet writer Sue Schofield, negotiated with Demon to include a discount coupon in the book for newcomers to Demon. The book needed a change to Demon&#x27;s mail systems. Schofield demanded and got a POP3 mail option added to the Demon service. The book sold 15,000 copies of the first print run, many readers subscribing to Demon.

Thanks to Demon Systems, Demon Internet always had a strong programming team allowing it to create solutions to emerging issues in-house. All three directors were programmers and Stanford wrote many business-critical pieces of software, writing modules to adapt MMDF to Demon&#x27;s purposes. Mark Turner, originally one of Demon System&#x27;s developers, wrote many of the accounts and operational systems. As Stanford was increasingly absorbed with corporate activities, Neil McRae eventually took over the work on the mail system. Oliver Smith moved from Systems to Internet to automate services for internal and corporate customers, establish Demon as a technical leader in industry forums such as the RIPE, DNS registry communities, e.g. .uk, and emerging open-source development communities etc. Later Peter Galbavy was brought in to develop solutions for interoperability issues and Ronald Khoo developed low-level networking solutions that allowed the company to run on free operating systems and PC-based hardware.

Many other key Demon people started out as developers – Giles Todd, Clive Feather, Richard Clayton.

Armed with so many developers, many of whom made names for themselves within the developing industry, Stanford used the company&#x27;s ability to contribute its developments to the open source community as a means of developing Demon&#x27;s reputation beyond what its Internet service commanded.

Demon&#x27;s home-dialup focus was also its Achilles heel. The company had some exposure after sponsoring Fulham F.C., but British Telecom were sceptical of Demon&#x27;s projected growth and did not provide for expansion, resulting in a regular shortage of lines and regular re-digs of the top end of Hendon Lane, Finchley, north London to lay down additional cables. Demon moved initially to Energis lines with a Regionally Organised Modem Pool (ROMP) and later added Colt lines to the service so they had more control over which lines new customers used over separate 0845 numbers.

In 1995, Demon acquired a 25% stake in competing UK Internet provider Cityscape Internet Services, as part of a deal to move Cityscape&#x27;s backbone from Pipex to Demon. On 29 September, they acquired the remaining 75% of the company.

Demon&#x27;s early days are described in an interview with Cliff Stanford published in &quot;The Independent &quot;on 15 January 1996.

The public telephone number of the company, and many of the dialup access numbers, end with 666 (the supposed Number of the Beast), a deliberate pun on the name &quot;Demon&quot;. When Thus plc was formed as a parent of Demon, its randomly allocated company number also ended in 666. Also, after a spate of &quot;access&quot; related names (e.g. gate, post) many of its original servers&#x27; hostnames started with &quot;dis&quot;, being the initial letters of &quot;Demon Internet Services&quot; as well as the name of a part of Hell in Dante&#x27;s Inferno and another name for Lucifer.

==Ownership==
In June 2008 Cable &amp; Wireless plc made a predatory offer for Demon&#x27;s parent, Thus. On 1 October 2008, Cable &amp; Wireless completed the takeover of Thus.

Cable &amp; Wireless split into two separate businesses on 26 March 2010. Thus and Demon came under the ownership of the original business, which was renamed Cable &amp; Wireless Worldwide. This was purchased by Vodafone in July 2012 which began integrating the business with its own. Thus and Demon were integrated into Vodafone on 1 April 2013.

During 2016–2019, the Demon Internet service was slowly wound down with a view to migrating customers over to Vodafone branded products, a process that took longer than expected with some customers still being provided with Demon ADSL at the end of May 2019 due to a large backlog in the processing of migration requests.

==IRC servers==
Demon ran IRC servers on both the IRCnet and EFnet networks from 1993 and on QuakeNet later on. In 2009, Demon delinked their server from QuakeNet and EFnet.

==See also==
* &quot;Godfrey v Demon Internet Service&quot;
* Internet in the United Kingdom § History
* Point-to-Point Protocol
* Post Office Protocol
* Serial Line Internet Protocol
* Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3022218" start="0" end="14" title="Demon Internet" label="Demon Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="29" end="54" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="121" end="129" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601071" start="138" end="172" title="List of UK ISPs by age" label="one of the UK&amp;#x27;s earliest ISPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="183" end="206" title="dial-up Internet access" label="dial-up Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="257" end="272" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778417" start="508" end="521" title="ScottishPower" label="ScottishPower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799478" start="553" end="561" title="Thus (company)" label="Thus plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="597" end="618" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="692" end="716" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507083" start="735" end="765" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507083" start="855" end="885" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="889" end="903" title="Vodafone Group" label="Vodafone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1032" end="1043" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q338633" start="1060" end="1063" title="KPN" label="KPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q851481" start="1117" end="1123" title="XS4ALL" label="XS4ALL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132772" start="1387" end="1401" title="Cliff Stanford" label="Cliff Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931568" start="1513" end="1516" title="CIX (website)" label="CIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501914" start="2049" end="2056" title="WinSock" label="WinSock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="2115" end="2121" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324672" start="2206" end="2210" title="KA9Q" label="KA9Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="2229" end="2235" title="Internet protocol suite" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="2293" end="2302" title="OS/2 Warp" label="OS/2 Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="2304" end="2309" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="2311" end="2321" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="2323" end="2328" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2330" end="2335" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="2340" end="2343" title="Mac (computer)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856092" start="2412" end="2420" title="Turnpike (software)" label="Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="2996" end="2999" title="VAT" label="VAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="3538" end="3542" title="POP3" label="POP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495193" start="3933" end="3937" title="MMDF" label="MMDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="4192" end="4203" title="email" label="mail system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4414" end="4417" title=".uk#History" label=".uk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096419" start="4978" end="4999" title="open source community" label="open source community"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="5200" end="5211" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="5217" end="5232" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q150217" start="5408" end="5416" title="Finchley" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017806" start="5835" end="5840" title="Pipex" label="Pipex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="6010" end="6025" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="6163" end="6182" title="Number of the Beast (numerology)" label="Number of the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="6198" end="6201" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q568735" start="6574" end="6612" title="Dis (Divine Comedy)" label="a part of Hell in Dante&amp;#x27;s Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="6634" end="6641" title="Lucifer" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="6671" end="6695" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507083" start="6981" end="7011" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="7035" end="7043" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q55541" start="7520" end="7531" title="IRC servers" label="IRC servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654425" start="7544" end="7550" title="IRCnet" label="IRCnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274573" start="7555" end="7560" title="EFnet" label="EFnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q732920" start="7587" end="7595" title="QuakeNet" label="QuakeNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576597" start="7690" end="7722" title="Godfrey v Demon Internet Service" label="Godfrey v Demon Internet Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7731" end="7771" title="Internet in the United Kingdom#Dial-up" label="Internet in the United Kingdom § History"/>
<link wikidata="Q215179" start="7774" end="7797" title="Point-to-Point Protocol" label="Point-to-Point Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="7800" end="7820" title="Post Office Protocol" label="Post Office Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342337" start="7823" end="7852" title="Serial Line Internet Protocol" label="Serial Line Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="7855" end="7884" title="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol" label="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334768" wikidata="Q131027" url="?curid=334768" title="Entamoeba histolytica">
<text>Entamoeba histolytica is an anaerobic parasitic amoebozoan, part of the genus &quot;Entamoeba&quot;. Predominantly infecting humans and other primates causing amoebiasis, &quot;E. histolytica&quot; is estimated to infect about 35-50 million people worldwide. &quot;E. histolytica&quot; infection is estimated to kill more than 55,000 people each year. Previously, it was thought that 10% of the world population was infected, but these figures predate the recognition that at least 90% of these infections were due to a second species, &quot;E. dispar&quot;. Mammals such as dogs and cats can become infected transiently, but are not thought to contribute significantly to transmission.

The word &quot;histolysis&quot; literally means disintegration and dissolution of organic tissues.

== Transmission ==

The active (trophozoite) stage exists only in the host and in fresh loose feces; cysts survive outside the host in water, in soils, and on foods, especially under moist conditions on the latter. The infection can occur when a person puts anything into their mouth that has touched the feces of a person who is infected with &quot;E. histolytica&quot;, swallows something, such as water or food, that is contaminated with &quot;E. histolytica&quot;, or swallows &quot;E. histolytica&quot; cysts (eggs) picked up from contaminated surfaces or fingers. The cysts are readily killed by heat and by freezing temperatures; they survive for only a few months outside of the host. When cysts are swallowed, they cause infections by excysting (releasing the trophozoite stage) in the digestive tract.
The pathogenic nature of &quot;E. histolytica&quot; was first reported by Fedor A. Lösch in 1875, but it was not given its Latin name until Fritz Schaudinn described it in 1903. &quot;E. histolytica&quot;, as its name suggests (&quot;histo&quot;–&quot;lytic&quot; = tissue destroying), is pathogenic; infection can be asymptomatic, or it can lead to amoebic dysentery or amoebic liver abscess. Symptoms can include fulminating dysentery, bloody diarrhea, weight loss, fatigue, abdominal pain, and amoeboma. The amoeba can &#x27;bore&#x27; into the intestinal wall, causing lesions and intestinal symptoms, and it may reach the bloodstream or peritoneal cavity. From there, it can reach vital organs of the human body, usually the liver, but sometimes the lungs, brain, and spleen. A common outcome of this invasion of tissues is a liver abscess, which can be fatal if untreated. Ingested red blood cells are sometimes seen in the amoeba cell cytoplasm.

==Risk factors==

Poor sanitary conditions are known to increase the risk of contracting amebiasis &quot;E. histolytica&quot;. In the United States, there is a much higher rate of amebiasis-related mortality in California and Texas (this might be caused by the proximity of those states to &quot;E. histolytica&quot;-endemic areas, such as Mexico), parts of Latin America, and Asia. &quot;E. histolytica&quot; is also recognized as an emerging sexually transmissible pathogen, especially in male homosexual relations, causing outbreaks in non-endemic regions. As such, high-risk sex behaviour is also a potential source of infection. Although it is unclear whether there is a causal link, studies indicate a higher chance of being infected with &quot;E. histolytica&quot; if one is also infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

==Genome==
The &quot;E. histolytica&quot; genome was sequenced, assembled, and automatically annotated in 2005.
The genome was reassembled and reannotated in 2010. The 20 million basepair genome assembly contains 8,160 predicted genes; known and novel transposable elements have been mapped and characterized, functional assignments have been revised and updated, and additional information has been incorporated, including metabolic pathways, Gene Ontology assignments, curation of transporters, and generation of gene families.
The major group of transposable elements in &quot;E. histolytica&quot; are non-LTR retrotransposons. These have been divided in three families called EhLINEs and EhSINEs (EhLINE1,2,3 and EhSINE1,2,3). EhLINE1 encodes an endonuclease (EN) protein (in addition to reverse transcriptase and nucleotide-binding ORF1), which has similarity with bacterial restriction endonuclease. This similarity with bacterial protein indicates that transposable elements have been acquired from prokaryotes by horizontal gene transfer in this protozoan parasite.

The genome of &quot;E. histolytica&quot; has been found to have snoRNAs with opisthokont-like features.
The &quot;E. histolytica&quot; U3 snoRNA (Eh_U3 snoRNA) has shown sequence and structural features similar to Homo sapiens U3 snoRNA.

==Pathogen interaction==
&quot;E. histolytica&quot; may modulate the virulence of certain human viruses and is itself a host for its own viruses.

For example, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) accentuates the damage and pathogenicity of &quot;E. histolytica&quot;. On the other hand, cells infected with HIV are often consumed by &quot;E. histolytica&quot;. Infective HIV remains viable within the amoeba, although there has been no proof of human reinfection from amoeba carrying this virus.

A burst of research on viruses of &quot;E. histolytica&quot; stems from a series of papers published by Diamond &quot;et al.&quot; from 1972 to 1979. In 1972, they hypothesized two separate polyhedral and filamentous viral strains within &quot;E. histolytica&quot; that caused cell lysis. Perhaps the most novel observation was that two kinds of viral strains existed and that within one type of amoeba (strain HB-301), the polyhedral strain had no detrimental effect but led to cell lysis in another (strain HK-9). Although Mattern et al. attempted to explore the possibility that these protozoal viruses could function like bacteriophages, they found no significant changes in &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot; virulence when infected by viruses.

== Immunopathogenesis ==

&quot;E. histolytica&quot; causes tissue destruction which leads to clinical disease. &quot;E. histolytica&quot; induces tissue damage by three main events: direct host cell death, inflammation, and parasite invasion. Once the trophozoites are excysted in the terminal ileum region, they colonize the large bowel, remaining on the surface of the mucus layer and feeding on bacteria and food particles. Occasionally, and in response to unknown stimuli, trophozoites move through the mucus layer where they come in contact with the epithelial cell layer and start the pathological process. &quot;E. histolytica&quot; has a lectin that binds to galactose and &quot;N&quot;-acetylgalactosamine sugars on the surface of the epithelial cells, The lectin normally is used to bind bacteria for ingestion. The parasite has several enzymes such as pore-forming proteins, lipases, and cysteine proteases, which are normally used to digest bacteria in food vacuoles but which can cause lysis of the epithelial cells by inducing cellular necrosis and apoptosis when the trophozoite comes in contact with them and binds via the lectin. Enzymes released allow penetration into the intestinal wall and blood vessels, sometimes onto the liver and other organs. The trophozoites will then ingest these dead cells. This damage to the epithelial cell layer attracts human immune cells and these in turn can be lysed by the trophozoite, which releases the immune cell&#x27;s lytic enzymes into the surrounding tissue, creating a type of chain reaction and leading to tissue destruction. This destruction manifests itself in the form of an &#x27;ulcer&#x27; in the tissue, typically described as flask-shaped because of its appearance in the transverse section. This tissue destruction can also involve blood vessels leading to bloody diarrhea, and amebic dysentery. Occasionally, trophozoites enter the bloodstream where they are transported typically to the liver via the portal system. In the liver a similar pathological sequence ensues, leading to amebic liver abscesses. The trophozoites can also end up in other organs, sometimes via the bloodstream, sometimes via liver abscess rupture or fistulas. Similarly, when the trophozoites travel to the brain, they can cause amoebic brain abscesses.

== Diagnosis ==

Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination for trophozoites or cysts in fresh or suitably preserved fecal specimens, smears of aspirates or scrapings obtained by proctoscopy, and aspirates of abscesses or another tissue specimen. A blood test is also available, but it is recommended only when a healthcare provider believes the infection may have spread beyond the intestine to some other organ of the body, such as the liver. However, this blood test may not help diagnose current illness, because the test can be positive if the patient has had amebiasis in the past, even if they are not infected at the time of the test.
Stool antigen detection and PCR are available for diagnosis, and are more sensitive and specific than microscopy.

==Treatment==
Several antibiotics are available to treat &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot;. The infected individual will be treated with only one antibiotic if the &quot;E. histolytica&quot; infection has not made the person sick, and will most likely be prescribed two antibiotics if the person has been feeling sick. Otherwise, below are other options for treatments.

===Intestinal infection===
Usually nitroimidazole derivatives (such as metronidazole) are used, because they are highly effective against the trophozoite form of the amoeba. Since they have little effect on amoeba cysts, usually this treatment is followed by an agent (such as paromomycin or diloxanide furoate) that acts on the organism in the lumen.

===Liver abscess===
In addition to targeting organisms in solid tissue, primarily with drugs like metronidazole and chloroquine, treatment of liver abscess must include agents that act in the lumen of the intestine (as in the preceding paragraph) to avoid re-invasion. Surgical drainage is usually not necessary, except when rupture is imminent.

===People without symptoms===
People without symptoms, otherwise known as asymptomatic carriers, in non-endemic areas, should be treated with paromomycin; other treatments include diloxanide furoate, and iodoquinol.
There have been problems with the use of iodoquinol and iodochlorhydroxyquin, so their use is not recommended.
Diloxanide furoate can also be used by mildly symptomatic persons who are just passing cysts.

==Meiosis==

In sexually reproducing eukaryotes, homologous recombination (HR) ordinarily occurs during meiosis. The meiosis-specific recombinase, Dmc1, is required for efficient meiotic HR, and Dmc1 is expressed in &quot;E. histolytica&quot;. The purified Dmc1 from &quot;E. histolytica&quot; forms presynaptic filaments and catalyzes ATP-dependent homologous DNA pairing and DNA strand exchange over at least several thousand base pairs. The DNA pairing and strand exchange reactions are enhanced by the eukaryotic meiosis-specific recombination accessory factor (heterodimer) Hop2-Mnd1. These processes are central to meiotic recombination, suggesting that &quot;E. histolytica&quot; undergoes meiosis.

Several other genes involved in both mitotic and meiotic HR are also present in &quot;E. histolytica&quot;. HR is enhanced under stressful growth conditions (serum starvation) concomitant with the up-regulation of HR-related genes. Also, UV irradiation induces DNA damage in &quot;E. histolytica&quot; trophozoites and activates the recombinational DNA repair pathway. In particular, expression of the Rad51 protein (a recombinase) is increased about 15-fold by UV treatment.

== See also ==
* List of parasites (human)

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot; image library 
* &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot; – Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
* CDC &quot;DPDx Parasitology Diagnostic Web Site&quot; 
* LSHTM &quot;Entamoeba&quot; Homepage
* &quot;Entamoeba&quot; Genome Resource – AmoebaDB
* &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot; article from the US Food and Drug Administration&#x27;s &quot;Bad Bug Book&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="28" end="37" title="anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q473809" start="48" end="57" title="amoebozoa" label="amoebozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="72" end="77" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q518891" start="84" end="93" title="Entamoeba" label="Entamoeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q949694" start="159" end="169" title="amoebiasis" label="amoebiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q518891" start="542" end="551" title="E. dispar" label="E. dispar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139008" start="703" end="713" title="histolysis" label="histolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="820" end="831" title="trophozoite" label="trophozoite"/>
<link wikidata="Q245998" start="889" end="893" title="Microbial cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392616" start="1674" end="1688" title="Fyodor Lesh" label="Fedor A. Lösch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64321" start="1740" end="1755" title="Fritz Schaudinn" label="Fritz Schaudinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="1889" end="1899" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q949694" start="1950" end="1967" title="Amoebiasis" label="amoebic dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811092" start="1979" end="1992" title="liver abscess" label="liver abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742079" start="2097" end="2105" title="Ameboma" label="amoeboma"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="2173" end="2179" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="2488" end="2502" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="3355" end="3383" title="human immunodeficiency virus" label="human immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="3434" end="3440" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="3644" end="3665" title="transposon" label="transposable elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q135085" start="3836" end="3849" title="Gene Ontology" label="Gene Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219715" start="4272" end="4296" title="restriction endonuclease" label="restriction endonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="4352" end="4373" title="transposable elements" label="transposable elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="4413" end="4437" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q284416" start="4531" end="4538" title="snoRNAs" label="snoRNAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q129021" start="4544" end="4555" title="opisthokont" label="opisthokont"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="4866" end="4900" title="acquired immunodeficiency syndrome" label="acquired immunodeficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q408693" start="6606" end="6612" title="lectin" label="lectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464543" start="7937" end="7950" title="Hepatic portal vein" label="portal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="8160" end="8167" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q425059" start="9436" end="9450" title="nitroimidazole" label="nitroimidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="9615" end="9620" title="cysts" label="cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="9746" end="9751" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169569" start="9852" end="9865" title="metronidazole" label="metronidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="9870" end="9881" title="chloroquine" label="chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415625" start="10243" end="10254" title="paromomycin" label="paromomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q799564" start="10281" end="10299" title="diloxanide furoate" label="diloxanide furoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276473" start="10305" end="10315" title="iodoquinol" label="iodoquinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="10560" end="10569" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="10572" end="10596" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="10627" end="10634" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172461" start="10657" end="10668" title="recombinase" label="recombinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036155" start="10670" end="10674" title="DMC1 (gene)" label="Dmc1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175967" start="10823" end="10834" title="Synapsis" label="presynaptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="10859" end="10862" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="10873" end="10895" title="Homologous recombination" label="homologous DNA pairing"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="10951" end="10960" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11532" end="11544" title="Apicomplexan life cycle#Glossary of cell types" label="trophozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235015" start="11632" end="11637" title="RAD51" label="Rad51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172461" start="11649" end="11660" title="recombinase" label="recombinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635818" start="11724" end="11749" title="List of parasites (human)" label="List of parasites (human)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11878" end="11920" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11923" end="11926" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126189" start="11980" end="11985" title="LSHTM" label="LSHTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747456" start="12059" end="12067" title="AmoebaDB" label="AmoebaDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059645" start="12166" end="12178" title="Bad Bug Book" label="Bad Bug Book"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334769" wikidata="Q437448" url="?curid=334769" title="Instantiation">
<text>Instantiation or instance may refer to:

==Philosophy==
* A modern concept similar to &quot;participation&quot; in classical Platonism; see the Theory of Forms
* The instantiation principle, the idea that in order for a property to exist, it must be had by some object or substance; the instance being a specific object rather than the idea of it
* Universal instantiation 
* An instance (predicate logic), a statement produced by applying universal instantiation to a universal statement
* Existential fallacy, also called existential instantiation
* A substitution instance, a formula of mathematical logic that can be produced by substituting certain strings of symbols for others in formula, also can be used as the mathematical order to represent the data in an algorithm

==Computing==
* Instance (computer science), referring to any running process or to an object as an instance of a class
* Table instance (or database instance), a concept in database design; see Row (database)
* Creation of an object (a location in memory having a value and possibly referenced by an identifier)
* Instance can refer to a single virtual machine in a virtualized or cloud computing environment that provides operating-system-level virtualization

==Other uses==
* Instance dungeon, a feature of many online videogames
* Instantiation of a class or object within the organization of a body of knowledge 
* Cline of instantiation, a concept in systemic functional linguistics.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q437448" start="0" end="13" title="Instantiation" label="Instantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q437448" start="17" end="25" title="Instantiation" label="instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="144" end="159" title="Theory of Forms" label="Theory of Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005655" start="166" end="189" title="instantiation principle" label="instantiation principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q784645" start="349" end="372" title="Universal instantiation" label="Universal instantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q784645" start="379" end="405" title="instance (predicate logic)" label="instance (predicate logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893176" start="491" end="510" title="Existential fallacy" label="Existential fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522579" start="554" end="575" title="substitution instance" label="substitution instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664689" start="794" end="821" title="Instance (computer science)" label="Instance (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366302" start="973" end="987" title="Row (database)" label="Row (database)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="1005" end="1011" title="object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="1124" end="1139" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664684" start="1258" end="1274" title="Instance dungeon" label="Instance dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q619544" start="1378" end="1395" title="body of knowledge" label="body of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133719" start="1399" end="1421" title="Cline of instantiation" label="Cline of instantiation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334773" wikidata="Q16516912" url="?curid=334773" title="Adam Czerniaków">
<text>Adam Czerniaków (30 November 1880 – 23 July 1942) was a Polish engineer and senator who was head of the Warsaw Ghetto Jewish Council (&quot;Judenrat&quot;) during World War II. He committed suicide on 23 July 1942 by swallowing a cyanide pill, a day after the commencement of mass extermination of Jews known as the Grossaktion Warsaw.

== Life and career ==
Czerniaków was born on 30 November 1880 in Warsaw, Poland (then part of the Congress Poland). He studied engineering in Warsaw and Dresden and taught in the Jewish community&#x27;s vocational school in Warsaw. From 1927 to 1934 he served as member of the Warsaw Municipal Council, and in May 1930 was elected to the Polish Senate. On 4 October 1939, a few days after Warsaw surrendered to Nazi Germany, Czerniaków was made head of the 24 member Jewish Council (&quot;Judenrat&quot;), responsible for implementing German orders in the new Jewish ghetto. The Warsaw Ghetto was closed to the outside world on November 15, 1940.

===The Warsaw Ghetto deportations===

As the German authorities began preparing for mass deportations of Jews from the Warsaw Ghetto to the newly built Treblinka extermination camp in July 1942, the Jewish Council was ordered to provide lists of Jews and maps of their residences. On 22 July 1942, the Judenrat received instructions from the SS that all Warsaw Jews were to be &quot;resettled&quot; to the East. Exceptions were made for Jews working in Nazi German factories, Jewish hospital staff, members of the council and the Jewish Ghetto Police with their families. Over the course of the day Czerniaków obtained exemptions for a handful of individuals, including sanitation workers, husbands of women working in factories, and some vocational students. Despite pleading he was unable to obtain an exemption for the children in Janusz Korczak&#x27;s orphanage or other ghetto orphanages. The orders stated that deportations would begin immediately at the rate of 6,000 people per day, to be supplied by the Jewish Council and the Ghetto Police. Failure would result in the execution of 100 hostages, including council employees and Czerniaków&#x27;s wife.

Realizing that deportation meant death, Czerniaków went to plead for the orphans. When he failed, he returned to his office at 26/28 Grzybowska Street and killed himself by taking a cyanide capsule. He left a suicide note to his wife, reading “They demand me to kill children of my nation with my own hands. I have nothing to do but to die,” and one to his fellow members of the council, explaining: &quot;I can no longer bear all this. My act will prove to everyone what is the right thing to do.&quot; He was succeeded by his deputy Marek Lichtenbaum.

===Diary of Adam Czerniaków===
Czerniaków kept a diary from 6 September 1939 until the day of his death. It was published in 1979 and has been translated into English. His wife Niunia survived the war and preserved his diaries. Adam Czerniaków is interred in the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery in Warsaw.

In the 2001 Warner Bros motion picture, &quot;Uprising&quot;, actor Donald Sutherland portrayed Adam Czerniaków. Excerpts of his diary are featured in the 2010 documentary film &quot;A Film Unfinished&quot;.

The theatre company Voices of the Holocaust toured England during 2013–14 with the play &quot;Fragile Fire&quot; based on the Warsaw Ghetto uprising which featured scenes depicting Czerniaków. In 2015 the actor and writer Tim Dalgleish (formerly of Voices of the Holocaust) wrote a full-length play based on Czerniaków&#x27;s journals called &quot;The Last Days of Adam: The true story of Adam Czerniaków&quot;. The play depicted Czerniaków as a conflicted character, torn between the need to ameliorate the worst excesses of the Nazis and the danger of being manipulated into becoming a collaborator.

American composer Arnold Rosner&#x27;s &quot;From the Diaries of Adam Czerniaków&quot;, Op. 82 is a half-hour classical music work composed in 1986 and scored for full orchestra and a narrator, who reads selected diary entries. The work was commissioned and later recorded by the conductor David Amos. According to the work&#x27;s only commercial recording, made in 2015, the English translation of Czerniaków&#x27;s words was made by Raul Hilberg and Stanislaw Staron, in collaboration with Josef Kermisz of Yad Vashem in Jerusalem.

===Personal life===
Czerniaków was married to Niunia (dr Felicja Czerniakówa) on 24 July 1912. They had a son named Jas, who became a lawyer and economist. Following the invasion of Poland, Jas fled to Soviet occupied territory and was exiled to Kirghiz SSR in Soviet Central Asia, where he died on July 18, 1942.

Niunia survived the war and lived in poor financial conditions till her death in 1950. She was buried next to her husband at the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery in Warsaw.

== See also ==
* Julian Tuwim, a nephew of Adam Czerniaków
* Chaim Rumkowski, Jewish Council&#x27;s head in the Łódź Ghetto

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Dalgleish, Tim (2015) The Last Days of Adam: The True Story of Adam Czerniakow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16516912" start="0" end="15" title="Adam Czerniaków" label="Adam Czerniaków"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="104" end="117" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q833941" start="140" end="148" title="Judenrat" label="Judenrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q965477" start="316" end="334" title="Grossaktion Warsaw (1942)" label="Grossaktion Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="402" end="408" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="435" end="450" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="490" end="497" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q98975" start="675" end="688" title="Senate of the Republic of Poland" label="Polish Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q833941" start="826" end="834" title="Judenrat" label="Judenrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="872" end="885" title="Nazi Germany" label="German orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="1104" end="1117" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="1137" end="1165" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1327" end="1329" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q707517" start="1515" end="1535" title="Jewish Ghetto Police" label="Jewish Ghetto Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q152441" start="1819" end="1833" title="Janusz Korczak" label="Janusz Korczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="2330" end="2337" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457674" start="2683" end="2700" title="Marek Lichtenbaum" label="Marek Lichtenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716786" start="2966" end="2996" title="Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery" label="Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3000" end="3006" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="3021" end="3032" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q686165" start="3055" end="3063" title="Uprising (2001 film)" label="Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="3077" end="3094" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q445175" start="3192" end="3209" title="A Film Unfinished" label="A Film Unfinished"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468579" start="3839" end="3852" title="Arnold Rosner" label="Arnold Rosner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4111" end="4121" title="David Amos" label="David Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="4526" end="4544" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276" start="4602" end="4613" title="Kirghiz SSR" label="Kirghiz SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="4617" end="4636" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q376278" start="4860" end="4872" title="Julian Tuwim" label="Julian Tuwim"/>
<link wikidata="Q278963" start="4904" end="4919" title="Chaim Rumkowski" label="Chaim Rumkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="4955" end="4966" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334775" wikidata="Q171866" url="?curid=334775" title="Middlesbrough">
<text>Middlesbrough ( ), colloquially known as Boro, is a port town in the Borough of Middlesbrough, North Yorkshire, England. Lying to the south of the River Tees, Middlesbrough forms part of the Teesside built-up area and the lower Tees Valley.

==History==
===Monks and lords===
Middlesbrough started as a Benedictine priory on the south bank of the River Tees, its name possibly derived from it being midway between the holy sites of Durham and Whitby. The earliest recorded form of Middlesbrough&#x27;s name is &quot;Mydilsburgh&quot;. Some believe the name means &#x27;middle fortress&#x27;, since it was midway between the two religious houses of Durham and Whitby; others state that it is an Old English personal name (&quot;Midele&quot; or &quot;Myhailf&quot;) combined with &quot;burgh&quot;, meaning town.

In 686 a monastic cell was consecrated by St Cuthbert at the request of St Hilda, Abbess of Whitby. The cell evolved into Middlesbrough Priory. The manor of Middlesburgh belonged to Whitby Abbey and Gisborough Priory. Robert Bruce, Lord of Cleveland and Annandale, granted and confirmed, in 1119, the church of St. Hilda of Middleburg to Whitby. Up until its closure on the Dissolution of the Monasteries by Henry VIII in 1537, the church was maintained by 12 Benedictine monks, many of whom became vicars, or rectors, of various places in Cleveland.

After settlement by the Angles, the area became home to Viking settlers. Names of Viking origin (with the suffix , meaning &quot;village&quot;) are abundant, for example Ormesby, Stainsby and Tollesby. These were once separate villages named after Vikings called Orm, Steinn and Toll. They are now areas of Middlesbrough that were recorded in Domesday Book, of 1086.

===Coal and docks===
In 1801 Middlesbrough was a small farming township with a population of just 25. From 1829 onwards it experienced rapid growth. In 1828 the influential Quaker banker, coal-mine owner and Stockton and Darlington Railway (S&amp;DR) shareholder Joseph Pease sailed up the River Tees to find a suitable new site downriver of Stockton on which to place new coal staithes. As a result, in 1829 he and a group of Quaker businessmen bought the Middlesbrough farmstead and associated estate, some of land, and established the Middlesbrough Estate Company.

Through the company, the investors set about a new coal port development (designed by John Harris) on the southern banks of the Tees. The first coal shipping staithes at the port (known as &quot;Port Darlington&quot;) were constructed with a settlement to the east established on the site of Middlesbrough farm as labour for the port, taking on the farm&#x27;s name as it developed into a village.

The port was linked to the S&amp;DR on 27 December 1830 via a branch that extended to an area just north of the current railway station.

The success of the port meant it soon became overwhelmed by the volume of imports and exports, and in 1839 work started on a dock to the east of Middlesbrough. The first water for the dock was let in on 19 March 1842, while the formal opening took place on 12 May 1842.

===Iron, steel and ships===
Iron dominated the Tees area since 1841 when Henry Bolckow in partnership with John Vaughan, founded the Vulcan iron foundry and rolling mill. Vaughan introduced the new &#x27;Bell Hopper&#x27; system of closed blast furnaces developed at the Ebbw Vale works. The new system and nearby abundant supply of Ironstone in the Eston Hills in 1850, made the works a success with the area becoming known as the &quot;Iron-smelting centre of the world&quot; and Bolckow, Vaughan &amp; Co., Ltd the largest company in existence at the time.

By 1851 Middlesbrough&#x27;s population had grown from 40 people in 1829 to 7,600. Pig iron production rose tenfold between 1851 and 1856 and by the mid-1870s Middlesbrough was producing one third of the entire nation&#x27;s Pig Iron output. During this time Middlesbrough earned the nickname &#x27;Ironopolis&#x27;.

On 21 January 1853 Middlesbrough received its Royal Charter of Incorporation, giving the town the right to have a mayor, aldermen and councillors. Henry Bolckow became mayor, in 1853.

In the latter half of the 19th century Old Middlesbrough was starting to decline and was overshadowed by developments built around the new town hall, south of the original town hall.

On 15 August 1867, a Reform Bill was passed, making Middlesbrough a new parliamentary borough, Bolckow was elected member for Middlesbrough the following year.

The town&#x27;s rapid expansion continued throughout the second half of the 19th century (fuelled by the iron and steel industry), the population reaching 90,000 by the dawn of the 20th century.

===Second World War===
Middlesbrough was the first major British town and industrial target to be bombed during the Second World War. The steel-making capacity and railways for carrying steel products were obvious targets. The Luftwaffe first bombed the town on 25 May 1940, when a lone bomber dropped 13 bombs between South Bank Road and the South Steel plant. More bombing occurred throughout the course of the war, with the railway station put out of action for two weeks in 1942.

By the end of the war more than 200 buildings had been damaged or destroyed in the Middlesbrough area. Areas of early- and mid-Victorian housing were demolished and much of central Middlesbrough was redeveloped. Heavy industry was relocated to areas of land better suited to the needs of modern technology. Middlesbrough itself began to take on a completely different look.

===Post-war development===

Post-war industrial to modern non-industrial Middlesbrough has changed the town, many buildings having been replaced and roads built. The A66 road was built through the town in the 1980s, the Royal Exchange being demolished to make way for it.

Middlesbrough F.C.&#x27;s modern Riverside Stadium opened on 26 August 1995 next to Middlesbrough Dock. The club moved from Ayresome Park, which had been their home for 92 years.

The original St Hilda&#x27;s area of Middlesbrough, after decades of decline and clearance, was given a new name of &quot;Middlehaven&quot; in 1986 on investment proposals to build on the land. Middlehaven has since had new buildings built there including Middlesbrough College and Middlesbrough FC&#x27;s Riverside Stadium amongst others. Also situated at Middlehaven is the &quot;Boho&quot; zone, offering office space to the area&#x27;s business and to attract new companies, and also &quot;Bohouse&quot;, housing. Some of the street names from the original grid-iron street plan of the town still exist in the area today.

The expansion of Middlesbrough southwards, eastwards and westwards continued throughout the 20th century absorbing villages such as Linthorpe, Acklam, Ormesby, Marton and Nunthorpe and continues to the present day.

==Local Government==

The local authority is Middlesbrough Council, a unitary authority. Middlesbrough also forms part of the Tees Valley Combined Authority.

===Political control===
The council has been under Labour majority control since the 2023 election.

Political control of the council since it was re-established in 1974 has been as follows:

Non-metropolitan district
Unitary authority
===Leadership of the Council===
Since 2002, political leadership on the council has been provided by the directly elected Mayor of Middlesbrough. Prior to 2002 the council was led by a leader of the council, and the mayor had a more ceremonial role. The leaders from 1981 to 2002 were:
The directly elected mayors since 2002 have been:
===Administrative history===
Middlesbrough was historically a township in the civil parish of West Acklam in the Langbaurgh Wapentake of Yorkshire. Despite having no church building, a perpetual curacy of Middlesbrough was created in 1744, also covering the neighbouring township of Linthorpe, and the curacy of Middlesbrough gradually came to be treated as a civil parish.

After construction of the modern town began in 1830, there was a need for more urban forms of local government. In 1841 a body of improvement commissioners was set up covering the township of Middlesbrough and part of the township of Linthorpe. The commissioners were superseded in 1853 when the same area was made a municipal borough. The borough boundaries were extended in 1858, 1866 and 1887. When elected county councils were created in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888, Middlesbrough became a county borough. It was then independent from the new North Riding County Council, whilst remaining part of the North Riding of Yorkshire for ceremonial purposes.

By this time, the borough covered the civil parish of Middlesbrough and parts of the parishes of Linthorpe (where the old township had been made a separate parish in 1866), Marton, and West Acklam. The Local Government Act 1894 said that parishes could no longer straddle borough boundaries, and so the parish of Middlesbrough was enlarged to cover the whole borough.
The borough was further enlarged in 1913, taking in the rest of Linthorpe and the North Ormesby area from the parish of Ormesby. In 1932 it gained West Acklam and smaller parts from other parishes when the Middlesbrough Rural District was abolished.

In the latter half of the 20th century, Middlesbrough was affected by three reforms: in 1968, Middlesbrough became part of the Teesside County Borough; in 1974, it became the county town of the Cleveland non-metropolitan county until its abolition and in 1996, the Borough of Middlesbrough became a unitary authority of North Yorkshire. In 2011, a local enterprise partnership was formed from the former Cleveland boroughs and the borough of Darlington called Tees Valley. In 2016 the area appointed a combined authority mayor.

==Members of Parliament==
===Parliamentary Constituencies===
Middlesbrough is represented in the British Parliament with a member of parliament from each of the following constituencies: Middlesbrough and Thornaby East constituency, and
Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland. 

The Middlesbrough and Thornaby East constituency is represented by Andy McDonald for (Labour) in the House of Commons. He was elected in a by-election held on 29 November 2012 following the death of previous Member of Parliament Sir Stuart Bell, who had been the MP since 1983.

The Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland constituency is represented by Luke Myer (Labour), who replaced Simon Clarke (Conservative), in 2024.

===Parliamentary elections in the 2020s===









===Historical constituencies===

Different constituencies have historically covered the town:
*Yorkshire, 1290–1832
*North Riding of Yorkshire, 1832–1885
**Middlesbrough, 1868–1918
**Cleveland, 1885–1918
*1918–1974:
**Cleveland
**Middlesbrough East
**Middlesbrough West
*From 1974:
**Cleveland and Whitby, until 1983
**Langbaurgh, until 1997
***Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland, current
***Middlesbrough and Thornaby East, current

==Geography==
===Distance to other places===

The town centre is approximately from the coast, from Roseberry Topping in the North York Moors National Park and from the Yorkshire Dales National Park.

===Areas===
The following list shows the wards that correspond to the Middlesbrough built-up area; those in bold have civil parishes.

===Climate===
Middlesbrough has an oceanic climate typical for the United Kingdom.
Being sheltered from prevailing south-westerly winds by the Lake District and Pennines to the west, and the Cleveland Hills to the south, Middlesbrough is in one of the relatively dry parts of the country, receiving on average of rain a year. Temperatures range from mild summer highs in July and August typically around , to winter lows in December and January falling to around .

Seasonal variations are small and both the mild summers and cool winters are far removed from the average climates of the latitude (54.5°N). This is mainly due to the British Isles being a relatively small land mass surrounded by water, the mild south-westerly Gulf Stream air that dominates the British Isles, and the propensity for cloud cover to limit temperature extremes. In nearby Scandinavia, more than ten degrees further north, there are coastal Bothnian climates with warmer summers than Middlesbrough; and winters in Middlesbrough can be less cold than those at lower latitudes in mainland Europe.

==Economy==

==Industry==
Industry in the town was once dominated by steelmaking, shipbuilding and chemical industries. Since the late 20th century and into the 21st century, 
the demise of much of the heavy industry in the area, newer technologies (such as the digital sector) have emerged.

=== Engineering ===
Middlesbrough also remains a stronghold for engineering based manufacturing and engineering contract service businesses. To help support this, the new TeesAMP advanced manufacturing park is designed to accommodate businesses associated with advanced manufacturing and emerging technologies. Announced in September 2020, TeesAMP will be the location of the UK&#x27;s first hydrogen transport centre.

===Port===

Teesport, owned by PD Ports, is a major contributor to the economy of Middlesbrough and the port owners have their offices in the town. The port is from the North Sea and east of Middlesbrough, on the River Tees. In 2019 it handled over 4,350 vessels each year and around 27 million tonnes of cargo with the estate covering approximately 779 acres. Steel, petrochemical, agribulks, manufacturing, engineering and high street commerce operations are all supported through Teesport, in addition to the renewable energy sector, in both production and assembly facilities.

===Industrial history===
In 1875, Bolckow, Vaughan &amp; Co opened the Cleveland Steelworks in Middlesbrough, beginning the transition from iron production to steel and, by the turn of the century, the area had become one of the major steel centres in the country and possibly the world. In 1900, Bolckow, Vaughan &amp; Co had become the largest producer of steel in Great Britain. In 1914, Dorman Long, another major steel producer from Middlesbrough, became the largest company in Britain, employing a workforce of over 20,000, and by 1929 it was the dominant steel producer on Teesside after taking over Bolckow, Vaughan &amp; Co and acquiring its assets. It was possibly the largest steel producer in Britain at the time.

The steel components of the Sydney Harbour Bridge (1932) were engineered and fabricated by Dorman Long of Middlesbrough. The company was also responsible for the New Tyne Bridge in Newcastle.

Several large shipyards also lined the Tees, including the Sir Raylton Dixon &amp; Company, which produced hundreds of steam freighters including the infamous SS Mont-Blanc, the steamship which caused the 1917 Halifax Explosion in Canada.

The area is still home to the nearby large Wilton International industrial site which until 1995 was largely owned by Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). The fragmentation of that company led to smaller manufacturing units being owned by multinational organisations. The last part of ICI itself completely left the area in 2006 and the remaining companies are now members of the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC).

==Culture==
===Festivals and fairs===

The Middlesbrough Mela is an annual, multi-cultural festival attracting an audience of up to 40,000 to enjoy a mix of live music, food, craft and fashion stalls. It began in Middlesbrough&#x27;s Central Gardens, now Centre Square, and is either held there or in Albert Park.

===Theatres and music venues===
Middlesbrough also has a healthy musical heritage. A number of bands and musicians hail from the area, including Paul Rodgers, Chris Rea, and Micky Moody.

Middlesbrough Town Hall is the pre-eminent theatre venue in Middlesbrough. It has two concert halls: the first is a classic Victorian concert hall with a proscenium stage and seating 1,190; the second, under the main hall, is called the Middlesbrough Crypt and has a capacity of up to 600. The venue is run by Middlesbrough Council and is funded, in part, by Arts Council England as a National Portfolio Organisation specialising in music. It was refurbished with the assistance of the National Lottery Heritage Fund and reopened in 2018.

The Middlesbrough Theatre (formerly the Little Theatre) is in the suburb of Linthorpe. It was designed by architects Elder &amp; De Pierro and was the first purpose designed theatre to be erected in post-war England when it was opened on 22 October 1957 by Sir John Gielgud.

===Art and galleries===
The town has three art galleries. Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art, known locally as mima, is a purpose built contemporary art gallery which opened in January 2007. It replaced the Cleveland Gallery (closed 1999), and Cleveland Crafts Centre (closed 2003).

The Middlesbrough Art Weekender is a contemporary art festival organised by the Auxiliary that has been held in central Middlesbrough since 2017. In 2019, it was held over the weekend of 26–29 September and included the works of artists such as Emily Hesse and Karina Smigla-Bobinski. The Auxiliary Warehouse space, which was opened also as part of the 2019 Middlesbrough Art Weekender, is a recent addition to the contemporary art community.

The Platform A Gallery is a contemporary art space at the end of platform 1 of Middlesbrough Railway Station.

===Cuisine===
The Parmo originated in Middlesbrough. It consists of a breaded cutlet of meat with cheese and white sauce toppings. The parmo is widely available at takeaways in Middlesbrough.

== Public services ==
===Healthcare===

The South Tees Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust has the James Cook University Hospital in the town. It adds to the economy through innovative projects; such as South Tees bio-incubator which acts as a launch-pad for research, innovation and collaboration between health, technology and science. It is a facility used by GlycoSeLect (UK) Ltd. as a client of the trust in strategic partnership with The Northern Health Science Alliance which has contributed £10.8 billion to the UK economy.

Roseberry Park Hospital, operated by Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust (TWEV), is north of James Cook Hospital. The hospital is psychiatric orientated and replaced St Luke&#x27;s Hospital. Acklam Road Hospital is operated by Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust which took over from TWEV. During the transition it was renamed from West Lane to its current name.

There is also the Middlesbrough One Life Medical Centre and North Ormesby Health Village in town. Ramsey Health operate the private Tees Valley Hospital in Acklam.

=== Police ===

Cleveland Police serve Middlesbrough and the surrounding area from their Middlesbrough headquarters on Bridge Street West, Coulby Newham police station and a number of community safety hubs.

The British Transport Police also maintain a presence at Middlesbrough railway station.

== Facilities ==
=== Parks ===

Albert Park was donated to the town by Henry Bolckow in 1866. It was formally opened by Prince Arthur on 11 August 1868, and consists of a site. The park underwent a considerable period of restoration from 2001 to 2004, during which a number of the park&#x27;s landmarks saw either restoration or revival.

Stewart Park was donated to the people of Middlesbrough in 1928 by Councillor Thomas Dormand Stewart and encompasses Victorian stable buildings, lakes and animal pens. It is also home to the Captain Cook Birthplace Museum. During 2011 and 2012, the park underwent major refurbishment. It hosted the BBC Radio 1&#x27;s Big Weekend in the summer of 2019.

Newham Grange Leisure farm in the suburb of Coulby Newham has operated continuously in this spot since the 17th century, becoming a farm park and conservation centre farm with the first residential development of the suburb in the 1970s.
===Libraries===
There are several libraries serving Middlesbrough. A notable library is the Middlesbrough Central Carnegie library, which dates from 1912.

== Landmarks ==
There are 129 listed buildings in the council area. Acklam Hall is the only one at grade I, and 11 are at grade II*, including the town hall and the Tees Transporter Bridge.

===Buildings===
The terraced Victorian streets surrounding the town centre are elements of Middlesbrough&#x27;s social and historical identity, and the vast streets surrounding Parliament Road and Abingdon Road a reminder of the area&#x27;s wealth and rapid growth during industrialisation.

The outer areas of the town have several country halls, most are of Victorian origin. Former halls include Marton Hall (on the grounds of Stewart Park), Gunnergate Hall (Coulby Newham), Tollesby Hall and Park End House. They are halls that are still in existence such as Newham Hall, Nunthorpe Hall, Grey Towers, and Coulby Manor. The oldest domestic building is Acklam Hall of 1678. Built by Sir William Hustler, it is also the only Grade I listed building in Midddlesbrough.

Middlesbrough Town Hall, designed by George Gordon Hoskins and built between 1883 and 1889 is a Grade II* listed building used for municipal purposes and as an entertainment venue. The Middlesbrough Empire, built in 1897 as a theatre, is a nightclub (since 1993) designed by Ernest Runtz. The first artist to perform in building as a Music Hall was Lillie Langtry. It became an early nightclub (1950s), then a bingo hall and is now once again a nightclub. In Linthorpe, is the Middlesbrough Theatre opened by Sir John Gielgud in 1957; it was one of the first new theatres built in England after the Second World War.

The Dorman Long office on Zetland Road, constructed between 1881 and 1891, is the only commercial building ever designed by Philip Webb, the architect who worked for Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell.

===Bridges===

Via a 1907 Act of Parliament, Sir William Arrol &amp; Co. of Glasgow built the Tees Transporter Bridge (1911) which spans the river between Middlesbrough and Port Clarence. It is a Grade II* listed building. Some of the film &quot;Billy Elliot&quot; was filmed on the bridge. At long and high, it is one of the largest of its type in the world. Since reopening after restoration and flood protection work in 2013 and 2015 the bridge has been closed for long periods due to safety concerns. In August 2022, the Mayor of Middlesbrough announced that one of the legs is sinking, and that the estimated costs of repairs have been increasing: the bridge&#x27;s future remains under consideration.

The Tees Newport Bridge opened further up the river in 1934. Newport bridge still stands and is passable by traffic: it formerly lifted vertically in the centre.

===Artworks===

The Temenos Sculpture, designed by sculptor Anish Kapoor and designer Cecil Balmond, is a steel structure near to the north west side of the Riverside Stadium. The steel structure, consisting of a pole, a circular ring and an oval ring, stands approximately 110 m long and 50 m high and is held together by steel wire. It was unveiled in 2010 at a cost of £2.7 million.

Near the town hall is the &quot;Bottle of Notes&quot;. It was unveiled in 1993 and is the UK&#x27;s only public sculpture by Claes Oldenburg. Drawing on its local surroundings, the sculpture was fabricated in South Tyneside by former ship builders, and its outside is made up of text from the journals of Captain James Cook, who was born in the area in 1728.

==Transport==
===Air===

Teesside, Newcastle and Leeds Bradford are the closest international airports to the town; they are all connected by a rail journey with at least one change. Manchester Airport is connected directly by TransPennine&#x27;s railway service.

===Railway===

Middlesbrough railway station is the fourth busiest in the North East England region. It opened in 1877 at its current site and was built in the Gothic architectural style. It is the Esk Valley line&#x27;s northern terminus, the Durham Coast line&#x27;s southern terminus and is on the Tees Valley line.

The station is served by three train operating companies:
* Northern operates local stopping services to , , , and 
* TransPennine Express provides services to , York, and Manchester Airport
* LNER operates limited inter-city services to , and .

Other stations in Middlesbrough are , , and (the latter operates near James Cook University Hospital) which are stops on the Esk Valley line. South Bank station is a stop on the Tees Valley Line.

====Trams====
The town had electric tramway services between 1921 and 1934, operated by the Middlesbrough Corporation Tramways.

===Buses===
Arriva North East and Stagecoach North East provide the majority of bus services in the area, with National Express and Megabus operating long-distance coach travel from Middlesbrough bus station.

===Road===
Middlesbrough is served by a number of major roads:
* A19 (north–south) passes to the west of the town
* A66 (east–west) runs through the northern part of the town centre 
* A171, A172 and A174 are other main routes linking the town. 
The A19 / A66 major interchange lies just to the west of the town.

===Paths===
Several long-distance footpaths pass near to the town. Two paths from Cumbria are:
* Teesdale Way which goes through the town to South Gare (it is part of the E2 European long distance path) 
* Coast to Coast Walk (a planned national trail between St Bees and Robin Hood Bay via Great Broughton).

Two paths include Roseberry Topping:
* Cleveland Way, a national trail around the North York Moors between Helmsley and Filey
* White Rose Walk between the hill and Kilburn Horse.

A trial e-scooter hire system is operating in Middlesbrough during 2020.

==Education==
=== Museums ===

The Dorman Memorial Museum, which was founded by Sir Arthur Dorman and specialises in social and local history.

The Captain Cook Birthplace Museum, which was opened on 28 October 1978 in celebration of the 250th anniversary of Captain James Cook&#x27;s birth in nearby Marton.

Though just outside the boundary of Middlesbrough, within a joint preservation area with Redcar and Cleveland, Ormesby Hall is an 18th-century palladian mansion, once owned by the Pennyman family; it is now a National Trust property

In July 2000, the Transporter Bridge Visitor Centre was opened to commemorate the building of the Middlesbrough Transporter Bridge.

===University===
Teesside University traces back to 1930 at the opening of Constantine Technical College, located on Borough Road, in the town centre. The then college expanded through acquiring adjacent buildings, such as Middlesbrough High School, and by building Middlesbrough Tower. It became &quot;Teesside Polytechnic&quot; in 1969.

In 1992, the polytechnic gained university status, becoming the &quot;University of Teesside&quot;. Extramural classes had previously been provided by the University of Leeds Adult Education Centre on Harrow Road, from 1958 to 2001. It was rebranded, in 2009, to &quot;Teesside University&quot;. It further expanded in size and courses available, until, student numbers increased to approximately 20,000 studying at the university.
The university is a major presence in the town. It has a growing reputation for developing digital businesses particularly in the field of digital animation and for hosting the Animex festival. The Boho zone in the town now houses a large number of these start-up digital businesses. The university has 18,000 students, 2,400 staff and operates a £250,000,000 campus in Middlesbrough town-centre. The university campus has benefited from approx £250 million of investment in recent years, including the £30 million Campus Heart scheme.

Teesside University supports a total of 2,570 full-time jobs across the Tees Valley, North East and UK economies per annum. The university contributes additional wealth to the local, regional and national economies as measured by Gross Value Added (GVA). It is estimated this contributes a total of £124 million GVA per annum. The total direct, indirect and induced spending impacts associated with full-time international students and UK students from outside of the North East is approximately £18.9 million per annum. It is estimated this spending supports 158 full-time jobs per annum in Tees Valley and contributes additional wealth of £9.3 million per annum to the local economy.

Current university departments include: business, arts-and-media, computing, health-and-life-sciences, Science-and-Engineering and Social-Sciences-and-Law. In addition to teaching computer animation and games design, it co-hosts the annual Animex International Festival of Animation and Computer Games. The university has links with James Cook University Hospital in the town.

===Other institutions===
The town&#x27;s largest college is Middlesbrough College, with 16,000 students. Others include Trinity Catholic College in Saltersgill, Macmillan Academy on Stockton Road and Askham Bryan College which has a site in Stewart Park.

The Northern School of Art (established in 1870) is also based in Middlesbrough, it has another site in Hartlepool. It is one of only four specialist art and design further education colleges in the United Kingdom.

==Religion==
===Christianity===
The Church of England Middlesbrough deanery is in the Archdeaconry of Cleveland with Stokesley (west), Guisborough (east), Whitby (south east) and Northern Ryedale (south) and Mowbray (south west). It is in the Diocese of York and Province of York.

Middlesbrough is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Middlesbrough, created on 20 December 1878 from the Diocese of Beverley. St. Mary&#x27;s Cathedral is the diocese&#x27;s mother church, it is in Coulby Newham as a replacement to the original St Mary&#x27;s in the town centre. The present bishop is the Right Reverend Terence Patrick Drainey, 7th Bishop of Middlesbrough, who was ordained on Friday 25 January 2008. Churches of the Sacred Heart, St Bernadette&#x27;s and St Clare of Assisi are also in the town.

===Judaism===

Ashkenazi Jews started to settle in Middlesbrough from 1862 and formed Middlesbrough Hebrew Congregation in 1870 with a synagogue in Hill Street. The synagogue moved to Brentnall Street in 1874 and then to a new building in 
Park Road South in 1938.

Editions of the &quot;Jewish Year Book&quot; record the growth and decline of Middlesbrough&#x27;s Jewish population. It was about 100 in 1896–97 and peaked at 750 in 1935. It then declined to 30 in 1998, in which year the synagogue in Park Road South was ceremonially closed.

===Islam===

The Muslim community is represented in several mosques in Middlesbrough. Muslim sailors visited Middlesbrough from about 1890. and, in 1961, Azzam and Younis Din opened the first Halal butcher shop.

The first mosque was a house in Grange Road in 1962. There are approximately seven mosques in Middlesbrough, the most prominent of which are the Al-Madina Jamia Mosque, on Waterloo Road, the Dar ul Islam Central Mosque, on Southfield Road, and the Abu Bakr Mosque &amp; Community Centre, which is currently temporarily situated on Cannon Park Way.

===Sikhism===
The Sikh community established its first gurdwara in Milton Street in 1967. After a time in Southfield Road, the centre is now in Lorne Street and was opened in 1990.

===Hinduism===
There is a Hindu Cultural Centre in Westbourne Grove, North Ormesby, which was opened in 1990.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are BBC North East and Cumbria and ITV Tyne Tees, the local based-television station TalkTeesside also broadcast to the town. Television signals are received from the Bilsdale TV transmitter.

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Tees which broadcast from its studios on Newport Road in the town, Heart North East, Hits Radio Teesside, Capital North East, Smooth North East, Greatest Hits Radio Teesside and CVFM Radio, a community based station.

Middlesbrough is served by the local newspaper, &quot;Evening Gazette&quot;.

==Television and filmography==
Middlesbrough has featured in many television programmes, including &quot;The Fast Show&quot;, &quot;Inspector George Gently&quot;, &quot;Steel River Blues&quot;, &quot;Spender&quot;, &quot;Play for Today&quot; (&quot;The Black Stuff&quot;; latterly the drama &quot;Boys from the Blackstuff&quot;) and &quot;Auf Wiedersehen, Pet&quot;.

Film director Ridley Scott is from the North East and based the opening shot of &quot;Blade Runner&quot; on the view of the old ICI plant at Wilton. He said: &quot;There&#x27;s a walk from Redcar … I&#x27;d cross a bridge at night, and walk above the steel works. So that&#x27;s probably where the opening of &quot;Blade Runner&quot; comes from. It always seemed to be rather gloomy and raining, and I&#x27;d just think &quot;God, this is beautiful.&quot; You can find beauty in everything, and so I think I found the beauty in that darkness.&quot; It has been claimed that the site was also considered as a shooting location for one of the films in Scott&#x27;s &quot;Alien&quot; franchise.

In the 2009 action thriller &quot;The Tournament&quot;, Middlesbrough is that year&#x27;s location where the assassins&#x27; competition is being held. In November 2009, the mima art gallery was used by the presenters of &quot;Top Gear&quot; as part of a challenge. The challenge was to see if car exhibits would be more popular than normal art.

In 2010, filmmaker John Walsh made the satirical documentary &quot;ToryBoy The Movie&quot; about the 2010 general election in the Middlesbrough constituency and sitting MP Stuart Bell&#x27;s alleged laziness as an MP.

In March 2013, Middlesbrough was used as a stand in for Newcastle 1969 in BBC&#x27;s &quot;Inspector George Gently&quot; starring Martin Shaw and Lee Ingleby; the footage appeared in the episode &quot;Gently Between The Lines&quot; (episode 1 of series 6).

In 2024, BBC Comedy commissioned &quot;Smoggie Queens&quot; from Hat Trick Productions, an &quot;out and out comedy centred around a gang of friends who are fiercely proud of their North Eastern town of Middlesbrough and their small pocket of the LGBTQ+ community.&quot; Writer Phil Dunning described the show as &quot;a love letter to the town&quot;. The series aired on BBC Three in November 2024.

==Sport==
===Football and rugby union===

Middlesbrough FC is a Championship football team, owned by local haulage entrepreneur Steve Gibson and managed by Michael Carrick. The 34,000 capacity Riverside Stadium is owned and host to home games by the club since 1995, when they left Ayresome Park. Founder members of the Premier League in 1992, Middlesbrough won the Football League Cup in 2004, and were beaten finalists in the 2005-06 UEFA Cup. In 1905, they made Britain&#x27;s first £1,000 transfer when they signed Alf Common from local rivals Sunderland. Middlesbrough Ironopolis FC was briefly based in the town during the late 19th century, it later dissolved. These days, Middlesbrough have players such as Darragh Lenihan, Hayden Hackney and Morgan Rogers.

Middlesbrough RUFC, founded in 1872 having have played their home games at Acklam Park since 1929, and Acklam RUFC are in Durham/ Northumberland Division One. Both are members of Yorkshire Rugby Football Union.

===Racing===
Middlesbrough hosts multiple road races through the year, including the annual Middlesbrough 10k (formerly Tees Pride 10k) road race. First held in 2005, the one-lap circuit event and associated fun runs were held in the Acklam area of the town before being moved to the town centre in 2021.

On 1 May 2016, Middlesbrough hosted the start of Stage 3 to the 2016 Tour de Yorkshire. The stage and race ended in Scarborough.

===Other===

Middlesbrough Cricket Club have played at Acklam Park since 1930 and play in North Yorkshire and South Durham Cricket League. Yorkshire have played 45 County Championship games in Middlesbrough. The most recent being in 1996.

Speedway racing was staged at Cleveland Park Stadium from 1928 until the 1990s, with the Middlesbrough Bears.

Tees Valley Mohawks and Teesside Lions basketball teams play in the NBL Division 3. Athletics has two local clubs serving Middlesbrough and the surrounding area, Middlesbrough-and-Cleveland Harriers and Middlesbrough AC (Mandale). Training facilities at the Middlesbrough Sports Village opened in 2015, replacing Clairville Stadium. Notable athletes to train at both facilities are World and European Indoor Sprint Champion Richard Kilty, British Indoor Long Jump record holder Chris Tomlinson. The sports village includes a running track with grandstand, an indoor gym and café, football pitches, as well as a cycle circuit and velodrome. Next to the sports village is a skateboard park and Middlesbrough Tennis World.

==Notable people==
==Twinned towns==
Middlesbrough is twinned with:
* Oberhausen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. Middlesbrough and Oberhausen entered into a town twinning partnership in 1974, close ties having existed for over 50 years. Those ties began in 1953 with youth exchanges, the first of which was held in 1953. Both towns continue to be committed to twinning activities today.
* Dunkirk, Nord, Hauts-de-France, France Although Middlesbrough is also officially twinned with the town, twinning events have ceased.
* Masvingo, Masvingo District, Masvingo Province, Zimbabwe, since 1989

==See also==
* Parmo
* Demographics of Tees Valley

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bell, Lady Florence. &quot;At the Works, a Study of a Manufacturing Town&quot; (1907) online.
* Briggs, Asa. &quot;Victorian Cities&quot; (1965) pp 245–82.
* Doyle, Barry. &quot;Labour and hospitals in urban Yorkshire: Middlesbrough, Leeds and Sheffield, 1919–1938.&quot; &quot;Social history of medicine&quot; (2010): hkq007.
* Glass, Ruth. &quot;The social background of a plan: a study of Middlesbrough&quot; (1948)
* Warwick, Tosh. &quot;Central Middlesbrough through time&quot; (2013).

==External links==
* Official Middlesbrough Council Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171866" start="0" end="13" title="Middlesbrough" label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="19" end="31" title="colloquially" label="colloquially"/>
<link wikidata="Q171866" start="41" end="45" title="Middlesbrough" label="Boro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673020" start="69" end="93" title="Borough of Middlesbrough" label="Borough of Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="95" end="110" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="147" end="157" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293366" start="191" end="199" title="Teesside" label="Teesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="200" end="213" title="Built up area" label="built-up area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982570" start="228" end="239" title="Tees Valley" label="Tees Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="303" end="314" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="347" end="357" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="432" end="438" title="Durham, England" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q852778" start="443" end="449" title="Whitby" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="694" end="705" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q504518" start="854" end="865" title="Cuthbert of Lindisfarne" label="St Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q257500" start="884" end="892" title="Hilda of Whitby" label="St Hilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q852778" start="904" end="910" title="Whitby" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863917" start="934" end="954" title="Middlesbrough Priory" label="Middlesbrough Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469493" start="994" end="1006" title="Whitby Abbey" label="Whitby Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402996" start="1011" end="1028" title="Gisborough Priory" label="Gisborough Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858519" start="1030" end="1075" title="Robert de Brus, 1st Lord of Annandale" label="Robert Bruce, Lord of Cleveland and Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1186" end="1216" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1220" end="1230" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1272" end="1283" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1388" end="1394" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1420" end="1426" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103393" start="1534" end="1541" title="Ormesby" label="Ormesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597064" start="1543" end="1551" title="Stainsby, North Yorkshire" label="Stainsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814387" start="1556" end="1564" title="Tollesby" label="Tollesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1612" end="1619" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1707" end="1720" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="1795" end="1803" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1905" end="1911" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="1940" end="1971" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286166" start="1995" end="2007" title="Joseph Pease (railway pioneer)" label="Joseph Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="2110" end="2117" title="staithe" label="staithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2159" end="2165" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q85771555" start="2387" end="2398" title="John Harris (railway engineer)" label="John Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q98528" start="3182" end="3195" title="Henry Bolckow" label="Henry Bolckow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261860" start="3216" end="3228" title="John Vaughan (ironmaster)" label="John Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="3249" end="3261" title="iron foundry" label="iron foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="3266" end="3278" title="rolling mill" label="rolling mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297559" start="3380" end="3389" title="Ebbw Vale" label="Ebbw Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509719" start="3442" end="3451" title="Ironstone" label="Ironstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401425" start="3459" end="3470" title="Eston Nab" label="Eston Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q335154" start="3591" end="3622" title="Bolckow, Vaughan" label="Bolckow, Vaughan &amp;amp; Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="3753" end="3761" title="Pig iron" label="Pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4034" end="4064" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter of Incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997749" start="4308" end="4321" title="Middlesbrough Town Hall" label="new town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26432665" start="4336" end="4354" title="Old Town Hall, Middlesbrough" label="original town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4830" end="4846" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="4941" end="4950" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102917" start="5141" end="5156" title="Middlesbrough railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649576" start="5740" end="5748" title="A66 road" label="A66 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="5847" end="5865" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q822886" start="5880" end="5897" title="Riverside Stadium" label="Riverside Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q602392" start="5971" end="5984" title="Ayresome Park" label="Ayresome Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q113349801" start="6221" end="6232" title="Middlehaven" label="Middlehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841844" start="6283" end="6304" title="Middlesbrough College" label="Middlesbrough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554853" start="6786" end="6795" title="Linthorpe" label="Linthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674269" start="6797" end="6803" title="Acklam, Middlesbrough" label="Acklam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103393" start="6805" end="6812" title="Ormesby" label="Ormesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q441541" start="6814" end="6820" title="Marton, Middlesbrough" label="Marton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929357" start="6825" end="6834" title="Nunthorpe" label="Nunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841843" start="6915" end="6936" title="Middlesbrough Council" label="Middlesbrough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="6940" end="6957" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061639" start="6996" end="7026" title="Tees Valley Combined Authority" label="Tees Valley Combined Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7080" end="7086" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q118189671" start="7114" end="7127" title="2023 Middlesbrough Council election" label="2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997741" start="7387" end="7409" title="Mayor of Middlesbrough" label="Mayor of Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="7450" end="7471" title="leader of the council" label="leader of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="7663" end="7671" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7679" end="7691" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674269" start="7695" end="7706" title="Acklam, Middlesbrough" label="West Acklam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485747" start="7714" end="7734" title="Langbaurgh Wapentake" label="Langbaurgh Wapentake"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="7738" end="7747" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169547" start="7786" end="7802" title="perpetual curacy" label="perpetual curacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554853" start="7884" end="7893" title="Linthorpe" label="Linthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7961" end="7973" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007851" start="8106" end="8131" title="improvement commissioners" label="improvement commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="8293" end="8310" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="8433" end="8458" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="Local Government Act 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="8483" end="8497" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789629" start="8536" end="8563" title="North Riding County Council" label="North Riding County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="8594" end="8619" title="North Riding of Yorkshire" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q441541" start="8819" end="8825" title="Marton, Middlesbrough" label="Marton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933983" start="8848" end="8873" title="Local Government Act 1894" label="Local Government Act 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056233" start="9096" end="9109" title="North Ormesby" label="North Ormesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841860" start="9220" end="9248" title="Middlesbrough Rural District" label="Middlesbrough Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664107" start="9353" end="9357" title="Local Government Commission for England (1958–1967)" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177622" start="9392" end="9415" title="Teesside County Borough" label="Teesside County Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="9420" end="9424" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="9440" end="9451" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q24550" start="9459" end="9468" title="Cleveland (county)" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664108" start="9520" end="9524" title="Local Government Commission for England (1992)" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673020" start="9530" end="9554" title="Borough of Middlesbrough" label="Borough of Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="9564" end="9581" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="9585" end="9600" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664362" start="9613" end="9641" title="local enterprise partnership" label="local enterprise partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171024" start="9696" end="9717" title="borough of Darlington" label="borough of Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982570" start="9725" end="9736" title="Tees Valley" label="Tees Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612297" start="9767" end="9785" title="combined authority" label="combined authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060764" start="9981" end="10025" title="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053429" start="10031" end="10069" title="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060764" start="10077" end="10121" title="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761018" start="10140" end="10153" title="Andy McDonald (politician)" label="Andy McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841877" start="10210" end="10223" title="2012 Middlesbrough by-election" label="a by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q261957" start="10302" end="10317" title="Stuart Bell" label="Sir Stuart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053429" start="10356" end="10394" title="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126850856" start="10426" end="10435" title="Luke Myer" label="Luke Myer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="10437" end="10443" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q30228118" start="10459" end="10471" title="Simon Clarke (politician)" label="Simon Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10473" end="10485" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055661" start="10645" end="10654" title="Yorkshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056495" start="10667" end="10692" title="North Riding of Yorkshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053438" start="10706" end="10719" title="Middlesbrough (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132049" start="10733" end="10742" title="Cleveland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132049" start="10768" end="10777" title="Cleveland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841848" start="10780" end="10798" title="Middlesbrough East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841864" start="10801" end="10819" title="Middlesbrough West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132297" start="10834" end="10854" title="Cleveland and Whitby (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cleveland and Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485743" start="10869" end="10879" title="Langbaurgh (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Langbaurgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053429" start="10895" end="10933" title="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060764" start="10946" end="10977" title="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Middlesbrough and Thornaby East"/>
<link wikidata="Q8519110" start="11088" end="11105" title="Roseberry Topping" label="Roseberry Topping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544595" start="11113" end="11143" title="North York Moors National Park" label="North York Moors National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20602688" start="11157" end="11186" title="Yorkshire Dales National Park" label="Yorkshire Dales National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="11359" end="11374" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="11467" end="11480" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="11485" end="11493" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132159" start="11515" end="11530" title="Cleveland Hills" label="Cleveland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="11957" end="11970" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="12051" end="12062" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="12177" end="12188" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12245" end="12253" title="Bothnian Bay#Climate" label="Bothnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694565" start="13125" end="13133" title="Teesport" label="Teesport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118879" start="13144" end="13152" title="PD Ports" label="PD Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="13282" end="13291" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="13326" end="13336" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q335154" start="13992" end="14017" title="Bolckow Vaughan" label="Bolckow, Vaughan &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298065" start="14086" end="14097" title="Dorman Long" label="Dorman Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q54495" start="14450" end="14471" title="Sydney Harbour Bridge" label="Sydney Harbour Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298065" start="14513" end="14524" title="Dorman Long" label="Dorman Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465864" start="14584" end="14599" title="Tyne Bridge" label="New Tyne Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="14603" end="14612" title="Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547220" start="14674" end="14705" title="Sir Raylton Dixon" label="Sir Raylton Dixon &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394076" start="14774" end="14787" title="SS Mont-Blanc" label="SS Mont-Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q502073" start="14825" end="14842" title="Halifax Explosion" label="Halifax Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163207" start="14898" end="14934" title="Wilton International" label="Wilton International industrial site"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="14973" end="15001" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072117" start="15234" end="15279" title="Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster" label="Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q86754967" start="15333" end="15351" title="Middlesbrough Mela" label="Middlesbrough Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q313098" start="15750" end="15762" title="Paul Rodgers" label="Paul Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q262314" start="15764" end="15773" title="Chris Rea" label="Chris Rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q720305" start="15779" end="15790" title="Micky Moody" label="Micky Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997749" start="15793" end="15816" title="Middlesbrough Town Hall" label="Middlesbrough Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="15947" end="15957" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400795" start="16178" end="16209" title="National Portfolio Organisation" label="National Portfolio Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742662" start="16279" end="16309" title="National Lottery Heritage Fund" label="National Lottery Heritage Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841862" start="16337" end="16358" title="Middlesbrough Theatre" label="Middlesbrough Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554853" start="16409" end="16418" title="Linthorpe" label="Linthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="16590" end="16606" title="John Gielgud" label="Sir John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841855" start="16667" end="16704" title="Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art" label="Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q86460289" start="17141" end="17152" title="Emily Hesse" label="Emily Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28465194" start="17157" end="17179" title="Karina Smigla-Bobinski" label="Karina Smigla-Bobinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139220" start="17469" end="17474" title="Parmo" label="Parmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568618" start="17688" end="17729" title="South Tees Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust" label="South Tees Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131686" start="17738" end="17768" title="James Cook University Hospital" label="James Cook University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817998" start="18172" end="18195" title="Roseberry Park Hospital" label="Roseberry Park Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694520" start="18209" end="18256" title="Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust" label="Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="18314" end="18325" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594064" start="18350" end="18373" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Middlesbrough" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017289" start="18411" end="18470" title="Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust" label="Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q20047299" start="18670" end="18683" title="Ramsay Health Care UK" label="Ramsey Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132210" start="18753" end="18769" title="Cleveland Police" label="Cleveland Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176086" start="18876" end="18889" title="Coulby Newham" label="Coulby Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q174588" start="18949" end="18973" title="British Transport Police" label="British Transport Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102917" start="19002" end="19031" title="Middlesbrough railway station" label="Middlesbrough railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710965" start="19066" end="19077" title="Albert Park, Middlesbrough" label="Albert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q160558" start="19154" end="19167" title="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn" label="Prince Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615909" start="19373" end="19385" title="Stewart Park, Middlesbrough" label="Stewart Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047954" start="19672" end="19702" title="BBC Radio 1&amp;#x27;s Big Weekend" label="BBC Radio 1&amp;#x27;s Big Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262150" start="19727" end="19753" title="Newham Grange Leisure farm" label="Newham Grange Leisure farm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19859" end="19868" title="Farm parks" label="farm park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="20079" end="20095" title="Carnegie library" label="Carnegie library"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="20151" end="20166" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674265" start="20189" end="20200" title="Acklam Hall" label="Acklam Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20233" end="20252" title="Grade I and Grade II* listed buildings in Middlesbrough (borough)#Grade II*" label="11 are at grade II*"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997749" start="20264" end="20277" title="Middlesbrough Town Hall" label="the town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254610" start="20286" end="20309" title="Tees Transporter Bridge" label="Tees Transporter Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="20341" end="20350" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615909" start="20742" end="20754" title="Stewart Park, Middlesbrough" label="Stewart Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176086" start="20774" end="20787" title="Coulby Newham" label="Coulby Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814387" start="20790" end="20798" title="Tollesby" label="Tollesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137721" start="20808" end="20816" title="Park End, Middlesbrough" label="Park End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674265" start="20967" end="20978" title="Acklam Hall" label="Acklam Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012722" start="21001" end="21016" title="William Hustler" label="William Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21038" end="21061" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997749" start="21082" end="21105" title="Middlesbrough Town Hall" label="Middlesbrough Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539813" start="21119" end="21140" title="George Gordon Hoskins" label="George Gordon Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="21188" end="21203" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="21416" end="21426" title="Music Hall" label="Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="21431" end="21445" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841862" start="21559" end="21580" title="Middlesbrough Theatre" label="Middlesbrough Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="21595" end="21607" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21681" end="21697" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q531721" start="21824" end="21835" title="Philip Webb" label="Philip Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="21918" end="21935" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289938" start="21937" end="21964" title="Sir William Arrol &amp;amp; Co." label="Sir William Arrol &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2254610" start="21986" end="22009" title="Tees Transporter Bridge" label="Tees Transporter Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230548" start="22065" end="22078" title="Port Clarence" label="Port Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="22098" end="22113" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q458629" start="22138" end="22150" title="Billy Elliot" label="Billy Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694534" start="22604" end="22623" title="Tees Newport Bridge" label="Tees Newport Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q124811555" start="22783" end="22800" title="Temenos Sculpture" label="Temenos Sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q327293" start="22823" end="22835" title="Anish Kapoor" label="Anish Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817041" start="22849" end="22862" title="Cecil Balmond" label="Cecil Balmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q156731" start="23275" end="23290" title="Claes Oldenburg" label="Claes Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="23455" end="23473" title="James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q667216" start="23535" end="23543" title="Teesside Airport" label="Teesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q8975" start="23545" end="23554" title="Newcastle International Airport" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8699" start="23559" end="23573" title="Leeds Bradford Airport" label="Leeds Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="23693" end="23711" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102917" start="23790" end="23819" title="Middlesbrough railway station" label="Middlesbrough railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="23849" end="23867" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="23935" end="23955" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397986" start="23973" end="23988" title="Esk Valley line" label="Esk Valley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316481" start="24019" end="24036" title="Durham Coast line" label="Durham Coast line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694539" start="24076" end="24092" title="Tees Valley line" label="Tees Valley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="24126" end="24151" title="train operating companies" label="train operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789775" start="24155" end="24163" title="Northern (train operating company)" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q119806220" start="24213" end="24233" title="TransPennine Express" label="TransPennine Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453867" start="24267" end="24285" title="Manchester Airport Station" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q53649859" start="24288" end="24292" title="London North Eastern Railway" label="LNER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131686" start="24412" end="24442" title="James Cook University Hospital" label="James Cook University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397986" start="24467" end="24482" title="Esk Valley line" label="Esk Valley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898560" start="24484" end="24502" title="South Bank railway station (England)" label="South Bank station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694539" start="24520" end="24536" title="Tees Valley Line" label="Tees Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841845" start="24631" end="24665" title="Middlesbrough Corporation Tramways" label="Middlesbrough Corporation Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796010" start="24680" end="24697" title="Arriva North East" label="Arriva North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596859" start="24702" end="24723" title="Stagecoach North East" label="Stagecoach North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="24779" end="24795" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853911" start="24800" end="24807" title="Megabus (Europe)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841873" start="24850" end="24875" title="Middlesbrough bus station" label="Middlesbrough bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648945" start="24943" end="24946" title="A19 road" label="A19"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649576" start="24994" end="24997" title="A66 road" label="A66"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648910" start="25063" end="25067" title="A171 road" label="A171"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648913" start="25069" end="25073" title="A172 road (England)" label="A172"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648915" start="25078" end="25082" title="A174 road" label="A174"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694560" start="25289" end="25301" title="Teesdale Way" label="Teesdale Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567330" start="25333" end="25343" title="South Gare" label="South Gare"/>
<link wikidata="Q667825" start="25363" end="25393" title="E2 European long distance path" label="E2 European long distance path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104394" start="25398" end="25417" title="Coast to Coast Walk" label="Coast to Coast Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017068" start="25452" end="25459" title="St Bees" label="St Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853998" start="25464" end="25478" title="Robin Hood Bay" label="Robin Hood Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598911" start="25483" end="25498" title="Great Broughton, North Yorkshire" label="Great Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8519110" start="25520" end="25537" title="Roseberry Topping" label="Roseberry Topping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100806" start="25541" end="25554" title="Cleveland Way" label="Cleveland Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544595" start="25584" end="25600" title="North York Moors" label="North York Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073801" start="25609" end="25617" title="Helmsley" label="Helmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82334" start="25622" end="25627" title="Filey" label="Filey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995355" start="25630" end="25645" title="White Rose Walk" label="White Rose Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632711" start="25691" end="25712" title="Scooter-sharing system" label="e-scooter hire system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298064" start="25792" end="25814" title="Dorman Memorial Museum" label="Dorman Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526059" start="25841" end="25854" title="Arthur Dorman" label="Arthur Dorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036598" start="25905" end="25935" title="Captain Cook Birthplace Museum" label="Captain Cook Birthplace Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="26016" end="26034" title="James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103392" start="26178" end="26190" title="Ormesby Hall" label="Ormesby Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164486" start="26247" end="26255" title="Pennyman baronets" label="Pennyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="26276" end="26290" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254610" start="26399" end="26431" title="Tees Transporter Bridge" label="Middlesbrough Transporter Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695910" start="26451" end="26470" title="Teesside University" label="Teesside University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="26929" end="26948" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="26949" end="26971" title="Adult Education" label="Adult Education Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="27345" end="27362" title="digital animation" label="digital animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="28610" end="28628" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828636" start="28670" end="28731" title="Animex International Festival of Animation and Computer Games" label="Animex International Festival of Animation and Computer Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131686" start="28763" end="28793" title="James Cook University Hospital" label="James Cook University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841844" start="28868" end="28889" title="Middlesbrough College" label="Middlesbrough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842614" start="28928" end="28952" title="Trinity Catholic College, Middlesbrough" label="Trinity Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724719" start="28969" end="28986" title="Macmillan Academy" label="Macmillan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807195" start="29008" end="29028" title="Askham Bryan College" label="Askham Bryan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132103" start="29064" end="29090" title="The Northern School of Art" label="The Northern School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q215752" start="29168" end="29178" title="Hartlepool" label="Hartlepool"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="29316" end="29333" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q385337" start="29348" end="29355" title="deanery" label="deanery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785756" start="29366" end="29391" title="Archdeaconry of Cleveland" label="Archdeaconry of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q597894" start="29397" end="29406" title="Stokesley" label="Stokesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q952490" start="29415" end="29426" title="Guisborough" label="Guisborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q852778" start="29435" end="29441" title="Whitby" label="Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943133" start="29468" end="29475" title="River Rye, Yorkshire" label="Ryedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508076" start="29488" end="29495" title="Vale of Mowbray" label="Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028528" start="29523" end="29538" title="Diocese of York" label="Diocese of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278084" start="29543" end="29559" title="Province of York" label="Province of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q872403" start="29595" end="29634" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Middlesbrough" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q851633" start="29673" end="29692" title="Diocese of Beverley" label="Diocese of Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q254404" start="29694" end="29719" title="Middlesbrough Cathedral" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361673" start="29742" end="29755" title="mother church" label="mother church"/>
<link wikidata="Q635674" start="29874" end="29912" title="Terry Drainey" label="Right Reverend Terence Patrick Drainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655076" start="30003" end="30015" title="Sacred Heart Church, Middlesbrough" label="Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592651" start="30017" end="30037" title="St Bernadette&amp;#x27;s, Nunthorpe" label="St Bernadette&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592818" start="30042" end="30060" title="St Clare of Assisi, Middlesbrough" label="St Clare of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="30099" end="30113" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="30219" end="30228" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189995" start="30372" end="30388" title="Jewish Year Book" label="Jewish Year Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="30645" end="30651" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="30714" end="30720" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="30721" end="30727" title="sailor" label="sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="30820" end="30825" title="Halal" label="Halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q329737" start="30826" end="30833" title="butcher" label="butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="30851" end="30857" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="31245" end="31253" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834875" start="31534" end="31560" title="BBC North East and Cumbria" label="BBC North East and Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975140" start="31565" end="31578" title="ITV Tyne Tees" label="ITV Tyne Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642934" start="31615" end="31627" title="Local TV Teesside" label="TalkTeesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913590" start="31697" end="31705" title="Bilsdale transmitting station" label="Bilsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834984" start="31748" end="31762" title="BBC Radio Tees" label="BBC Radio Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301032" start="31825" end="31841" title="Heart North East" label="Heart North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670115" start="31843" end="31862" title="Hits Radio Teesside" label="Hits Radio Teesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035626" start="31864" end="31882" title="Capital North East" label="Capital North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646132" start="31884" end="31901" title="Smooth North East" label="Smooth North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730600" start="31903" end="31931" title="Greatest Hits Radio Teesside" label="Greatest Hits Radio Teesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416606" start="32030" end="32045" title="Evening Gazette (Teesside)" label="Evening Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107119" start="32159" end="32172" title="The Fast Show" label="The Fast Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507427" start="32186" end="32209" title="Inspector George Gently" label="Inspector George Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605706" start="32223" end="32240" title="Steel River Blues" label="Steel River Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576283" start="32254" end="32261" title="Spender" label="Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562040" start="32275" end="32289" title="Play for Today" label="Play for Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952713" start="32351" end="32375" title="Boys from the Blackstuff" label="Boys from the Blackstuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234742" start="32393" end="32413" title="Auf Wiedersehen, Pet" label="Auf Wiedersehen, Pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="32436" end="32448" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="32508" end="32520" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990792" start="33085" end="33112" title="Alien (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q249151" start="33143" end="33169" title="The Tournament (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Tournament&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="33342" end="33350" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385563" start="33481" end="33491" title="John Walsh (filmmaker)" label="John Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18791542" start="33529" end="33546" title="ToryBoy The Movie" label="ToryBoy The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="33563" end="33584" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053438" start="33588" end="33618" title="Middlesbrough (UK Parliament constituency)" label="the Middlesbrough constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q261957" start="33634" end="33645" title="Stuart Bell" label="Stuart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="33737" end="33746" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507427" start="33772" end="33795" title="Inspector George Gently" label="Inspector George Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324008" start="33811" end="33822" title="Martin Shaw" label="Martin Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811844" start="33827" end="33838" title="Lee Ingleby" label="Lee Ingleby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33978" end="33992" title="Smoggie Queens" label="Smoggie Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680824" start="34004" end="34025" title="Hat Trick Productions" label="Hat Trick Productions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34217" end="34229" title="Phil Dunning" label="Phil Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="34382" end="34398" title="Middlesbrough FC" label="Middlesbrough FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="34404" end="34416" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="34417" end="34425" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434511" start="34468" end="34480" title="Steve Gibson (businessman)" label="Steve Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566" start="34496" end="34511" title="Michael Carrick" label="Michael Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q822886" start="34533" end="34550" title="Riverside Stadium" label="Riverside Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q602392" start="34622" end="34635" title="Ayresome Park" label="Ayresome Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="34660" end="34674" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q837731" start="34678" end="34682" title="FA Premier League 1992-93" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="34706" end="34725" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602810" start="34729" end="34733" title="2004 Football League Cup Final" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q580161" start="34768" end="34784" title="2005-06 UEFA Cup" label="2005-06 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463992" start="34859" end="34869" title="Alf Common" label="Alf Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="34888" end="34898" title="Sunderland AFC" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154562" start="34900" end="34927" title="Middlesbrough Ironopolis FC" label="Middlesbrough Ironopolis FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350337" start="35055" end="35070" title="Darragh Lenihan" label="Darragh Lenihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764328" start="35072" end="35086" title="Hayden Hackney" label="Hayden Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q61598452" start="35091" end="35104" title="Morgan Rogers" label="Morgan Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841859" start="35107" end="35125" title="Middlesbrough RUFC" label="Middlesbrough RUFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674270" start="35182" end="35193" title="Acklam Park" label="Acklam Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316454" start="35229" end="35264" title="Durham/Northumberland 1" label="Durham/ Northumberland Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022707" start="35286" end="35316" title="Yorkshire Rugby Football Union" label="Yorkshire Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674269" start="35553" end="35559" title="Acklam, Middlesbrough" label="Acklam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155459" start="35689" end="35711" title="2016 Tour de Yorkshire" label="2016 Tour de Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q743521" start="35741" end="35752" title="Scarborough, North Yorkshire" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q107638285" start="35768" end="35794" title="Middlesbrough Cricket Club" label="Middlesbrough Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057463" start="35845" end="35892" title="North Yorkshire and South Durham Cricket League" label="North Yorkshire and South Durham Cricket League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177444" start="35894" end="35903" title="Yorkshire County Cricket Club" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="35919" end="35938" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="35995" end="36010" title="Motorcycle speedway" label="Speedway racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841840" start="36084" end="36103" title="Middlesbrough Bears" label="Middlesbrough Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694542" start="36106" end="36125" title="Tees Valley Mohawks" label="Tees Valley Mohawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997747" start="36130" end="36144" title="Teesside Lions" label="Teesside Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336842" start="36174" end="36188" title="National Basketball League (England)" label="NBL Division 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310299" start="36530" end="36543" title="Richard Kilty" label="Richard Kilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q716951" start="36584" end="36599" title="Chris Tomlinson" label="Chris Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="36881" end="36888" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838" start="36897" end="36907" title="Oberhausen" label="Oberhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="36909" end="36931" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="37218" end="37225" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12661" start="37227" end="37231" title="Nord (French department)" label="Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677767" start="37233" end="37248" title="Hauts-de-France" label="Hauts-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q601142" start="37353" end="37361" title="Masvingo" label="Masvingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785738" start="37363" end="37380" title="Masvingo District" label="Masvingo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q498351" start="37382" end="37399" title="Masvingo Province" label="Masvingo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139220" start="37438" end="37443" title="Parmo" label="Parmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q124119545" start="37446" end="37473" title="Demographics of Tees Valley" label="Demographics of Tees Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334776" wikidata="Q426948" url="?curid=334776" title="Sistrum">
<text>A sistrum (plural: sistra or (in Latin) sīstra; from the Greek &quot;seistron&quot; of the same meaning; literally &quot;that which is being shaken&quot;, from &quot;seiein&quot;, &quot;to shake&quot;) is a musical instrument of the percussion family, a form of rattle, used most notably by the ancient Egyptians. It consists of a handle and a U-shaped metal frame, made of brass or bronze and ranging from in width. The frame supports sliding metal cross-bars, which may hold metal rings. When shaken, the small rings or loops of thin metal on its movable crossbars produce a sound that can vary from a soft clank to a loud jangling. Its name in the ancient Egyptian language was sekhem &quot;(sḫm)&quot; or sesheshet &quot;(sššt)&quot; because of the sound it made when it rattled. The ancient Egyptian sistrum had important associations with religious and ritualistic practices concerning various musical and joyful deities.

A &quot;sekhem&quot; is the simpler, hoop-like sistrum, while sesheshet (an onomatopoeic word) is the naos-shaped one.

The English language has adopted the name &quot;sistrum&quot; to refer to modern-day West-African disc-rattle instruments.

==Egyptian sistrum==
The sistrum was a sacred instrument in ancient Egypt. Perhaps originating in the worship of Bat, it was used in dances and religious ceremonies, particularly in the worship of the goddess Hathor, with the U-shape of the sistrum&#x27;s handle and frame seen as resembling the face and horns of the cow goddess. Another type of sistrum used during the worship of Hathor is naos-shaped: a small temple with an elaboratly adorned handle with the head of Hathor on top of it. The sistrum was exclusively carried by women or musical priestesses for ritualistic practices, except for festivals when the king would use the sistrum in order to present something to Hathor. The sounds made by the percussive instrument along with the rhythm of the music was largely important for its calling upon of deities, as the repetitive sound was thought to aide in ritual healing and to alter reality. The sistrum was also used outside of a religious context for other music, dancing, and merry-making until the 18th dynasty, when the use of the sistrum became increasingly more restricted, until it was only used for religious purposes. It also was shaken to avert the flooding of the Nile and to frighten away Set.

Isis in her role as mother and creator was depicted holding a pail, symbolizing the flooding of the Nile, in one hand and a sistrum in the other. The goddess Bast often is depicted holding a sistrum also, with it symbolizing her role as a goddess of dance, joy, and festivity.

Sistra are still used in the Alexandrian Rite and Ethiopic Rite. Besides the depiction in Egyptian art with dancing and expressions of joy, the sistrum was also mentioned in Egyptian literature. The hieroglyph for the sistrum is shown.

==Minoan sistrum==
The ancient Minoans also used the sistrum, and a number of examples made of local clay have been found on the island of Crete. Five of these are displayed at the Archaeological Museum of Agios Nikolaos. A sistrum is also depicted on the Harvester Vase, an artifact found at the site of Hagia Triada.

Minoans use of the sistrum perhaps also centered around Hathor in a rituals involving fertility, entertainment aspects like music and dancing, as well as indulgence. Sistrums used by ancient Minoans show overlaps with ancient Egyptian usage through their similar use during funerary contexts. Evidence of two bronze Minoan sistra suggests that they were created by separately molding the arch and handle, joining the two together with rivets later in the process.

Researchers are not sure yet whether the clay sistra were actual instruments that were used to provide music or instead were models with only symbolic significance. But experiments with a ceramic replica show that a satisfactory clacking sound is produced by such a design in clay, so a use in rituals is probably to be preferred.

==Later use==
The (sistrum) and later crotalus remained a liturgical instrument in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church throughout the centuries and is played today during the dance performed by the &quot;debtera&quot; (cantors) on important church festivals. It is also occasionally found in Neopagan worship and ritual.

The sistrum was occasionally revived in 19th century Western orchestral music, appearing most prominently in Act 1 of the opera &quot;Les Troyens&quot; (1856–1858) by the French composer Hector Berlioz. Nowadays, however, it is replaced by its close modern equivalent, the tambourine. The effect produced by the sistrum in music – when shaken in short, sharp, rhythmic pulses – is to arouse movement and activity. The rhythmical shaking of the sistrum, like the tambourine, is associated with religious or ecstatic events, whether shaken as a sacred rattle in the worship of Hathor of ancient Egypt, or in the strident jangling of the tambourine in modern-day Evangelicalism, in Romani song and dance, on stage at a rock concert, or to heighten a large-scale orchestral tutti.

Classical composer Hans Werner Henze (1926–2012) calls for the flautist to play two sistra in his 1988 work &quot;Sonate für sechs Spieler&quot; (&quot;Sonata for six players&quot;).

===West Africa===
Various modern West African and Gabon rattle instruments are also called &quot;sistra&quot; (plural of &quot;sistrum&quot;): the calabash sistrum, the West Africa sistrum or disc rattle (n&#x27;goso m&#x27;bara) also called Wasamba or Wassahouba rattle. It typically consists of a V-shaped branch with some or many concave calabash discs attached, which can be decorated.

==Gallery==

==See also==
* Kagura suzu (Shinto)

==Footnotes==
==References==
===Cited literature===
* 
* 

==External links==

* Sistrum (Smith&#x27;s Dictionary, 1875)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q426948" start="2" end="9" title="Sistrum" label="sistrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q426948" start="19" end="25" title="Sistrum" label="sistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q426948" start="40" end="46" title="Sistrum" label="sīstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="57" end="62" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="207" end="225" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="233" end="243" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132068" start="262" end="268" title="Rattle (percussion instrument)" label="rattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="295" end="308" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="659" end="676" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="1005" end="1017" title="onomatopoeic" label="onomatopoeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64526160" start="1031" end="1035" title="Naos (hieroglyph)" label="naos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132068" start="1152" end="1158" title="Rattle (percussion instrument)" label="rattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q810687" start="1286" end="1289" title="Bat (goddess)" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133343" start="1382" end="1388" title="Hathor" label="Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="2345" end="2365" title="flooding of the Nile" label="flooding of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131795" start="2387" end="2390" title="Set (mythology)" label="Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q47107" start="2455" end="2459" title="Bucket" label="pail"/>
<link wikidata="Q129106" start="2551" end="2555" title="Bast (goddess)" label="Bast"/>
<link wikidata="Q478400" start="2700" end="2716" title="Alexandrian Rite" label="Alexandrian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q478400" start="2721" end="2734" title="Ethiopic Rite" label="Ethiopic Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q318394" start="2761" end="2773" title="Art of Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q29410" start="2845" end="2864" title="Ancient Egyptian literature" label="Egyptian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="2939" end="2946" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3047" end="3052" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q211463" start="3114" end="3128" title="Agios Nikolaos, Crete" label="Agios Nikolaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700917" start="3164" end="3178" title="Harvester Vase" label="Harvester Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q393632" start="3213" end="3225" title="Hagia Triada" label="Hagia Triada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545960" start="4063" end="4071" title="crotalus (instrument)" label="crotalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="4112" end="4137" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q796790" start="4223" end="4230" title="debtera" label="debtera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="4311" end="4319" title="Modern Paganism" label="Neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="4475" end="4486" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="4528" end="4542" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="4614" end="4624" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5001" end="5015" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="5020" end="5026" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q665214" start="5111" end="5116" title="tutti" label="tutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="5138" end="5155" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5233" end="5257" title="Sonate für sechs Spieler" label="Sonate für sechs Spieler"/>
<link wikidata="Q954904" start="5722" end="5733" title="Kagura suzu" label="Kagura suzu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334779" wikidata="Q58034" url="?curid=334779" title="Gadu-Gadu">
<text>Gadu-Gadu (Polish for &quot;chit-chat&quot;; commonly known as GG or gg) is a Polish instant messaging client using a proprietary protocol. At one time, Gadu-Gadu was the most popular IM service in Poland, with over 15 million registered accounts and approximately 6.5 million users online daily. Gadu-Gadu&#x27;s casual gaming portal had some 500,000 active users as at the end of March 2009. Users send up to 300 million messages per day.

Gadu-Gadu is financed by the display of advertisements. The developer is based in Koszalin, Poland and the company is wholly owned by another Polish company, Fintecom.

== Features ==

Gadu-Gadu uses its own proprietary protocol. As with ICQ, users are identified by unique serial numbers. Protocol&#x27;s features include status messages, file sharing, and VoIP. Users may format and embed images in messages. Starting from client version 6.0, an experimental feature utilizing a secure SSL connection was introduced, although it remained inactive until the beta release of version 10.0.

The official client provides over 150 emoticons, allows grouping contacts, sending SMS and integrates with other services run by the same company: a virtual Internet dial-up, a social networking site MojaGeneracja.pl (defunct since 5 November 2012) and an internet radio Open.fm.

On February 9, 2009, a significant new major version of the application, named &quot;Nowe Gadu-Gadu&quot; (which translates to &quot;New Gadu-Gadu&quot; in Polish), was released. The graphical user interface underwent a complete overhaul, being rebuilt from scratch using the Qt framework. This update brought along a range of notable enhancements, including the introduction of voice calling capabilities, a spell checker, an anti-spam filter, the ability to display YouTube videos directly within the chat window as embeds, customizable skins, the addition of tabs, and several other additions aimed at improving the user experience and security.

Gadu-Gadu allows its users to add personal information to a publicly searchable directory. Language options include English and Polish. There is also a browser version available.

== Blip.pl ==
Blip.pl (or just Blip) was a Polish social networking internet service, founded in May 2007 and currently owned by Gadu-Gadu. It had microblogging capability. Soon after being established, it was purchased by Gadu-Gadu S.A in June 2007.

About 329,000 people visited the site in June 2009. In October 2009 the number of posts on the network exceeded ten million. By 4 December 2010 the service had 80,000 users. Notable Polish celebrities and politicians, such as Lech Wałęsa and Grzegorz Napieralski, used the site. The service was used as a communication channel of various governmental services, for example ZUS.

Blip was closed on 2 September 2013, following a two-month advance notice. During this period, users could choose to migrate their accounts to Wykop, which hosts a similar microblogging service.

== See also ==

* Comparison of instant messaging clients
* Comparison of instant messaging protocols

== References ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58034" start="0" end="9" title="Gadu-Gadu" label="Gadu-Gadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="11" end="17" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q58034" start="63" end="65" title="Gadu-Gadu" label="GG"/>
<link wikidata="Q58034" start="69" end="71" title="Gadu-Gadu" label="gg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="85" end="102" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="103" end="109" title="client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408089" start="118" end="138" title="proprietary protocol" label="proprietary protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="198" end="204" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="482" end="496" title="Advertising" label="advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="524" end="532" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58166" start="680" end="683" title="ICQ" label="ICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604532" start="765" end="779" title="status message" label="status message"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="782" end="794" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="800" end="804" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568869" start="816" end="822" title="formatted text" label="format"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="930" end="933" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="1070" end="1079" title="emoticons" label="emoticons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="1115" end="1118" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="1209" end="1226" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="1288" end="1302" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1496" end="1520" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="1589" end="1601" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296401" start="1692" end="1705" title="voice calling" label="voice calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="1722" end="1735" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="1745" end="1749" title="Spamming" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1781" end="1788" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="2193" end="2210" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q92438" start="2290" end="2303" title="microblogging" label="microblogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="2621" end="2632" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377262" start="2637" end="2657" title="Grzegorz Napieralski" label="Grzegorz Napieralski"/>
<link wikidata="Q144881" start="2768" end="2771" title="Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych" label="ZUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039882" start="2917" end="2922" title="Wykop.pl" label="Wykop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618972" start="2988" end="3027" title="Comparison of instant messaging clients" label="Comparison of instant messaging clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863582" start="3030" end="3071" title="Comparison of instant messaging protocols" label="Comparison of instant messaging protocols"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334780" wikidata="Q2931568" url="?curid=334780" title="CIX (website)">
<text>CIX (originally &quot;Compulink Information eXchange&quot;) is an online conferencing service developed by CIX Online Ltd. Founded in 1983 as a FidoNet bulletin board system, it is one of the oldest British Internet service providers.

==History==
===Origins===
Founded in 1983 by Frank and Sylvia Thornley, it began as a FidoNet bulletin board system but was relaunched commercially as CIX in 1987. At the core of the service were thousands of &quot;conferences&quot; — groups created by users to discuss specific topics. These were conceptually similar to newsgroups but limited to CIX subscribers, who sometimes refer to themselves as &quot;Cixen&quot;. These conferences still exist today, although the CIX service has since expanded to include many additional features. The service is funded through a monthly subscription fee rather than advertising.

In 1988, CIX provided the first commercial internet email and Usenet access in the UK. The service grew rapidly, reaching a peak of over 16,000 users in 1994, before starting to lose customers to newly established internet service providers that offered free access to the mass market using 0845 dial-up. These included providers such as Demon (founded by Cixen Cliff Stanford, whose CIX nickname was &quot;Demon&quot;), Pipex, AOL, and Freeserve. By 2011, CIX still had nearly 9,000 users.

In its heyday, CIX was one of the UK&#x27;s premier online platforms for both technical and social interaction. It hosted several official online support areas for companies such as Borland and Novell and counted many of the UK&#x27;s technology journalists among its subscribers (some of whom were provided with free accounts), ensuring regular mentions in the computing press.

The Liberal Democrats have used CIX as a conferencing system, with a branded version of the offline reader Ameol provided for their use.

===Later company history===
In 1996, the Thornleys decided to expand CIX&#x27;s services to include full 0845 dial-up internet access, branded as CIX Internet. However, uptake was limited, possibly due to its above-average cost, despite being technically rated for many years as one of the best internet providers in the UK.

In March 1998, a management buy-in backed by Legal &amp; General Ventures was successfully completed. The buy-in team, none of whom had previously worked at CIX, included Doug Birtley as Managing Director, Niels Gotfredsen as Finance Director, Graham Davies as Sales and Marketing Director, and Lisa Pennington. Frank and Sylvia Thornley agreed to remain with the company for a minimum of three years.

In 2000, CIX was sold to Telenor, a Norwegian telecommunications company. It was rebranded and merged with XTML of Manchester and Norsk Data of Newbury to form the UK arm of Nextra, Telenor&#x27;s internet subsidiary in the UK.

In June 2002, Telenor outsourced the CIX service to Parkglobe, a company established specifically for this purpose by several long-term CIX staff and directors, including Graham Davies, Charlie Brook, and Mat Sims.

In July 2002, Telenor sold the business to GX Networks, also known as PIPEX.

In February 2001, CIX WCS (Web Conferencing System) was released as a private beta to a select group, followed by a public beta in May 2001.

In 2004, CIX Conferencing was made accessible via a new service, CIX Online, by CIX Online Ltd, providing a web interface as an alternative to the text interface. However, customer acceptance of the web interface was limited compared to the OLRs (Offline Readers — which allowed the upload and download of new messages with message editing performed offline) that most Cixen used.

In April 2007, the first prototype of the CIX Forums website was launched by CIX Online Ltd. This new online method of accessing content was designed to attract more users.

In September 2008, Graham Davies of CIX Online Ltd announced that the API behind CIX Forums would be made available in October 2008, allowing interested parties to create additional user add-ons.

On 25 May 2011, CIX Online Ltd was purchased by ICUK, an ISP, hosting, and telecoms provider formed in November 2001 by a former employee of Compulink Information eXchange Ltd. In its press release, ICUK stated its intention to grow and expand CIX Conferencing for both new and existing users of the two companies.

In April 2012, version 2 of CIX Forums was released. This version included numerous bug fixes, enhancements, speed optimisations, and an improved user interface.

In July 2012, version 3 of CIX Forums was released, featuring further design improvements and a new notification system that allowed users to receive instant replies to messages posted.

==Technical information==
CIX Conferencing is based on the CoSy Conferencing System, although it has been heavily modified by generations of staff to add new features. The CoSy conferencing system used by CIX was initially run on a UNIX server. (This was the same CoSy codebase on which BIX, the US-centric Byte Information eXchange, was based.)

At first, users read the text-based (ISO 8859-1) CIX messages online, but the UK&#x27;s practice of charging per minute for telephone calls led to the development of offline readers (OLRs). The first CIX OLR was TelePathy (DOS-based), which later developed into the first Windows OLR, WigWam (now an open-source project under the name Virtual Access). The first official Windows OLR for CIX was called Ameol, which stood for &quot;A Most Excellent Off-Line Reader&quot;. It handled email, CIX conferencing, and Usenet, and is still freely available. It was independently written by Steve Palmer in 1994. The official desktop client is now CIXReader, which runs on Windows 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, as well as macOS, and is freely available to all subscribers. Many other OLRs, written by CIX users, are also available for other operating systems, such as Nicola for the Amiga and Polar for Psion PDAs. Augur is an open-source OLR designed for CIX.

In 1996, it was decided to port the system to Sun hardware and upgrade the bank of modems. ISDN dial-up access and the ability to use the internet to blink (a term used to collect messages) were also introduced.

==See also==
* WELL - Still-active US precursor of CIX
* BIX - the Byte Information eXchange

==References==

* Disembodied Fellowship &amp; Real-Time Ribs by Davey Winder 
* Bug Hunting in Corel
* Need to Know, Blinking rules
* PC Pro, How to be an internet Guru. Davey Winder

==External links==
* ICUK Website
* CIX Forums
* CIX Office
* CIXReader
* CIX VFR Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2931568" start="0" end="3" title="CIX (website)" label="CIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q729805" start="144" end="151" title="FidoNet" label="FidoNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="152" end="173" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="199" end="206" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="207" end="232" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q729805" start="322" end="329" title="FidoNet" label="FidoNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="330" end="351" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="558" end="568" title="Usenet newsgroup" label="newsgroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="910" end="915" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="920" end="926" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022218" start="1196" end="1201" title="Demon Internet" label="Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132772" start="1220" end="1234" title="Cliff Stanford" label="Cliff Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017806" start="1279" end="1284" title="Pipex" label="Pipex"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="1286" end="1289" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378538" start="1295" end="1304" title="Freeserve" label="Freeserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="1532" end="1539" title="Borland" label="Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="1544" end="1550" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="1734" end="1751" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1837" end="1842" title="Ameol" label="Ameol"/>
<link wikidata="Q845632" start="2622" end="2629" title="Telenor" label="Telenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2633" end="2642" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205312" start="2727" end="2737" title="Norsk Data" label="Norsk Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137555" start="4740" end="4744" title="CoSy (computer conferencing system)" label="CoSy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4913" end="4917" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137555" start="4945" end="4949" title="CoSy (computer conferencing system)" label="CoSy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004616" start="4968" end="4971" title="Byte Information Exchange" label="BIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="5893" end="5898" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756771" start="5913" end="5918" title="Psion (computers)" label="Psion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655416" start="6200" end="6204" title="The WELL" label="WELL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004616" start="6242" end="6245" title="Byte_Information_Exchange" label="BIX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334781" wikidata="Q492635" url="?curid=334781" title="Lars Sponheim">
<text>Lars Sponheim (born 23 May 1957) is a Norwegian politician. He was leader of the Liberal Party from 1996 to 2010. He was a member of the Storting from 1993 to 2009, and a government minister from 1997 to 2000 and from 2001 to 2005. He served as County Governor of Vestland from 2010 to 2022, having served as the County Governor of Hordaland from 2010 until the office was merged with that of neighboring Sogn og Fjordane in 2019.

Sponheim was born in Halden, Østfold. In 1981 he achieved a degree in agricultural science at the Agricultural University of Norway. From 1988 to 1991, he was mayor of his home municipality, Ulvik in Hordaland. He is also a farmer, and with his family he runs the ancestral farm, &quot;Sponheim&quot;, in Ulvik. He was elected to parliament as the Liberal Party&#x27;s only representative in the 1993 election. During his campaign he pledged that he would walk from his home in Ulvik to Oslo if elected, which he did. During his first term in parliament he tried to carve a place in Norwegian politics for the Liberal Party, who had been out of parliament since the 1985 election, and to make the party a potential partner in a new non-socialist government. In this he succeeded in the 1997 elections when the Liberal Party gained 5 new seats in parliament and became junior partner in the centrist first cabinet of Kjell Magne Bondevik. Sponheim became party leader in 1996, succeeding Odd Einar Dørum, before stepping down in 2010. He is the longest serving leader in the party&#x27;s history.

In the first cabinet of Bondevik, from October 1997 to March 2000, Sponheim was Minister of Trade and Industry. His main project in this position was to reduce the number of laws and regulations restricting business, especially small business. In the second Bondevik cabinet, from October 2001 to October 2005, he was Minister of Agriculture and Food. He used this position to promote Norwegian food in general and local agricultural specialties in particular, and to implement reforms aimed at making Norwegian agriculture more competitive. He also gained much publicity for criticizing Norwegians traveling to Sweden in order to buy cheaper food, calling it &quot;Harry&quot;.

Sponheim was elected to a fourth consecutive term in the Storting in the 2005 election.

In the 2009 election, the Liberal Party suffered a major defeat and lost eight out of their ten seats in parliament, including Sponheim&#x27;s seat in Hordaland. Following this defeat, Sponheim announced on the election night that he would resign as party leader when the Liberal Party convenes in the spring 2010. On 19 March 2010, it was announced that Sponheim would become the new County Governor of Hordaland, replacing the retiring Svein Alsaker. As county governor, Sponheim came into a dispute with the Bergen city government when he agreed with the opposition that the 2011 budget for Bergen illegally considered extraordinary dividend from BKK as regular income, and not as income which must be used for investments.

On 2 March 2022, he announced that he would be retiring in early June and step down as county governor of Vestland. His successor, Liv Signe Navarsete, was nominated on 3 June and assumed office on 1 September.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492635" start="0" end="13" title="Lars Sponheim" label="Lars Sponheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="38" end="47" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="81" end="94" title="Liberal Party of Norway" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="137" end="145" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245400" start="313" end="341" title="County Governor of Hordaland" label="County Governor of Hordaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50626" start="405" end="421" title="Sogn og Fjordane" label="Sogn og Fjordane"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042" start="453" end="459" title="Halden" label="Halden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50614" start="461" end="468" title="Østfold" label="Østfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="502" end="522" title="agricultural science" label="agricultural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725075" start="530" end="563" title="Agricultural University of Norway" label="Agricultural University of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="609" end="621" title="Municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q487711" start="623" end="628" title="Ulvik" label="Ulvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q50625" start="632" end="641" title="Hordaland" label="Hordaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888592" start="828" end="841" title="1993 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="919" end="923" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785780" start="1098" end="1111" title="1985 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="1985 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452936" start="1218" end="1232" title="1997 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="1997 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111940" start="1331" end="1368" title="First cabinet Bondevik" label="first cabinet of Kjell Magne Bondevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349776" start="1419" end="1434" title="Odd Einar Dørum" label="Odd Einar Dørum"/>
<link wikidata="Q120292122" start="1609" end="1639" title="Minister of Trade and Industry (Norway)" label="Minister of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063848" start="1780" end="1803" title="Second cabinet Bondevik" label="second Bondevik cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11992117" start="1847" end="1879" title="Minister of Agriculture (Norway)" label="Minister of Agriculture and Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2141" end="2147" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974363" start="2195" end="2200" title="Harry (derogatory term)" label="Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475163" start="2282" end="2295" title="2005 Norwegian general election" label="2005 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q132055" start="2305" end="2318" title="2009 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="2009 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245400" start="2683" end="2711" title="List of County Governors of Hordaland" label="County Governor of Hordaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586221" start="2736" end="2749" title="Svein Alsaker" label="Svein Alsaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="2809" end="2815" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="2934" end="2942" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891601" start="2948" end="2951" title="Bergenshalvøens Kommunale Kraftselskap" label="BKK"/>
<link wikidata="Q291655" start="3157" end="3176" title="Liv Signe Navarsete" label="Liv Signe Navarsete"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334782" wikidata="Q156800" url="?curid=334782" title="Metasequoia glyptostroboides">
<text>Metasequoia glyptostroboides, the dawn redwood, is a fast-growing, endangered deciduous conifer. It is the sole living species of the genus &quot;Metasequoia&quot;, one of three genera in the subfamily Sequoioideae of the family Cupressaceae. It now survives in the wild only in wet lower slopes and montane river and stream valleys in the border region of Hubei and Hunan provinces and Chongqing municipality in south-central China, notably in Lichuan county in Hubei. Although the shortest of the redwoods, it can grow to in height.

In 1941, the genus &quot;Metasequoia&quot; was reported by paleobotanist as a widely distributed extinct genus based on fossils, before attracting considerable attention a few years later when small populations were found alive in central China. It is a well-known example of a living fossil species. Modern dawn redwood appears identical to its late Cretaceous ancestors. The tree faces considerable risks of extinction in its wild range due to deforestation; however, it has been planted extensively in arboreta worldwide, where it has proved a popular and fast-growing ornamental plant. If the species had not been discovered when it was, it might have become extinct before being investigated.

==History==

Although it was commonly known from the fossil record from across the northern hemisphere, the dawn redwood was considered extinct until the mid-twentieth century. When the genus &quot;Metasequoia&quot; was first described in 1941, it was from Mesozoic Era fossils, none of which were less than 150 million years old. While studying fossil samples of the family Cupressaceae, Dr. Shigeru Miki from Kyoto University identified a divergent leaf form. He realized he had discovered a new genus, which he named &quot;Metasequoia&quot;, meaning &quot;like a sequoia&quot;.

In the same year, Kan Duo (Toh Kan, 1903–1961), professor of Forest Management, National Central University, Chongqing, (formerly Chungking) observed an enormous living specimen while performing a survey in Sichuan and Hubei provinces. Though unaware of Miki&#x27;s new genus, he recognized the unique traits of the tree. Unfortunately, while he collected some plant material, he did not attempt to identify or publish his findings. This tree formed part of a local shrine, where villagers called it (&quot;Shuǐshān&quot; or &quot;water fir&quot;). &quot;Shuǐshān&quot; continues to be the common name of dawn redwood in Chinese.

In 1943, Wang Zhan (Chan Wang, 1911–2000) of the National Bureau of Forest Research, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Chongqing, collected samples from an unidentified tree in the village of (formerly Motaochi, Maodaoqi or Modaoxi) in Lichuan County, Hubei province—now believed to be the same tree Kan discovered. The samples were determined to belong to a tree yet unknown to science, but World War II postponed further study.

Professors Zheng Wanjun (Cheng Wan-Chun) and Hu Xiansu (Hu Hsen-Hsu) made the pivotal connection between Miki&#x27;s fossil genus and the living samples in 1946, and provided the specific epithet &quot;glyptostroboides&quot;, after its resemblance to the Chinese swamp cypress (&quot;Glyptostrobus&quot;).

In July 1947, the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University provided $250 to fund an expedition by Zheng Wanjun&#x27;s assistant Hua Jingchan (Ching-Shan Hwa 1921–present) to collect seeds for the arboretum from the &quot;Metasequoia&quot; type tree in Moudao, and trees in the nearby Metasequoia Valley (Shuishaba Valley). Hua&#x27;s collecting trip returned with several kilos of seed that were distributed over the next few months for growth trials to Chinese institutions; the Arnold Arboretum, Missouri Botanic Garden, and elsewhere in the United States; botanic gardens at Kew, Edinburgh, and other locations in the United Kingdom; as well as botanic gardens in continental Europe and worldwide.

==Description==

&quot;Metasequoia glyptostroboides&quot; leaves are opposite, long, and bright fresh green, turning a foxy reddish brown in autumn. The pollen cones are long, produced on long spikes in early spring; they are produced only on trees growing in regions with hot summers. The cones are globose to ovoid, in diameter with 16–28 scales arranged in opposite pairs in four rows, each pair at right angles to the adjacent pair; they mature in about 8–9 months after pollination.

While the bark and foliage are similar to another closely related genus of redwoods, &quot;Sequoia&quot;, &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; differs from the coast redwood in that it is deciduous, like &quot;Taxodium distichum&quot; (bald cypress). Similar to &quot;T. distichum&quot;, older trees may form wide buttresses on the lower trunk. &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; is a fast-growing tree, exceeding in height and in trunk diameter by the age of 50, in cultivation (with the potential to grow to even greater dimensions). The trunk forms a distinctive &quot;armpit&quot; under each branch. The bark is vertically fissured and tends to exfoliate in ribbon-like strips.

The largest dawn redwood recorded was an isolated specimen in China about tall and wide. This tree was killed by a lightning strike in 1951. Several dawn redwoods of this height still live in the eastern part of &quot;Metasequoia&quot; Valley, where the tree was discovered. The tree&#x27;s true potential size is much larger, as logs up to wide at the base have been discovered in rice paddies.

The thickest and tallest dawn redwoods listed by Monumental Trees are both at Longwood Gardens, outside Kennett Square, Pennsylvania, United States. The widest has a girth at breast height of , average diameter , and is tall. The tallest is tall, and has a girth at breast height of , average diameter . Both trees were planted in 1948 and measured in 2018.

===Ecotypic variation===
Ecotypic variation has developed in a variety of microhabitats. Three variations have been observed based on the size of their cones, large, medium, and small. The large cone type is found growing on mountain slopes, develops a broad canopy, seeds more readily and is more drought tolerant. The small cone type is found near stream banks, is more sensitive to drought, and develops a more uniform trunk.
== Related species ==
Together with &quot;Sequoia sempervirens&quot; (coast redwood) and &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; (giant sequoia) of California, &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; is classified in the subfamily Sequoioideae of the family Cupressaceae. Although it is the only living species in its genus, three fossil species are known as well. The other Sequoioideae and several other genera have been transferred from the Taxodiaceae to the Cupressaceae based on DNA analysis.

==Conservation==
Studies carried out between 2007 and 2009 counted 5,371 trees primarily in Lichuan, Hubei, with much smaller groups in Shizhu, Chongqing and Longshan, Hunan.

The floodplain of Metasequoia Valley in Hubei had already been turned to rice paddies by the time of the tree&#x27;s discovery, but was once probably a more extensive dawn redwood forest. Such a forest would have been similar to bald cypress forests in the United States, with many similar species growing in association. Nearly 3,000 trunks were found in the floor of the valley, ranging from wide at the base. Additionally, houses made of &quot;Metasequoia&quot; wood 200–300 years old still exist and probably date back to the original settlement of the valley.

Since its discovery, the dawn redwood has become something of a national point of pride, and it is protected under Chinese law and also planted widely. However, it is still listed as endangered in the wild. Cutting of trees or branches is illegal, but the demand for seedlings drives cone collection to the point that natural reproduction is no longer occurring in the dawn redwood forest. In addition, the landscape has been highly modified by human use, and a 1980 expedition found that the habitat has significantly degraded since the tree&#x27;s discovery. Most of the other vegetation has been cut, and most of the area is no longer suitable ground for seedlings. Between 1950 and 1980 several hundred were logged in Metasequoia Valley, some over wide.

A survey in the 2000s counted and measured all wild dawn redwoods. The remaining healthy trees range from to wide at breast height, in height, and estimated 41–265 years in age. The average size was tall and wide at breast height, with an estimated age of about 95 years. (The type tree, at breast height, was in poor health and therefore excluded from the study) No seedlings were found, and if they ever do appear it is legal to remove and transplant them. The species will continue to live in yards, parks and on roadsides all over China, but the &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; forest ecosystem could disappear when its mature trees die.

==Cultivation==
Since the tree&#x27;s rediscovery, the dawn redwood has become a popular ornamental tree in parks and gardens worldwide.

Dawn redwood seed arrived at the Arnold Arboretum on January 5, 1948, and was shipped to arboreta around the world soon after. By 1951, the species had entered the commercial horticultural trade in the United States, and following media excitement about the new discovery, including in the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; of March 25, 1948, sales soon took off.

Dawn redwood has proved an easy tree to grow in temperate regions, and is now widely planted as an ornamental tree. Planted trees have already reached at least up to in diameter at breast height and tall, despite being in cultivation for only 70 years. This rapid rate of growth has led to consideration for using the tree in forestry plantations. It has been discovered that &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; will thrive in standing water, much like bald cypress, and if left branched to the ground in full sun, will develop the large, contorted boles that have made bald cypress famous. Limbing or pruning at an early age will prohibit this formation later on.

In cultivation, &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot; is hardy to USDA Zone 5, making it hardy down to lows of . It is tolerant of soggy, waterlogged soils; in the wild it is adapted to growing on flood plains. Until it is established in a specific site, it is vulnerable to drought and inadequate water availability. The dawn redwood is recommended for urban areas in the Midwest, Southeast, and East Coast of North America, as its fast growth rate and tolerance for air pollution make it adaptable and able to thrive where other species might suffer. The species tends to struggle without irrigation in arid climates such as the American West unless planted directly on or adjacent to a body of water such as a pond or stream. This species is also highly susceptible to damage from contact with heavy amounts of winter de-icing salt.

In the 1980s, it was discovered that many of the second-generation trees in cultivation suffered from inbreeding depression (extremely low genetic variability), which could lead to increased susceptibility to disease and reproductive failure. Many sources claim that the original 1947 seedlots came from as few as one tree; however, this has proven to be false. The original seeds did have a wide range of source trees, and the inbreeding depression is more likely to come from self-pollination by isolated trees. However, the total cultivated population still had less genetic variation than the wild ones, and more widespread seed-collecting expeditions in China in the 1990s sought to resolve this problem and restore genetic diversity to cultivated &quot;M. glyptostroboides&quot;.

===In China===
Pizhou, Jiangsu has the longest dawn redwood avenue in the world. The avenue is approximately 60 km long with over one million trees. The Water Forest in Xinghua, Jiangsu is named after the many dawn redwood trees found there in the park.

There is a large collection of dawn redwood in the Lushan Botanical Garden within Mount Lu, Jiangxi.

===In the United Kingdom===
The dawn redwood is frequently encountered across the UK. Growth has been fastest in the south-east, but it is believed the tree may have a longer future in the more humid western regions. The first dawn redwood to be planted in the UK was at the Cambridge University Botanic Garden. The seed was not from the Arnold expedition, but came to Cambridge directly. The Botanic Garden&#x27;s Annual Report for 1949 declares: &#x27;Seeds of Metasequoia glyptostroboides, sent by Dr Silow from China to Professor F T Brooks, germinated freely. Three of the seedlings have been planted out: one in the Yard at the back of the Range and two beside the Pond (now called the Lake).&#x27; The tree on the south-west side of the Lake is still living, as at July 2019. Seed distributed in the 1940s to Hillier Gardens near Winchester, UK, have thrived and are now the emblem of the gardens. A sapling planted in Stratford Park, Stroud in 1953 to commemorate the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II is now a large tree. The TROBI Champions are at Woking Park, Surrey: 22 m height by 144 cm d.b.h, Clare College, Cambridge: 21 m × 129 cm (planted 1949), and Wayford Woods, Somerset: 32 m × 99 cm. Several cultivars are available providing a range of different foliage colours and textures. The cultivar &#x27;Golden Oji&#x27; has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

===In the United States===
Dawn redwoods thrive over a large, crescent-shaped region that encompasses the eastern and southern United States, as well as on the West Coast. Many institutions, such as the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University, have fine specimens. The H. H. Hunnewell estate in Wellesley, Massachusetts, has two specimens (numbers 29 and 34) that date to the initial distribution of seed by the Arnold Arboretum in 1949. There is a small grove of dawn redwoods at Bailey Arboretum in Locust Valley, New York, including one tree which is claimed to be the world&#x27;s largest by diameter. The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation has begun planting dawn redwoods on sidewalks throughout Manhattan and Brooklyn, this link maps them. Washington, D.C.&#x27;s Urban Forestry Division has planted hundreds throughout that city, including all of the street trees in the 1800 block of Redwood Terrace, NW. A dawn redwood grows outside of the Rosicrucian Research Library at Rosicrucian Park in San Jose, California, as a memorial to H. Spencer Lewis. It was planted in 1950 from a seedling from the lot brought from China by Dr. Ralph Chaney, and donated by an unnamed donor to H. Spencer Lewis&#x27;s widow for this purpose. Additionally in San Jose, a dawn redwood is planted at San Jose State University. The Mildred E. Mathias Botanical Garden on the UCLA campus includes a dawn redwood. In North Carolina, a private endeavor is working to create a &quot;Metasequoia&quot; reserve on 50 acres of uplands in the Sauratown Mountains. Portland, Oregon, is home to some of the oldest dawn redwoods in the U.S. One specimen planted in the Hoyt Arboretum in 1948 was 103&#x27; tall at last measurement and in 1952 earned the distinction of being the first dawn redwood to bear cones in the Western Hemisphere in 6–8 million years. A dawn redwood was planted at Southern Illinois University Carbondale in Carbondale, Illinois by William Marberry in 1950 and remains there.

In 2005, Oregon made dawn redwood the state fossil of the state.

==Gallery==
== References ==


==Further reading==
* He, Zican, Jianqiang Li, Qing Cai, Xiaodong Li, and Hongwen Huang. 2004. &quot;Cytogenetic Studies on Metasequoia Glyptostroboides, a Living Fossil Species&quot;. &quot;Genetica&quot;. 122, no. 3: 269–276.
* International Metasequoia Symposium, Ben A. LePage, Christopher J. Williams, and Hong Yang. &quot;The Geobiology and Ecology of Metasequoia&quot;. Topics in geobiology, v. 22. Dordrecht: Springer, 2005. 
* Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on &quot;Metasequoia&quot; and Associated Plants, August 6–10, 2006, Metasequoia: Back from the Brink? An Update. Edited by Hong Yang and Leo J. Hickey. Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural History, Volume 48, Issue 2 31 October 2007, pp. 179–426. 
* Bartholomew, Bruce, D. E. Boufford, and S. A. Spongberg. &quot;Metasequoia glyptostroboides--Its present status in central China.&quot; Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 64.1 (1983): 105–128.
* Farjon, A. (2005). &quot;Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys&quot;. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. .
* Hanks, D.A. &quot;Crescent Ridge Dawn Redwoods Preserve&quot; (2005). http://www.dawnredwood.org
* Jahren, A. H. &amp; Sternberg, L. S. L. (2003). Humidity estimate for the middle Eocene Arctic rain forest. &quot;Geology&quot; May 2003 pdf file
* 
* Williams C.J., LePage, B.A., Vann D.R., Tange, T., Ikeda, H., Ando, M., Kusakabe, T., Tsuzuki, T. and T. Sweda. (2003). Structure, allometry, and biomass of plantation &quot;Metasequoia glyptostroboides&quot; in Japan. &quot;Forest Ecology and Management&quot;, 180(103): 287-301. 
* Williams C.J., Johnson A.H., LePage, B.A., Vann D.R. and T. Sweda. 2003. Reconstruction of Tertiary Metasequoia Forests II. Structure, Biomass and Productivity of Eocene Floodplain Forests in the Canadian Arctic. Paleobiology, 29(2): 271-292. 

==External links==

* Metasequoia in &quot;The Gymnosperm database&quot;
* Crescent Ridge Dawn Redwoods Preserve
* The metasequoia organisation
* More information on the Dawn Redwood, including largest specimens
* Giant redwoods in the U.K.
* Notes on the dawn redwood from the Arnold Arboretum, including a link to a summary of archival materials on the discovery of the dawn redwood.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156800" start="34" end="46" title="Metasequoia glyptostroboides" label="dawn redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="78" end="87" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="88" end="95" title="pinophyta" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="119" end="126" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="134" end="139" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825748" start="146" end="157" title="Metasequoia" label="Metasequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149335" start="202" end="214" title="Sequoioideae" label="Sequoioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="222" end="228" title="family (botany)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="300" end="307" title="Montane ecosystems" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="357" end="362" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="367" end="372" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="387" end="396" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="427" end="432" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q971230" start="445" end="452" title="Lichuan, Hubei" label="Lichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="595" end="608" title="paleobotanist" label="paleobotanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187419" start="814" end="827" title="living fossil" label="living fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="887" end="897" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="1041" end="1049" title="Arboretum" label="arboreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="1492" end="1504" title="Mesozoic Era" label="Mesozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="1610" end="1622" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cupressaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="1646" end="1662" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="1926" end="1935" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q971230" start="2691" end="2705" title="Lichuan, Hubei" label="Lichuan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="2707" end="2712" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q715438" start="2897" end="2909" title="Wan Chun Cheng" label="Zheng Wanjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q510757" start="2931" end="2940" title="Hu Xiansu" label="Hu Xiansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073661" start="3170" end="3183" title="Glyptostrobus" label="Glyptostrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="3211" end="3227" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3231" end="3249" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="3430" end="3434" title="Type (biology)" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="3769" end="3772" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="4046" end="4052" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="4183" end="4188" title="Conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975652" start="4473" end="4480" title="Sequoia (genus)" label="Sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="4587" end="4605" title="Taxodium distichum" label="Taxodium distichum"/>
<link wikidata="Q911072" start="4691" end="4701" title="Buttress roots" label="buttresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129930" start="5532" end="5548" title="Longwood Gardens" label="Longwood Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181684" start="5558" end="5572" title="Kennett Square" label="Kennett Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333907" start="5838" end="5856" title="Ecotypic variation" label="Ecotypic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="6284" end="6304" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="Sequoia sempervirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="6337" end="6361" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="Sequoiadendron giganteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q149335" start="6462" end="6474" title="Sequoioideae" label="Sequoioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="6482" end="6488" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="6489" end="6501" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cupressaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632844" start="6675" end="6686" title="Taxodiaceae" label="Taxodiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="6716" end="6728" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q971230" start="6823" end="6830" title="Lichuan, Hubei" label="Lichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="6832" end="6837" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378010" start="6867" end="6873" title="Shizhu Tujia Autonomous County" label="Shizhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="6875" end="6884" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q928899" start="6889" end="6897" title="Longshan County" label="Longshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="6899" end="6904" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="7136" end="7148" title="bald cypress" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="8964" end="8979" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="9046" end="9062" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="9102" end="9110" title="arboreta" label="arboreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="9309" end="9332" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="9428" end="9437" title="temperateness" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="9479" end="9494" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="9706" end="9714" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9715" end="9726" title="Plantation#Forestry" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="9829" end="9841" title="Taxodium distichum" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="9925" end="9930" title="Trunk (botany)" label="boles"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="10102" end="10113" title="USDA Hardiness Zone" label="USDA Zone 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="10975" end="10996" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342853" start="11675" end="11681" title="Pizhou" label="Pizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="11683" end="11690" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973298" start="11813" end="11825" title="Water Forest (Xinghua)" label="Water Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028116" start="11829" end="11845" title="Xinghua, Jiangsu" label="Xinghua, Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874028" start="11966" end="11989" title="Lushan Botanical Garden" label="Lushan Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q622616" start="11997" end="12005" title="Mount Lu" label="Mount Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="12007" end="12014" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q894665" start="12292" end="12327" title="Cambridge University Botanic Garden" label="Cambridge University Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498873" start="12541" end="12561" title="Frederick Tom Brooks" label="Professor F T Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621976" start="12943" end="12957" title="Stratford Park" label="Stratford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770081" start="13051" end="13056" title="Tree Register of the British Isles" label="TROBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029338" start="13074" end="13085" title="Woking Park" label="Woking Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="13087" end="13093" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q973582" start="13117" end="13122" title="diameter at breast height" label="d.b.h"/>
<link wikidata="Q760967" start="13124" end="13137" title="Clare College" label="Clare College"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="13139" end="13148" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13184" end="13197" title="Wayford Woods" label="Wayford Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="13199" end="13207" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="13231" end="13239" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="13367" end="13394" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="13402" end="13423" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="13629" end="13645" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965195" start="13694" end="13716" title="H. H. Hunnewell estate" label="H. H. Hunnewell estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848332" start="13906" end="13922" title="Bailey Arboretum" label="Bailey Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="14035" end="14083" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="14141" end="14150" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="14155" end="14163" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14186" end="14202" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7368869" start="14421" end="14437" title="Rosicrucian Park" label="Rosicrucian Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q930320" start="14480" end="14496" title="Harvey Spencer Lewis" label="H. Spencer Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129808" start="14576" end="14588" title="Ralph Chaney" label="Ralph Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="14728" end="14753" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850966" start="14759" end="14794" title="Mildred E. Mathias Botanical Garden" label="Mildred E. Mathias Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="14802" end="14806" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427530" start="14962" end="14981" title="Sauratown Mountains" label="Sauratown Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157862" start="15085" end="15099" title="Hoyt Arboretum" label="Hoyt Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472347" start="15306" end="15345" title="Southern Illinois University Carbondale" label="Southern Illinois University Carbondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q577511" start="15349" end="15369" title="Carbondale, Illinois" label="Carbondale, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044076" start="15456" end="15468" title="List of U.S. state fossils" label="state fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="16170" end="16203" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578310" start="17302" end="17314" title="Paleobiology" label="Paleobiology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334785" wikidata="Q273179" url="?curid=334785" title="Box jellyfish">
<text>Box jellyfish (class Cubozoa) are cnidarian invertebrates distinguished by their box-like (i.e., cube-shaped) body. Some species of box jellyfish produce potent venom delivered by contact with their tentacles. Stings from some species, including &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot;, &quot;Carukia barnesi&quot;, &quot;Malo kingi&quot;, and a few others, are extremely painful and often fatal to humans.

== Taxonomy and systematics ==
Historically, cubozoans were classified as an order of Scyphozoa until 1973, when they were put in their own class due to their unique biological cycle (lack of strobilation) and morphology.

At least 51 species of box jellyfish were known as of 2018. These are grouped into two orders and eight families. A few new species have since been described, and it is likely that additional undescribed species remain.

Cubozoa represents the smallest cnidarian class with approximately 50 species.

Class Cubzoa
* Order Carybdeida
** Family Alatinidae
** Family Carukiidae
** Family Carybdeidae
** Family Tamoyidae
** Family Tripedaliidae
* Order Chirodropida
** Family Chirodropidae
** Family Chiropsalmidae
** Family Chiropsellidae

== Description ==

The medusa form of a box jellyfish has a squarish, box-like bell, from which its name is derived. From each of the four lower corners of this hangs a short pedalium or stalk which bears one or more long, slender, hollow tentacles. The rim of the bell is folded inwards to form a shelf known as a velarium which restricts the bell&#x27;s aperture and creates a powerful jet when the bell pulsates. As a result, box jellyfish can move more rapidly than other jellyfish; speeds of up to per minute have been recorded.

In the center of the underside of the bell is a mobile appendage called the manubrium which somewhat resembles an elephant&#x27;s trunk. At its tip is the mouth. The interior of the bell is known as the gastrovascular cavity. It is divided by four equidistant septa into a central stomach and four gastric pockets. The eight gonads are located in pairs on either side of the four septa. The margins of the septa bear bundles of small gastric filaments which house nematocysts and digestive glands and help to subdue prey. Each septum is extended into a septal funnel that opens onto the oral surface and facilitates the flow of fluid into and out of the animal.
The box jellyfish&#x27;s nervous system is more developed than that of many other jellyfish. They possess a ring nerve at the base of the bell that coordinates their pulsing movements, a feature found elsewhere only in the crown jellyfish. Whereas some other jellyfish have simple pigment-cup ocelli, box jellyfish are unique in the possession of true eyes, complete with retinas, corneas and lenses. Their eyes are set in clusters at the ends of sensory structures called rhopalia which are connected to their ring nerve. Each rhopalium contains two image-forming lens eyes. The upper lens eye looks straight up out of the water with a field of view that matches Snell&#x27;s window. In species such as &quot;Tripedalia cystophora&quot;, the upper lens eye is used to navigate to their preferred habitats at the edges of mangrove lagoons by observing the direction of the tree canopy. The lower lens eye is primarily used for object avoidance. Research has shown that the minimum visual angle for obstacles avoided by their lower lens eyes matches the half-widths of their receptive fields. Each rhopalium also has two pit eyes on either side of the upper lens eye which likely act as mere light meters, and two slit eyes on either side of the lower lens eye which are likely used to detect vertical movement. In total, the box jellyfish have six eyes on each of their four rhopalia, creating a total of 24 eyes. The rhopalia also feature a heavy crystal-like structure called a statolith, which, due to the flexibility of the rhopalia, keep the eyes oriented vertically regardless of the orientation of the bell.

Box jellyfish also display complex, probably visually-guided behaviors such as obstacle avoidance and fast directional swimming. Research indicates that, owing to the number of rhopalial nerve cells and their overall arrangement, visual processing and integration at least partly happen within the rhopalia of box jellyfish. The complex nervous system supports a relatively advanced sensory system compared to other jellyfish, and box jellyfish have been described as having an active, fish-like behavior.

Depending on species, a fully grown box jellyfish can measure up to along each box side ( in diameter), and the tentacles can grow up to in length. Its weight can reach . However, the thumbnail-sized Irukandji is a box jellyfish, and lethal despite its small size. There are about 15 tentacles on each corner. Each tentacle has about 500,000 cnidocytes, containing nematocysts, a harpoon-shaped microscopic mechanism that injects venom into the victim. Many different kinds of nematocysts are found in cubozoans.

== Distribution ==

Although the notoriously dangerous species of box jellyfish are largely restricted to the tropical Indo-Pacific region, various species of box jellyfish can be found widely in tropical and subtropical oceans (between 42° N and 42 °S), including the Atlantic Ocean and the east Pacific Ocean, with species as far north as California (&quot;Carybdea confusa&quot;), the Mediterranean Sea (&quot;Carybdea marsupialis&quot;) and Japan (such as &quot;Chironex yamaguchii&quot;), and as far south as South Africa (for example, &quot;Carybdea branchi&quot;) and New Zealand (such as &quot;Copula sivickisi&quot;). Though box jellies are known to inhabit the Indo-Pacific region, there is very little collected data or studies proving this. It was only in 2014, that the first ever box jelly sightings (Tripedalia cystophora) were officially published in Australia, Thailand and the Indian Ocean. There are three known species in Hawaiian waters, all from the genus &quot;Carybdea&quot;: &quot;C. alata&quot;, &quot;C. rastoni&quot;, and &quot;C. sivickisi&quot;. Within these tropical and subtropical environments, box jellyfish tend to reside closer to shore. They have been spotted in near-shore habitats such as mangroves, coral reefs, kelp forests, and sandy beaches.

Recently, in 2023, a new genus and species of box jellyfish was discovered in the Indo-Pacific region, specifically the Gulf of Thailand. Discovered and named after scientist Lisa-ann Gershwin, this new species of box jellyfish, &quot;Gershwinia thailandensis&quot;, is a member of the Carukiidae family. &quot;Gershwinia thailandensis&quot; is described as its own new species as it has sensory structures with specialized horns and lacks a common digestive system among box jelly, the stomach gastric phaecellae. Due to this and other observations, structural and biological, &quot;Gershwinia thailandensis&quot; was accepted as a new species of box jellyfish.

== Detection ==

Cubozoans are widely distributed throughout tropical and subtropical regions, yet the detection of these organisms can be quite difficult and costly due to a high amount of variation in their occurrence and abundance, their translucent body, two different life stages (medusa and polyp), and vast amounts of size variability within the different species in the class Cubozoa.

Understanding the ecological distribution of cubozoans can be difficult work, and some of the costly methods like visual observations, a variety of different nets, light attraction techniques, and most recently the use of drones have had some levels of success in locating and tracking different species of cubozoa, but are limited by both anthropogenic and environmental factors.

A new form of detection, environmental DNA (eDNA), has been developed and employed to help aid in the analysis of the populations of box jellyfish which can be implemented to mitigate the effects that box jellyfish have on coastal anthropogenic activities. This relatively easy and cost-effective method utilizes extra-organismal genetic material that can be found in the water column via shedding throughout the lifespan of an organism.

This process for identifying box jellyfish using the eDNA technique involves collecting a water sample and filtering the sample through a cellulose nitrate membrane filter to extract any genetic material from the water sample. Once the DNA is extracted, it is analyzed for species-specific matches to see if the eDNA sequences sampled correlate with existing DNA sequences for box jellyfish. Given the results, the presence or absence of the box jellyfish can be indicated through the matching of genetic material. If a match is found, then the box jellyfish was present in the area. The utilization of eDNA can provide a cost-effective and efficient way to monitor populations of box jellyfish in both medusa and polyp life stages, to then use the data to help understand more about their ecology and limit the effects on coastal anthropogenic activities.

== Ecology ==

=== Age and growth ===
It has been found that the statoliths, which are composed of calcium sulfate hemihydrate, exhibit clear sequential incremental layers, thought to be laid down on a daily basis. This has enabled researchers to estimate growth rates, ages, and age to maturity. &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot;, for example, increases its inter-pedalia distance (IPD) by per day, reaching an IPD of when 45 to 50 days old. The maximum age of any individual examined was 88 days by which time it had grown to an IPD of . In the wild, the box jellyfish will live up to 3 months, but can survive up to seven or eight months in a science lab tank.

=== Behavior ===
The box jellyfish actively hunts its prey (small fish), rather than drifting as do true jellyfish. They are strong swimmers, capable of achieving speeds of up to 1.5 to 2 metres per second or about . and rapidly turning up to 180° in a few bell contractions. Some species are capable of avoiding obstacles.

The majority of box jellyfishes feed by extending their tentacles and accelerating for a short time upwards, then turn upside-down and stop pulsating. Then the jellyfish slowly sinks, until prey finds itself entangled by tentacles. At this point the pedalia fold and bring the prey to the oral opening.

The venom of cubozoans is distinct from that of scyphozoans, and is used to catch prey (small fish and invertebrates, including prawns and bait fish) and for defence from predators, which include the butterfish, batfish, rabbitfish, crabs (blue swimmer crab) and various species of turtle including the hawksbill sea turtle and flatback sea turtle. It seems that sea turtles are unaffected by the stings because they seem to relish box jellyfish.

=== Reproduction ===

Cubozoans usually have an annual life cycle. Box jellyfish reach sexual maturity when their bell diameter reaches 5 millimeters. Chirodropida reproduces by external fertilization. Carybdeida instead reproduces by internal fertilization and is ovoviviparous; sperm is transferred by spermatozeugmata, a type of spermatophore. Hours after the fertilization, the female releases an embryo strand that contains its own nematocytes; both euryteles and isorhizas. Cubozoas are the only class of cnidarian that contains species that perform the “wedding dance” to transfer the spermatophores from the male into the females, including the &quot;Carybdea sivickisi&quot; species.

It is previously believed that medusa species only reproduce once in their life before dying a few weeks later, a semelparity lifestyle. Alternatively, in July 2023, the box jelly species &quot;Chiropsalmus quadrumanus&quot;, were found to potentially have iteroparous reproduction, meaning they reproduce multiple times in their life. Oogenesis appears to happen numerous times as oocytes are discovered in four stages; pre-vitellogenic, early vitellogenic, mid vitellogenic, and late vitellogenic. Continuous research needs to be conducted to determine if box jellyfish are semelparity or iteroparous, or if it is species dependent.

==Genetics==
Box jellyfish have a mitochondrial genome that is arranged into eight linear chromosomes. As of 2022, only two Cubozoan species were fully sequenced, &quot;Alatina alata&quot; and &quot;Morbakka virulenta&quot;. &quot;A. alata&quot; has 66,156 genes, the largest gene count for any Medusozoan. The mitochondrial genome of box jellyfish is uniquely structured into multiple linear fragments. Each one of the eight linear chromosomes have between one and four genes including two extra genes. These two extra genes (mt-polB and orf314) encode proteins. There are only a few studies that have been completed involving the research of mitochondrial gene expression in box jellyfish.

==Danger to humans==

Box jellyfish have been long known for their powerful sting. The lethality of the Cubozoan venom to humans is the primary reason for its research. Although unspecified species of box jellyfish have been called in newspapers &quot;the world&#x27;s most venomous creature&quot; and the deadliest creature in the sea, only a few species in the class have been confirmed to be involved in human deaths; some species are not harmful to humans, possibly delivering a sting that is no more than painful. When the venom of the box jellyfish was sequenced, it was found that more than 170 toxin proteins were identified. The high quantity of toxin proteins that the box jellyfish possess is the reason they are known to be so dangerous. Stings from the box jellyfish can lead to skin irritation, cardiotoxicity, and can even be fatal.

===Australia===
Hugo Flecker, who worked on various venomous animal species and poisonous plants, was concerned at the unexplained deaths of swimmers. He identified the cause as the species of box jellyfish later named &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot;. In 1945, he described another jellyfish envenoming which he named the &quot;Irukandji Syndrome&quot;, later identified as caused by the box jellyfish species &quot;Carukia barnesi&quot;.

In Australia, fatalities are most often caused by the largest species of this class of jellyfish, &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot;, one of the world&#x27;s most venomous creatures. After severe &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot; stings, cardiac arrest can occur quickly, within just two minutes. &quot;C. fleckeri&quot; has caused at least 79 deaths since the first report in 1883, but even in this species most encounters appear to result only in mild envenoming. While most recent deaths in Australia have been in children, including a 14-year old who died in February 2022, which is linked to their smaller body mass, in February 2021, a 17-year-old boy died about 10 days after being stung while swimming at a beach on Queensland&#x27;s western Cape York. The previous fatality was in 2007.

At least two deaths in Australia have been attributed to the thumbnail-sized Irukandji box jellyfish. People stung by these may suffer severe physical and psychological symptoms, known as Irukandji syndrome. Nevertheless, most victims do survive, and out of 62 people treated for Irukandji envenomation in Australia in 1996, almost half could be discharged home with few or no symptoms after 6 hours, and only two remained hospitalized approximately a day after they were stung.

Preventative measures in Australia include nets deployed on beaches to keep jellyfish out, and jugs of vinegar placed along swimming beaches to be used for rapid first aid.

===Hawaii: research and dangers===
Researchers at the University of Hawaii&#x27;s Department of Tropical Medicine found the venom causes cells to become porous enough to allow potassium leakage, causing hyperkalemia, which can lead to cardiovascular collapse and death as quickly as within 2 to 5 minutes.

In Hawaii, box jellyfish numbers peak approximately seven to ten days after a full moon, when they come near the shore to spawn. Sometimes, the influx is so severe that lifeguards have closed infested beaches, such as Hanauma Bay, until the numbers subside.

===Malaysia, Philippines, Japan, Thailand, and Texas===
In parts of the Malay Archipelago, the number of lethal cases is far higher than in Australia. In the Philippines, an estimated 20–40 people die annually from Chirodropid stings, probably owing to limited access to medical facilities and antivenom.

The recently discovered and very similar &quot;Chironex yamaguchii&quot; may be equally dangerous, as it has been implicated in several deaths in Japan. It is unclear which of these species is the one usually involved in fatalities in the Malay Archipelago.

Warning signs and first aid stations have been erected in Thailand following the death of a 5-year-old French boy in August 2014. A woman died in July 2015 after being stung off Ko Pha Ngan, and another at Lamai Beach at Ko Samui on 6 October 2015.

In 1990, a 4-year-old child died after being stung by &quot;Chiropsalmus quadrumanus&quot; at Galveston Island, Texas, on the Gulf of Mexico. Either this species or &quot;Chiropsoides buitendijki&quot; is considered the likely perpetrator of two deaths in West Malaysia.

==Protection and treatment==
===Protective clothing===
Wearing pantyhose, full body lycra suits, dive skins, or wetsuits is an effective protection against box jellyfish stings. The pantyhose were formerly thought to work because of the length of the box jellyfish&#x27;s stingers (nematocysts), but it is now known to be related to the way the stinger cells work. The stinging cells on a box jellyfish&#x27;s tentacles are not triggered by touch, but by chemicals found on skin, which are not present on the hose&#x27;s outer surface, so the jellyfish&#x27;s nematocysts do not fire.

===First aid for stings===
Once a tentacle of the box jellyfish adheres to skin, it pumps nematocysts with venom into the skin, causing the sting and agonizing pain. Flushing with vinegar is used to deactivate undischarged nematocysts to prevent the release of additional venom. A 2014 study reported that vinegar also increased the amount of venom released from already-discharged nematocysts; however, this study has been criticized on methodological grounds.

Vinegar is made available on Australian beaches and in other places with venomous jellyfish.

Removal of additional tentacles is usually done with a towel or gloved hand, to prevent secondary stinging. Tentacles can still sting if separated from the bell, or after the creature is dead. Removal of tentacles may cause unfired nematocysts to come into contact with the skin and fire, resulting in a greater degree of envenomation.

Although commonly recommended in folklore and even some papers on sting treatment, there is no scientific evidence that urine, ammonia, meat tenderizer, sodium bicarbonate, boric acid, lemon juice, fresh water, steroid cream, alcohol, cold packs, papaya, or hydrogen peroxide will disable further stinging, and these substances may even hasten the release of venom. Heat packs have been proven for moderate pain relief. The use of pressure immobilization bandages, methylated spirits, or vodka is generally not recommended for use on jelly stings.

===Possible antidotes in humans===

In 2011, researchers at the University of Hawaii announced that they had developed an effective treatment against the stings of Hawaiian box jellyfish by &quot;deconstructing&quot; the venom contained in their tentacles. Its effectiveness was demonstrated in the PBS &quot;Nova&quot; episode &quot;Venom: Nature&#x27;s Killer&quot;, originally shown on North American television in February 2012. Their research found that injected zinc gluconate prevented the disruption of red blood cells and reduced the toxic effects on the cardiac activity of research mice. It was later found that copper gluconate was even more effective. A cream containing copper gluconate has been produced, to be applied to inhibit the injected venom; although it is used by U.S. military divers, evidence that it is effective in humans is only anecdotal.

In April 2019, a team of researchers at the University of Sydney announced that they had found a possible antidote to &quot;Chironex fleckeri&quot; venom that would stop pain and skin necrosis if administered within 15 minutes of being stung. The research was the result of work done with CRISPR whole genome editing in which the researchers selectively deactivated skin-cell genes until they were able to identify ATP2B1, a calcium transporting ATPase, as a host factor supporting cytotoxicity. The research showed the therapeutic use of existing drugs targeting cholesterol in mice, although the efficacy of the approach had not been demonstrated in humans.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Cubozoa classification</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273179" start="0" end="13" title="Box jellyfish" label="Box jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q273179" start="21" end="28" title="Box jellyfish" label="Cubozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="34" end="42" title="cnidaria" label="cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="44" end="56" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="97" end="101" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="136" end="145" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="161" end="166" title="venom (poison)" label="venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q310432" start="252" end="269" title="Chironex fleckeri" label="Chironex fleckeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q135000" start="283" end="298" title="Carukia barnesi" label="Carukia barnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505985" start="312" end="322" title="Malo kingi" label="Malo kingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272388" start="484" end="493" title="Scyphozoa" label="Scyphozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411746" start="590" end="602" title="strobilation" label="strobilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="708" end="714" title="Order (biology)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="725" end="733" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883954" start="813" end="832" title="undescribed species" label="undescribed species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="874" end="882" title="cnidaria" label="cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075467" start="943" end="953" title="Carybdeida" label="Carybdeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386457" start="964" end="974" title="Alatinidae" label="Alatinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047477" start="985" end="995" title="Carukiidae" label="Carukiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308104" start="1006" end="1017" title="Carybdeidae" label="Carybdeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006084" start="1028" end="1037" title="Tamoyidae" label="Tamoyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867403" start="1048" end="1061" title="Tripedaliidae" label="Tripedaliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963928" start="1070" end="1082" title="Chirodropida" label="Chirodropida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963921" start="1093" end="1106" title="Chirodropidae" label="Chirodropidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013836" start="1117" end="1131" title="Chiropsalmidae" label="Chiropsalmidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19897576" start="1142" end="1156" title="Chiropsellidae" label="Chiropsellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q660059" start="1397" end="1405" title="tentacle" label="tentacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626260" start="1896" end="1917" title="gastrovascular cavity" label="gastrovascular cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="2018" end="2023" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q916596" start="2157" end="2167" title="nematocyst" label="nematocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="2209" end="2213" title="Predation" label="prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q277471" start="2578" end="2593" title="crown jellyfish" label="crown jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="2648" end="2654" title="Simple eye in invertebrates" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="2727" end="2733" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="2736" end="2742" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q146701" start="2748" end="2754" title="lens (anatomy)" label="lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q519823" start="2828" end="2836" title="Rhopalium" label="rhopalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332595" start="3019" end="3038" title="Snell&amp;#x27;s window" label="Snell&amp;#x27;s window"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382380" start="3065" end="3086" title="Tripedalia cystophora" label="Tripedalia cystophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q36864" start="4662" end="4671" title="Nail (anatomy)" label="thumbnail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315696" start="4678" end="4687" title="Irukandji_jellyfish" label="Irukandji"/>
<link wikidata="Q916596" start="4820" end="4829" title="cnidocyte" label="cnidocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q916596" start="4843" end="4853" title="Cnidocyte" label="nematocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="5111" end="5123" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5333" end="5343" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q148576" start="5405" end="5425" title="Carybdea marsupialis" label="Carybdea marsupialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q293354" start="5458" end="5477" title="Chironex yamaguchii" label="Chironex yamaguchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563960" start="5539" end="5555" title="Carybdea branchi" label="Carybdea branchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469196" start="5594" end="5610" title="Copula sivickisi" label="Copula sivickisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308104" start="5976" end="5984" title="Carybdea" label="Carybdea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276632" start="5998" end="6006" title="Carybdea alata" label="C. alata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6020" end="6030" title="Carybdea rastoni" label="C. rastoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469196" start="6048" end="6060" title="Carybdea sivickisi" label="C. sivickisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107406" start="6453" end="6470" title="Lisa-ann Gershwin" label="Lisa-ann Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098939" start="7743" end="7760" title="environmental DNA" label="environmental DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="9114" end="9141" title="Calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate hemihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q310432" start="9318" end="9335" title="Chironex fleckeri" label="Chironex fleckeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q272388" start="9776" end="9790" title="Scyphozoa" label="true jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058410" start="10433" end="10438" title="prawn" label="prawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329127" start="10444" end="10453" title="bait fish" label="bait fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283115" start="10505" end="10515" title="Stromateidae" label="butterfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q637670" start="10517" end="10524" title="Ephippidae" label="batfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667467" start="10526" end="10536" title="rabbitfish" label="rabbitfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="10538" end="10542" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364966" start="10545" end="10562" title="Portunus pelagicus" label="blue swimmer crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="10587" end="10593" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="10608" end="10628" title="hawksbill sea turtle" label="hawksbill sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q372997" start="10633" end="10652" title="flatback sea turtle" label="flatback sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963928" start="10904" end="10916" title="Chirodropida" label="Chirodropida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198400" start="10931" end="10953" title="external fertilization" label="external fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075467" start="10955" end="10965" title="Carybdeida" label="Carybdeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266977" start="10988" end="11010" title="internal fertilization" label="internal fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="11018" end="11031" title="ovoviviparous" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q901728" start="11085" end="11098" title="spermatophore" label="spermatophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276632" start="12252" end="12265" title="Alatina alata" label="Alatina alata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316713" start="12282" end="12300" title="Morbakka virulenta" label="Morbakka virulenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596143" start="12378" end="12387" title="Medusozoa" label="Medusozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539192" start="13641" end="13653" title="Hugo Flecker" label="Hugo Flecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q310432" start="13850" end="13867" title="Chironex fleckeri" label="Chironex fleckeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q233770" start="14804" end="14813" title="Cape York Peninsula" label="Cape York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315696" start="14928" end="14951" title="Irukandji jellyfish" label="Irukandji box jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548946" start="15039" end="15057" title="Irukandji syndrome" label="Irukandji syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="15559" end="15579" title="University of Hawaii" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="15708" end="15720" title="hyperkalemia" label="hyperkalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="15815" end="15821" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="15890" end="15899" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574284" start="16030" end="16041" title="Hanauma Bay" label="Hanauma Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="16143" end="16160" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="16229" end="16240" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963928" start="16286" end="16297" title="Chirodropida" label="Chirodropid"/>
<link wikidata="Q424427" start="16365" end="16374" title="antivenom" label="antivenom"/>
<link wikidata="Q293354" start="16424" end="16443" title="Chironex yamaguchii" label="Chironex yamaguchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069922" start="16814" end="16825" title="Ko Pha Ngan" label="Ko Pha Ngan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270375" start="16857" end="16865" title="Ko Samui" label="Ko Samui"/>
<link wikidata="Q262770" start="16946" end="16970" title="Chiropsalmus quadrumanus" label="Chiropsalmus quadrumanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315101" start="16980" end="16996" title="Galveston Island" label="Galveston Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="16998" end="17003" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="17012" end="17026" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859415" start="17057" end="17081" title="Chiropsoides buitendijki" label="Chiropsoides buitendijki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="17142" end="17155" title="West Malaysia" label="West Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q276389" start="17221" end="17230" title="pantyhose" label="pantyhose"/>
<link wikidata="Q330262" start="17242" end="17247" title="lycra" label="lycra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="17255" end="17265" title="dive skins" label="dive skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="17270" end="17277" title="wetsuit" label="wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q916596" start="17834" end="17845" title="Cnidocyte" label="nematocysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="18758" end="18763" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="18765" end="18772" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q410420" start="18774" end="18789" title="Papain" label="meat tenderizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="18791" end="18809" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="18811" end="18821" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="18823" end="18834" title="lemon juice" label="lemon juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="18836" end="18847" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="18849" end="18862" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="18864" end="18871" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146414" start="18873" end="18883" title="ice pack" label="cold packs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="18885" end="18891" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="18896" end="18913" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="19486" end="19489" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="19490" end="19506" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Nova&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822815" start="19655" end="19669" title="zinc gluconate" label="zinc gluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="20346" end="20352" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654809" start="20472" end="20478" title="ATP2B1" label="ATP2B1"/>
<link wikidata="Q300033" start="20503" end="20509" title="ATPase" label="ATPase"/>
<link wikidata="Q246181" start="20539" end="20551" title="cytotoxicity" label="cytotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="20621" end="20632" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334788" wikidata="Q241820" url="?curid=334788" title="UNAM (disambiguation)">
<text>*The National Autonomous University of Mexico (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM)), is the large public autonomous university, and it is based in Mexico City. 
*National University of Misiones, a National University in Posadas, Argentina
*Club Universidad Nacional, or UNAM, a soccer club based in Mexico City, better known as &quot;Pumas de la UNAM&quot;
*University of Namibia, a university in Windhoek, Namibia
* Unam Sanctam, a bull issued on 18 November 1302 by Pope Boniface VIII 
* Art name of Syngman Rhee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="5" end="45" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q690146" start="173" end="204" title="National University of Misiones" label="National University of Misiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="251" end="276" title="Club Universidad Nacional" label="Club Universidad Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q220226" start="369" end="390" title="University of Namibia" label="University of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q383653" start="428" end="440" title="Unam Sanctam" label="Unam Sanctam"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="513" end="525" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334794" wikidata="Q247731" url="?curid=334794" title="Kaizer Chiefs F.C.">
<text>Kaizer Chiefs Football Club (often known as Chiefs) is a South African professional football club based in Naturena, Johannesburg South, that plays in the Betway Premiership. The team is nicknamed &quot;AmaKhosi&quot;, which means &quot;Kings&quot; or &quot;Chiefs&quot; in Zulu, and the &quot;Phefeni Glamour Boys&quot;. Chiefs have won 13 league titles (four in the PSL era) and over 42 cup trophies. The Last time Kaizer Chiefs won a domestic trophy was in 2015 when they won the 2014/2015 PSL league trophy and have since never been able to secure any other domestic trophy thereafter. This is one of the reasons why Kaizer Chiefs fans across the country have been frustrated with the team&#x27;s lack of Silverware which is nearing a decade despite being one of the richest and most supported PSL teams. As a result, they hold the most trophies amongst all clubs in South Africa and are the most successful team in South African football history since the start of the top flight in 1970. They are the most supported club in the country, drawing an average home attendance of 16,144 in the 2019–20 season, the highest in the league. It led to them being dubbed &quot;The Biggest Club&quot; in Southern Africa. The team plays its home matches at the 94,797-capacity FNB Stadium.

The team has a strong local rivalry with Orlando Pirates, a fellow Soweto team that Chiefs founder Kaizer Motaung played for in his early playing career. Famous players who donned the black-and-gold jersey in the past include former national team captains Neil Tovey and Lucas Radebe as well as Patrick Ntsoelengoe, Gary Bailey, John &quot;Shoes&quot; Moshoeu, Shaun Bartlett, Steve Komphela, Siyabonga Nomvete, and Doctor Khumalo.

Kaizer Chiefs were banned by the African Football (CAF) from competing in African club competitions until 2009 after their abrupt withdrawal from the 2005 CAF Confederation Cup. This was the second time in four years that Chiefs had been penalized by CAF for refusal to participate in a competition.

It is the most supported team in South Africa. Kaizer Chiefs had a support base of over 16 million at the turn of the century. In January 2025 , Kaizer Chiefs celebrated their 55th anniversary.

Kaiser Chiefs, the British indie rock/britpop band, was named after the club because Lucas Radebe, a former player of Kaizer Chiefs, captained Leeds United, the team that the band members all supported.

==History==

Kaizer Chiefs FC was founded in January 1970 shortly after the return of Kaizer &quot;Chincha Guluva&quot; Motaung from the United States where he played as a striker for the Atlanta Chiefs of the North American Soccer League (NASL). He combined his own first name with the Atlanta Chiefs to create the name of Kaizer Chiefs. Several other people have played key roles in the formation and growth of Kaizer Chiefs, including the late Gilbert Sekgabi, Clarence Mlokoti, China Ngema, Ewert &quot;The Lip&quot; Nene, and Rabelani Jan Mofokeng, he trailed and quit because of work.

Kaizer Chiefs are known as &quot;Amakhosi&quot; by its fans, a Zulu word meaning &quot;kings&quot; or &quot;chiefs&quot;. Their headquarters is &quot;Kaizer Chiefs Village&quot;, in Naturena, six kilometres south of Johannesburg.

The 2001–02 season was one of the Club&#x27;s most successful in their history as well as their most tragic. They won four major trophies in four months; the Vodacom Challenge, the BP Top Eight, the Coca-Cola Cup, and the African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup. At the time the team was said to have been a team that was on &quot;Operation vat alles&quot; by its then public relations officer Putco Mafani, &quot;vat alles&quot; being an Afrikaans statement meaning &quot;take everything&quot; in English. However, the highs of cup wins was contrasted by the lows of the Ellis Park Stadium disaster on 11 April 2001, in which 43 fans were crushed to death during the Soweto Derby between Chiefs and their arch-rivals Orlando Pirates.

By winning the African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, Chiefs played the 2001 CAF Champions League winners Al Ahly of Egypt in the 2002 CAF Super Cup. In April 2002, Kaizer Chiefs&#x27; achievements during 2001 were recognized as they were chosen as the &quot;CAF Club of the Year&quot; by the Confederation of African Football.

In the 2003–04 season Chiefs were given the Fair Play Award at the Peace Cup in South Korea. Chiefs ended the season as league champions, winning the PSL for the first time in their history.

During the championship race of the 2004–05 soccer season, Chiefs overtook the season-long leaders (Orlando Pirates) in the last game of the season to defend its PSL championship. Under the leadership of Romanian coach Ted Dumitru, Zambian striker Collins Mbesuma had a record-breaking season scoring 39 goals in all competitions.

Kaizer Chiefs&#x27; forays into Africa were temporarily scuttled by a Confederation of African Football (CAF) ban. However, it still made its presence felt through the annual Vodacom Challenge that pit Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates with an invited European club. Chiefs have won the Vodacom Challenge Cup 5 times since its inception. They beat a young Manchester United side 4–3 on penalties in the 2006 Challenge to win the trophy.

In March 2007, coach Ernst Middendorp and the club parted company. The club instantly appointed their rival Orlando Pirates&#x27; former coach Kosta Papić for the remainder of the 2006–07 season.

Muhsin Ertuğral returned for the 2007–08 season to begin his second stint with Chiefs, having already coached &quot;The Glamour Boys&quot; from 1999 until 2003.

Under coach Ernst Middendorp in the 2019/20 season, Kaizer Chiefs topped the table from the seventh matchday of the season until infamously losing the title on the final day, which saw the club finishing two points behind winners Mamelodi Sundowns.

On 26 June 2021, the team secured their first CAF Champions League final appearance after defeating Wydad AC by a 1–0 aggregate.

On 9 July 2021, Kaizer Chiefs confirmed through Twitter that they signed six players for next season after their transfer ban ended. On 17 July 2021, they lost 3–0 against Al Ahly in the Champions League Final.

In the 2023/24 season, Kaizer chiefs finished in 10th position under the interim coach Cavin Johnson, making this their lowest finish in the PSL era.

==Stadium==

===Amakhosi Stadium===
During the past years, the &quot;Amakhosi&quot; have used no less than nine stadiums in Johannesburg as their home ground, and often rotated between several stadiums during the season. In August 2006, the club made a strategic decision to sign a &quot;mutual interest agreement&quot; with a stadium developer and the local municipality regarding the construction of a new permanent home venue for Kaizer Chiefs, at a total planned cost of R1.2 billion (£105m), which was to be partly owned by the club. This future home venue was named &quot;Amakhosi Stadium&quot;, and will be situated in Krugersdorp, roughly 40 km west of Johannesburg. Initially it was planned to open in December 2008, but according to the latest revised construction plan, it is now expected only to be finalised by August 2012. The planned stadium was redesigned into a cheaper project, with a new price tag at R700 million, and the capacity being reduced from 55,000 to 35,000 seats. As part of the new revised construction plan for the stadium, it was announced by Kaizer Chiefs, that they no longer plan to be one of the owners of the stadium, but remain ready to support the stadium as a long time committed tenant.

The new stadium was initially planned to be part of a greater sports precinct, into which the club would also move its entire &quot;Kaizer Chiefs Youth Development Programme&quot;. The Gauteng Provincial Government have agreed to develop the needed infrastructures around the stadium, in order to guarantee sufficient road and railway access for the huge crowd of spectators.

The stadium developers initially had set time lines for the &quot;Amakhosi stadium&quot;, to open its doors for the public in December 2008. As of July 2010, construction however had not yet started. Kaizer Chiefs announced in August 2010, that construction of Amakhosi Stadium was now expected only to start in autumn 2010, and finalised by August 2012. It had been postponed several years, due to Kaizer Chiefs and its joint partners, facing difficulties to finance the construction. For the football seasons in 2010–12, the team instead planned to use Rand Stadium as their home venue.

Kaizer Chiefs however only played four of their 15 home games at Rand Stadium in 2010–11, due to some experienced capacity problems, with the transportation related infrastructures around the stadium -and a low spectator attendance. Instead the team during this season, played most of their home games, at the big FNB Stadium -Soccer City.

===FNB Stadium/Soccer City===


FNB Stadium is a stadium located in Johannesburg, with a capacity of 94,736 seats. It is located next to the South African Football Association headquarters (&quot;SAFA House&quot;), where both the FIFA offices and the Local Organising Committee for the 2010 FIFA World Cup is housed.

==The Soweto Derby==

The Soweto Derby between Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates is a fiercely-contested rivalry dating back to 1970, and in contrast to most other games in the South African Premier Soccer League, always attracts a large fanbase.

==Honours==
===Domestic===

Top-flight league titles: 12

Premiership 
*Champions (4): 2003–04, 2004–05, 2012–13, 2014–15
*Runners-up (5): 1996–97, 1997–98, 1998–99, 2000–01, 2013–14, 2019–20

National Soccer League 
*Champions (3) - record: 1989, 1991, 1992

National Professional Soccer League 
*Champions (5) - record: 1974, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1984

Cups: 41

Nedbank Cup (National Cup)
*Champions (13) - record: 1971, 1972, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1982, 1984, 1987, 1992, 2000, 2006, 2012–13

Telkom Knockout (League Cup)
*Champions (13) - record: 1983,1984, 1986, 1988, 1989, 1997, 1998, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2007, 2009, 2010

MTN 8 (Top 8 Tournament)
*Champions (15) - record: 1974, 1976, 1977, 1981, 1982, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991, 1992, 1994, 2001, 2006, 2008, 2014

===International===
CAF Champions League
*Runners-up: 2020–21

African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup
*Winners: 2001

CAF Super Cup
*Runners-up: 2002

Individual Awards
*&quot;African Club of the Year 2001&quot;

=== unofficial domestic cups===
Vodacom Challenge
*Winners (5) - record: 2000, 2001, 2003, 2006, 2009

Telkom Charity Cup
*Winners (11) - record: 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2002, 2003, 2010

Carling Black Label Cup
*Winners(4): 2013, 2016, 2017, 2021 
*Runners-up(5): 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2019

 Sales House Champ of Champs
*Winners:1974,1976,1977,1980,1981,1982,1984

Panasonic Cup
*Winners: 1986

Ohlsson&#x27;s Challenge Cup
*Winners: 1987, 1989

Castle Challenge Cup
*Winners: 1990, 1991

Stylo Cup
*Winners: 1970

UCT Super Team Competition
*Winners: 1972

Shell Helix Ultra Cup
*Winners: 2019

CUFA Cup
*Winners: 2024

Home of Legends Cup
*Winners: 2024

== Performance in CAF Competitions ==
Kaizer Chiefs qualified to play for the 1997 CAF Champions League but withdrew from the competition. The team made their first CAF Cup appearance in the year 2000 and only made it to the round of 16. They had the same result in the 2005 CAF Champions League and 2014 CAF Champions League. In the 2018 edition of the CAF Confederations Cup, Kaizer Chiefs reached the playoff round of 30 in which they were eliminated. Kaizer Chiefs are the runner-ups of the 2020-21 CAF Champions League and the 2002 CAF Super Cup after being crowned the Champions of the 2001 African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup.
Kaizer Chiefs&#x27; appearances in African competitions

* CAF Champions league = 5 appearance(s)
* CAF Confederations Cup = 2 appearance(s) 
* CAF Super Cup = 1appearance(s) 
* African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup = 3 appearance(s)
* CAF Cup = 1 appearance(s)

== Club Ranking ==
Kaizer Chiefs are ranked 30th on the CAF 5-year ranking for the 2024-25 CAF club Season.
== Crest and colours ==

=== Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors ===
==Club records==
*Most appearances – Doctor Khumalo 497
*Most goals – Marks Maponyane 85
*Most capped player – Siphiwe Tshabalala 91
*Most appearances in a season – Neil Tovey 52 (1992)
*Most goals in a season (all competitions) – Collins Mbesuma – 35 2004/05
*Record win – 9-1 vs Manning Rangers (Coca-Cola Challenge – 23 March 1996)
*Record loss – 1-5 vs AmaZulu (League – 08/06/86), Orlando Pirates (League – 03/11/90)

===Premier League era===
==Personnel==
===Club officials===
=== Senior team staff ===
==Players==












==Notable former players==
&quot;For all Kaizer Chiefs players with a Wikipedia article see &quot;

==Coaches==

* Thomas Johnson (1971)
* Thomas Johnson and Kaizer Motaung (1972)
* Kaizer Motaung (1973–74)
* Eliakim Khumalo (1974)
* Eddie Lewis (1974–76)
* Eliakim Khumalo (1976)
* Thomas Johnson (1976)
* Eliakim Khumalo (1976)
* Eddie Lewis (1976)
* Kaizer Motaung (1977–78)
* Mario Tuani (1979–80)
* Eddie Lewis (1980)
* Chris Ngcobo (1981)
* Eliakim Khumalo (1981)
* Joseph Setlhodi (1982)
* Eddie Lewis (1983)
* Eliakim Khumalo and Jackie Masike (1983)
* Orlando Casares (1983)
* Joe Frickleton (1984–85)
* Shaka Ngcobo (1985)
* Eddie Lewis (1985)
* Ted Dumitru (1985–88)
* Jack Chamangwana (1988)
* Jeff Butler (1988–89)
* Jack Chamangwana (1989)
* Augusto Palacios (1990)
* Jeff Butler (1991)
* Nelson &quot;Teenage&quot; Dladla (1991)
* Wiseman Mbale (1992)
* Jeff Butler (1992)
* Sergio dos Santos (1993)
* N. &quot;Teenage&quot; Dladla and Ryder Mofokeng (1993)
* Geoff Hudson (1993)
* Philippe Troussier (1994)
* Trott Moloto (1994)
* Augusto Palacios (1995)
* Jeff Butler (1995–96)
* Walter da Silva (1996)
* Wellington Manyathi (1997)
* Paul Dolezar (1 July 1997 – 30 June 1999)
* Jacob Sephoa (1999)
* Muhsin Ertugral (14 July 1999–02)
* Doctor &quot;16V&quot; Khumalo and Ace Khuse (2002–03)
* Ted Dumitru (12 June 2003 – 30 June 2005)
* Ernst Middendorp (1 July 2005 – 5 March 2007)
* Kosta Papić (7 March 2007 – 4 June 2007)
* Muhsin Ertugral (1 July 2007 – 8 May 2009)
* Vladimir Vermezović (18 May 2009 – 12 April 2012)
* Ace Khuse &quot;(interim)&quot; (12 April 2012 – 30 June 2012)
* Stuart Baxter (1 July 2012 – June 2015)
* Steve Komphela (17 June 2015 – 21 April 2018)
* Giovanni Solinas (12 July 2018 -7 December 2018)
* Ernst Middendorp (7 December 2018 – 9 September 2020)
* Gavin Hunt (17 September 2020 – 28 May 2021)
* Stuart Baxter (7 June 2021 – 21 April 2022)
* Arthur Zwane (26 May 2022 – 28 June 2023)
* Molefi Ntseki (28 June 2023 – October 2023) 
* Cavin Johnson (October 2023 – June 2024)
* Nasreddine Nabi (7 July 2024– current)
==Rugby==
On 29 October 2012, Kaizer Chiefs announced that they had registered a rugby sevens team to participate in the inaugural 7s Premier League.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*PSL Club Info
*Kaizer Chiefs results</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247731" start="0" end="27" title="Kaizer Chiefs F.C." label="Kaizer Chiefs Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q247731" start="44" end="50" title="Kaizer Chiefs F.C." label="Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="84" end="92" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217170" start="117" end="135" title="Johannesburg South" label="Johannesburg South"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="155" end="173" title="South African Premier Division" label="Betway Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="274" end="278" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q163521" start="1270" end="1281" title="FNB Stadium" label="FNB Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="1325" end="1340" title="Orlando Pirates" label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="1383" end="1397" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q567895" start="1540" end="1550" title="Neil Tovey" label="Neil Tovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q349473" start="1555" end="1567" title="Lucas Radebe" label="Lucas Radebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117781" start="1579" end="1598" title="Patrick Ntsoelengoe" label="Patrick Ntsoelengoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q713610" start="1600" end="1611" title="Gary Bailey" label="Gary Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q593509" start="1613" end="1643" title="John Moshoeu" label="John &amp;quot;Shoes&amp;quot; Moshoeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q726324" start="1645" end="1659" title="Shaun Bartlett" label="Shaun Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498983" start="1661" end="1675" title="Steve Komphela" label="Steve Komphela"/>
<link wikidata="Q314714" start="1677" end="1694" title="Siyabonga Nomvete" label="Siyabonga Nomvete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233848" start="1700" end="1714" title="Doctor Khumalo" label="Doctor Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="1750" end="1772" title="Confederation of African Football" label="African Football (CAF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015900" start="1867" end="1893" title="2005 CAF Confederation Cup" label="2005 CAF Confederation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015900" start="2004" end="2015" title="2005 CAF Confederation Cup" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2051" end="2063" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="2213" end="2226" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="2240" end="2250" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="2251" end="2258" title="britpop" label="britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q349473" start="2298" end="2310" title="Lucas Radebe" label="Lucas Radebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="2356" end="2368" title="Leeds United" label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="2503" end="2544" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer &amp;quot;Chincha Guluva&amp;quot; Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2554" end="2567" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358722" start="2605" end="2619" title="Atlanta Chiefs" label="Atlanta Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="2627" end="2655" title="North American Soccer League (1968–84)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="3072" end="3076" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3191" end="3199" title="Naturena" label="Naturena"/>
<link wikidata="Q723257" start="3398" end="3415" title="Vodacom Challenge" label="Vodacom Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571479" start="3421" end="3433" title="MTN 8" label="BP Top Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q601431" start="3439" end="3452" title="Telkom Knockout" label="Coca-Cola Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999494" start="3462" end="3491" title="2001 African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="3669" end="3678" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461749" start="3802" end="3829" title="Ellis Park Stadium disaster" label="Ellis Park Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023641" start="3898" end="3910" title="Soweto Derby" label="Soweto Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="3948" end="3963" title="Orlando Pirates F.C." label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552733" start="4030" end="4055" title="2001 CAF Champions League" label="2001 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q223566" start="4064" end="4071" title="Al Ahly SC" label="Al Ahly"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4075" end="4080" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824128" start="4088" end="4092" title="2002 CAF Super Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="4093" end="4106" title="CAF Super Cup" label="CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="4251" end="4284" title="Confederation of African Football" label="Confederation of African Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q482526" start="4354" end="4363" title="Peace Cup" label="Peace Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="4367" end="4378" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948812" start="4407" end="4423" title="2003–04 Premier Soccer League" label="league champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q603439" start="4437" end="4440" title="Premier Soccer League" label="PSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948813" start="4515" end="4536" title="2004–05 Premier Soccer League" label="2004–05 soccer season"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="4579" end="4594" title="Orlando Pirates F.C." label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4683" end="4690" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066707" start="4698" end="4709" title="Ted Dumitru" label="Ted Dumitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="4711" end="4717" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525854" start="4727" end="4742" title="Collins Mbesuma" label="Collins Mbesuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q723257" start="4986" end="5003" title="Vodacom Challenge" label="Vodacom Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="5063" end="5076" title="Premier League" label="European club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="5167" end="5184" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359515" start="5270" end="5286" title="Ernst Middendorp" label="Ernst Middendorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433449" start="5392" end="5403" title="Kosta Papić" label="Kosta Papić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070123" start="5446" end="5461" title="Muhsin Ertuğral" label="Muhsin Ertuğral"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="5904" end="5924" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139095" start="5958" end="5966" title="Wydad AC" label="Wydad AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q223566" start="6160" end="6167" title="Al Ahly SC" label="Al Ahly"/>
<link wikidata="Q107031016" start="6175" end="6197" title="2021 CAF Champions League Final" label="Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="6475" end="6487" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q644506" start="6977" end="6988" title="Krugersdorp" label="Krugersdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="7012" end="7024" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002645" start="7766" end="7795" title="Gauteng Provincial Government" label="Gauteng Provincial Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="7830" end="7845" title="infrastructures" label="infrastructures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291439" start="8513" end="8525" title="Rand Stadium" label="Rand Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163521" start="8862" end="8886" title="FNB Stadium" label="FNB Stadium -Soccer City"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="8957" end="8969" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q833624" start="9030" end="9064" title="South African Football Association" label="South African Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023641" start="9233" end="9245" title="Soweto Derby" label="Soweto Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="9272" end="9287" title="Orlando Pirates F.C." label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q603439" start="9398" end="9419" title="Premier Soccer League" label="Premier Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="9513" end="9524" title="South African Premier Division" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948812" start="9542" end="9549" title="2003–04 Premier Soccer League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948813" start="9551" end="9558" title="2004–05 Premier Soccer League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628539" start="9560" end="9567" title="2012–13 Premier Soccer League" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109294" start="9569" end="9576" title="2014–15 South African Premier Division" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948805" start="9594" end="9601" title="1996–97 Premier Soccer League" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948806" start="9603" end="9610" title="1997–98 Premier Soccer League" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948807" start="9612" end="9619" title="1998–99 Premier Soccer League" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948809" start="9621" end="9628" title="2000–01 Premier Soccer League" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720648" start="9630" end="9637" title="2013–14 South African Premier Division" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q74111066" start="9639" end="9646" title="2019–20 South African Premier Division" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978478" start="9648" end="9670" title="National Soccer League (South Africa)" label="National Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223258" start="9697" end="9701" title="1989 NSL First Division" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223248" start="9703" end="9707" title="1991 NSL First Division" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223250" start="9709" end="9713" title="1992 NSL First Division" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975029" start="9715" end="9750" title="National Professional Soccer League (South Africa)" label="National Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344273" start="9777" end="9781" title="1974 NPSL First Division" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696685" start="9789" end="9793" title="1979 NPSL First Division" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q132168518" start="9795" end="9799" title="1981 NPSL First Division" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163530" start="9817" end="9828" title="Nedbank Cup" label="Nedbank Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q124322830" start="9936" end="9940" title="2006 ABSA Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628411" start="9942" end="9949" title="2012–13 Nedbank Cup" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q601431" start="9951" end="9966" title="Telkom Knockout" label="Telkom Knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619959" start="10077" end="10081" title="2010–11 Telkom Knockout" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571479" start="10083" end="10088" title="MTN 8" label="MTN 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q124202921" start="10206" end="10210" title="SAA Supa 8 2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484013" start="10212" end="10216" title="2008 MTN 8" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q17988780" start="10218" end="10222" title="2014 MTN 8" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="10244" end="10264" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q79054740" start="10278" end="10285" title="2020–21 CAF Champions League" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q384042" start="10287" end="10316" title="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999494" start="10327" end="10331" title="2001 African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="10333" end="10346" title="CAF Super Cup" label="CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824128" start="10360" end="10364" title="2002 CAF Super Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q723257" start="10460" end="10477" title="Vodacom Challenge" label="Vodacom Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607113" start="10519" end="10523" title="2006 Vodacom Challenge" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615092" start="10525" end="10529" title="2009 Vodacom Challenge" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852064" start="10531" end="10549" title="Telkom Charity Cup" label="Telkom Charity Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618545" start="10634" end="10638" title="2010 Telkom Charity Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955891" start="10640" end="10663" title="Carling Black Label Cup" label="Carling Black Label Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955891" start="10677" end="10681" title="2013 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129554" start="10683" end="10687" title="2016 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804108" start="10689" end="10693" title="2017 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q108112863" start="10695" end="10699" title="2021 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955891" start="10717" end="10721" title="2011 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955891" start="10723" end="10727" title="2012 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513306" start="10729" end="10733" title="2014 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058196" start="10735" end="10739" title="2015 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q74115051" start="10741" end="10745" title="2019 Carling Black Label Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552376" start="11191" end="11216" title="1997 CAF Champions League" label="1997 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022732" start="11383" end="11408" title="2005 CAF Champions League" label="2005 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630193" start="11413" end="11438" title="2014 CAF Champions League" label="2014 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446843" start="11447" end="11451" title="2018 CAF Confederation Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q79054740" start="11608" end="11636" title="2020-21 CAF Champions League" label="2020-21 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824128" start="11645" end="11663" title="2002 CAF Super Cup" label="2002 CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999494" start="11705" end="11739" title="2001 African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="2001 African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="11800" end="11820" title="CAF Champions league" label="CAF Champions league"/>
<link wikidata="Q909863" start="11841" end="11863" title="CAF Confederations Cup" label="CAF Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="11885" end="11898" title="CAF Super Cup" label="CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q384042" start="11919" end="11948" title="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191871" start="11969" end="11976" title="CAF Cup" label="CAF Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976082" start="12052" end="12070" title="CAF 5-year ranking" label="CAF 5-year ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233848" start="12211" end="12225" title="Doctor Khumalo" label="Doctor Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294404" start="12244" end="12259" title="Marks Maponyane" label="Marks Maponyane"/>
<link wikidata="Q207647" start="12285" end="12303" title="Siphiwe Tshabalala" label="Siphiwe Tshabalala"/>
<link wikidata="Q567895" start="12339" end="12349" title="Neil Tovey" label="Neil Tovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525854" start="12405" end="12420" title="Collins Mbesuma" label="Collins Mbesuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485192" start="12455" end="12470" title="Manning Rangers F.C." label="Manning Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q451635" start="12531" end="12538" title="AmaZulu F.C. (South Africa)" label="AmaZulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="12560" end="12575" title="Orlando Pirates" label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791348" start="12822" end="12836" title="Thomas Johnson (South African footballer)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791348" start="12846" end="12860" title="Thomas Johnson (South African footballer)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="12865" end="12879" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="12889" end="12903" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013673" start="12916" end="12931" title="Eliakim Khumalo" label="Eliakim Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336231" start="12941" end="12952" title="Eddie Lewis (footballer, born 1935)" label="Eddie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013673" start="12965" end="12980" title="Eliakim Khumalo" label="Eliakim Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791348" start="12990" end="13004" title="Thomas Johnson (South African footballer)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013673" start="13014" end="13029" title="Eliakim Khumalo" label="Eliakim Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336231" start="13039" end="13050" title="Eddie Lewis (footballer, born 1935)" label="Eddie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="13060" end="13074" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993070" start="13087" end="13098" title="Mario Tuani" label="Mario Tuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336231" start="13111" end="13122" title="Eddie Lewis (footballer, born 1935)" label="Eddie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13132" end="13144" title="Chris Ngcobo (footballer)" label="Chris Ngcobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013673" start="13154" end="13169" title="Eliakim Khumalo" label="Eliakim Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116712" start="13179" end="13194" title="Banks Setlhodi" label="Joseph Setlhodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336231" start="13204" end="13215" title="Eddie Lewis (footballer, born 1935)" label="Eddie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013673" start="13225" end="13240" title="Eliakim Khumalo" label="Eliakim Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13245" end="13258" title="Jackie Masike" label="Jackie Masike"/>
<link wikidata="Q55362448" start="13268" end="13283" title="Orlando Casares" label="Orlando Casares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209928" start="13293" end="13307" title="Joe Frickleton" label="Joe Frickleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145592" start="13320" end="13332" title="Abednigo Ngcobo" label="Shaka Ngcobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336231" start="13342" end="13353" title="Eddie Lewis (footballer, born 1935)" label="Eddie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066707" start="13363" end="13374" title="Ted Dumitru" label="Ted Dumitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q52739268" start="13387" end="13403" title="Jack Chamangwana" label="Jack Chamangwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914353" start="13413" end="13424" title="Jeff Butler (soccer)" label="Jeff Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q52739268" start="13437" end="13453" title="Jack Chamangwana" label="Jack Chamangwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025990" start="13463" end="13479" title="Augusto Palacios" label="Augusto Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914353" start="13489" end="13500" title="Jeff Butler (soccer)" label="Jeff Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186215" start="13510" end="13543" title="Nelson Dladla" label="Nelson &amp;quot;Teenage&amp;quot; Dladla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13553" end="13566" title="Wiseman Mbale" label="Wiseman Mbale"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914353" start="13576" end="13587" title="Jeff Butler (soccer)" label="Jeff Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145040" start="13597" end="13614" title="Sergio dos Santos" label="Sergio dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186215" start="13624" end="13653" title="Nelson Dladla" label="N. &amp;quot;Teenage&amp;quot; Dladla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145540" start="13658" end="13672" title="Ryder Mofokeng" label="Ryder Mofokeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534175" start="13682" end="13694" title="Geoff Hudson" label="Geoff Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q461479" start="13704" end="13722" title="Philippe Troussier" label="Philippe Troussier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846354" start="13732" end="13744" title="Trott Moloto" label="Trott Moloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025990" start="13754" end="13770" title="Augusto Palacios" label="Augusto Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914353" start="13780" end="13791" title="Jeff Butler (soccer)" label="Jeff Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966491" start="13804" end="13819" title="Walter da Silva" label="Walter da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13829" end="13848" title="Wellington Manyathi" label="Wellington Manyathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107279" start="13858" end="13870" title="Paul Dolezar" label="Paul Dolezar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13902" end="13914" title="Jacob Sephoa" label="Jacob Sephoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070123" start="13924" end="13939" title="Muhsin Ertugral" label="Muhsin Ertugral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233848" start="13960" end="13990" title="Doctor Khumalo" label="Doctor &amp;quot;16V&amp;quot; Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672995" start="13995" end="14004" title="Ace Khuse" label="Ace Khuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066707" start="14017" end="14028" title="Ted Dumitru" label="Ted Dumitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359515" start="14061" end="14077" title="Ernst Middendorp" label="Ernst Middendorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433449" start="14109" end="14120" title="Kosta Papić" label="Kosta Papić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070123" start="14152" end="14167" title="Muhsin Ertugral" label="Muhsin Ertugral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897061" start="14197" end="14216" title="Vladimir Vermezović" label="Vladimir Vermezović"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672995" start="14249" end="14258" title="Ace Khuse" label="Ace Khuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q715348" start="14314" end="14327" title="Stuart Baxter" label="Stuart Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498983" start="14356" end="14370" title="Steve Komphela" label="Steve Komphela"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022505" start="14404" end="14420" title="Giovanni Solinas" label="Giovanni Solinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359515" start="14455" end="14471" title="Ernst Middendorp" label="Ernst Middendorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528180" start="14511" end="14521" title="Gavin Hunt" label="Gavin Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q715348" start="14558" end="14571" title="Stuart Baxter" label="Stuart Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800783" start="14604" end="14616" title="Arthur Zwane" label="Arthur Zwane"/>
<link wikidata="Q66134148" start="14648" end="14661" title="Molefi Ntseki" label="Molefi Ntseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554223" start="14695" end="14708" title="Cavin Johnson" label="Cavin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107466892" start="14738" end="14753" title="Nasreddine Nabi" label="Nasreddine Nabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="14858" end="14870" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643938" start="14908" end="14925" title="7s Premier League" label="7s Premier League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334800" wikidata="Q607939" url="?curid=334800" title="Orlando Pirates F.C.">
<text>Orlando Pirates Football Club, referred to as simply Pirates, is a South African professional football club based in Orlando, Soweto that plays in the top-tier system of Football in South Africa known as Betway Premiership. The team plays its home matches at Orlando Stadium in Soweto.

The club was founded in 1937 and was originally based in Orlando, Soweto. Orlando Pirates are the first club since the inception of the Premier Soccer League in 1996 to have won three major trophies in a single season back to back, having won the domestic league ABSA Premiership, the domestic cup Nedbank Cup and the Top 8 Cup MTN 8 during the ABSA Premiership 2010–11 season and domestic league ABSA Premiership, the League Cup Telkom Knockout and the Top 8 Cup MTN 8 during the ABSA Premiership 2011–12 season. They are one of only two South African teams with Mamelodi Sundowns to win the CAF Champions League, which they won in 1995 and were runners up of 2013 CAF Champions League.

They are also the runners-up of the 2015 and 2021–2022 CAF Confederation Cup.

In total Orlando Pirates have appeared in four Confederation of African Football finals, that is more continental finals than any other Premier Soccer League side.

The club has won nine league titles and 88 trophies in total including 10 South African cup trophies.

In 2024 they became the first team to win three consecutive MTN 8 finals.

==History==
Orlando Pirates is one of South Africa&#x27;s oldest football clubs having been established in 1937 in Orlando East, Soweto.

===Early years===
The founders of Orlando Pirates included the offspring of migrant workers who moved from rural areas to work in the gold mines of Gauteng. Boys in Orlando came together at every available opportunity in open spaces and in informal groupings to play football. The original club was formed in 1934 by a group of teenagers at the Orlando Boys Club. Andries Mkhwanazi, popularly known as &quot;Pele Pele&quot;, was a boxing instructor at the Orlando Boys Club when he encouraged formation of a football club in 1937 and a year later those teenagers were competing among the minors of the Johannesburg Bantu Football Association barefoot and without a team kit.

In 1940, Bethuel Mokgosinyane, the first president, bought the first team kit with his own funds. Orlando Boys participated in Johannesburg Bantu Football Association&#x27;s Saturday League, where they won the Division Two title and gained promotion to Division One in 1944. Andrew Bassie, a key member of the team, suggested the new name &#x27;Orlando Pirates&#x27;. The team composed the camp&#x27;s war cry &#x27;Ezimnyama Ngenkani&#x27;.
===Since 1971===

Over the years, Orlando Pirates, also known as &#x27;The Happy People&#x27;, have accumulated a record of successes having won the National Professional Soccer League title in 1971, 1973, 1975 and 1976, the National Soccer League title in 1994, and the Premier Soccer League title four times, in 2001, 2003, 2011 and 2012. Their first-place finish in the 2010–11 domestic league campaign generated much excitement among the club&#x27;s vast fan base.

In 2011, Orlando Pirates enjoyed tremendous success by winning the 2010–11 Premier Soccer League, The Nedbank Cup, The MTN 8 Cup and The Telkom Knockout. This year was dubbed as &quot;The Happy Year.&quot;

Many other cup triumphs in domestic football have also been recorded, including Vodacom Challenge title victories in the inaugural 1999 tournament and 2005. But the African continent and other areas of the football world took notice of Orlando Pirates Football Club when they won the African Champions Cup (now known as the Champions League) in 1995 and the African Super Cup a year later. Along with Mamelodi Sundowns, TP Mazembe and AS Vita, the Orlando Pirates are the only Southern Hemisphere club to have won the African Champions League. This achievement resulted in the club being honoured by the first State President of the new democratic South Africa, Nelson Mandela; another first for a South African sporting team.

Kaizer Chiefs chairman Kaizer Motaung and his Jomo Cosmos counterpart Jomo Sono were popular players of the highest calibre for the Buccaneers before starting their own clubs.

In 2005, the team, along with Interza Lesego and Ellis Park Stadium Ltd, announced its acquisition of a 51% share in Ellis Park Stadium, making it the first majority black-owned stadium in South Africa. It was in the same year that Orlando Pirates achieved Superbrand status. Superbrands is an international company that identifies and rewards the leading brands around the world; Orlando Pirates are the only South African sports team next to the Springboks and Proteas to be given this status.

=== The Ghost ===
Orlando Pirates’ supporters are among the most demanding in Africa and the world; Pirates’ real supporters‚ or “the Ghost” ‚ as they are known are some of the most passionate football fans you will ever come across.

Known as the spiritual owners of the club they produce the most intimidating atmosphere on match days at Orlando Stadium.

Pirates&#x27; fans, who are also known as the Ghost, often boast about their team being the first club from Southern Africa to have won the Caf Champions League title having achieved this in 1995.

=== Orlando Stadium (The fortress and the slaughterhouse) ===
Not only is Orlando Stadium the original Mecca of South African football, it is also home to local giants and 1995 CAF Champions League winners Orlando Pirates; It is by far the most intimidating of venues on match days.

The club boasts an impressive record at home compared to other sides in the PSL.

===The Soweto derby===

The Soweto derby between Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates is fiercely contested derby. The first match was on 24 January 1971.

==Honours==

Amateur Era (1937-1960)

Johannesburg Bantu Football Association (JBFA) Saturday League Division Two

• Champions (1): 1939

Johannesburg Bantu Football Association (JBFA) Saturday League Division One

• Champions (3): 1955, 1956 &amp; 1959

Johannesburg African Football Association (JAFA) Summer League

• Champions (2): 1950, 1952

Transvaal Challenge Cup

• Champions (3): 1952, 1955, 1959

SA Robertson Cup

• Champions (4): 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953

Robor Shield Cup

• Champions (1): 1959

=== Domestic Competitions ===
South African League titles (9):

Premiership
*Champions (4): 2000–01, 2002–03, 2010–11, 2011–12
*&quot;Runners up (8)&quot;: 1999–2000, 2004–05, 2005–06, 2008–09, 2017–18, 2018–19, 2022–23, 2023–24 (record)
National Soccer League
*Champions (1): 1994
*National Professional Soccer League
**Champions (4): 1971, 1973, 1975, 1976

=== Cup Competitions ===
Nedbank Cup
*Champions (10): 1973, 1974, 1975, 1980, 1988, 1996, 2010–11, 2013–14, 2022–23, 2023–24
*Runners-up: 2006, 2015–16, 2016–17
Telkom Knockout
*Champions (1): 2011
*Runners-up: 1987,1990,1995,2000,2008, 2010, 2013, 2018
MTN 8 
*Champions (13): 1972, 1973, 1978, 1983, 1993, 1996, 2000, 2010, 2011, 2020, 2022, 2023, 2024
*Runners-up: 2007, 2013, 2014

=== International Competitions ===
CAF Champions League
*Champions (1): 1995 
*Runners-up (1): 2013
CAF Confederation Cup
*Runners-up (2): 2015, 2021-22
CAF Super Cup
*Champions (1): 1996
Afro-Asian Club Championship

* Runners-up (1): 1996

=== Cup Competitions (unofficial) ===
Castle Challenge
*Champions (1): 1992
Sales House Cup 
*Champions (4): 1973, 1975, 1977,1978, 1983
Carling Black Label Cup 
*Champions (5) record: 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2019
Vodacom Challenge 
*Champions (2): 1999, 2005
Telkom Charity Cup

* Champions (7) 1993,1995,1997,1999,2001,2008,2009

PSL Reserve League 
*Champions (1): 2007

==Performance in CAF Competitions==
NB: South African football clubs started participating in CAF Competition&#x27;s in 1993, after 16 years of being banned from FIFA due to the apartheid system. The ban extended from 1976 to 1992.
*African Cup of Champions Clubs / CAF Champions League: 11 appearances
The club appeared in the African Cup of Champions Clubs twice (1995, 1996) and have appeared in the CAF Champions League ten times from 1997 to date. The club has been knocked out 4 times in the preliminary round out of the last 6 appearances. 
*CAF Confederation Cup: 4 appearances
*African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup: 1 appearance
*CAF Super Cup: 1 appearance
Note
*Orlando Pirates did not make an appearance in the CAF Cup. They qualified for the 2001 CAF Cup but withdrew from the competition. As the cup was intended for league runners-up their place in the tournament was then extended to Kaizer Chiefs who had finished third, but they declined as they had already qualified for the more prestigious 2001 African Cup Winners&#x27; Cup. Pirates&#x27; place in the tournament was then extended to and taken by Ajax Cape Town.
*Contrary to popular belief, Orlando Pirates had already incorporated the star above their badge before the second leg of the 1995 CAF Champions Cup final against ASEC Mimosas. Photographic evidence from the match shows Pirates players wearing jerseys with the star, indicating that the club anticipated their victory and added it before officially securing the title. This challenges the common misconception that the star was only introduced after their triumph

===Overall matches===

== Crest and colours ==

=== Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors ===
==Club ranking==
As of 2 September 2023, Orlando Pirates are ranked 16th in the 2023-24 CAF 5-year ranking.

==Notable former coaches==

* Walter Da Silva (1988)
* Shepherd Murape (1994)
* Joe Frickleton (1995)
* Viktor Bondarenko (1995–1996)
* Shaibu Amodu (1996–1997)
* Ted Dumitru (1999–2000)
* Gordon Igesund (2000–2001)
* Jean-Yves Kerjean (2001–2002)
* Kosta Papić (2004–2005)
* Milutin Sredojević (2006–2007)
* Bibey Mutombo (2007)
* Owen Da Gama (2007–2008)
* Ruud Krol (2008–2011)
* Júlio César Leal (2011–2012)
* Augusto Palacios (interim; 2012)
* Roger De Sa (2012–2014)
* Eric Tinkler (interim; 2014)
* Vladimir Vermezović (2014–2015)
* Eric Tinkler (2015–2016)
* Muhsin Ertuğral (2016)
* Augusto Palacios (interim; 2016–2017)
* Kjell Jonevret (2017)
* Milutin Sredojević (2017–2019)
* Rulani Mokwena (interim; 2019)
* Josef Zinnbauer (2019–2021) 
* Fadlu Davids &amp; Mandla Ncikazi (interims; 2021–2022)
* José Riveiro (2022-)
==Club records==

*Most appearances: Happy Jele 401
*Most goals: Benedict Vilakazi 52
*Most capped player: Teko Modise 58 (South Africa)
*Most appearances in a season: Senzo Meyiwa 51 (2013–2014), Oupa Manyisa 51 (2013–14) and Willy Okpara 51 (1994–1995)
*Most goals in a season: Dennis Lota 23 (1999–00)
*Record win: 9–1 v Olympics FC (Bob Save Super Bowl, 7 March 1999)
*Record loss: 0–6 vs Mamelodi Sundowns (League, 11 February 2017) Loftus Versfeld Stadium, Pretoria
*Most games unbeaten: 17 (1975, 2005)
*Most goals scored in a season: 61 (1989)
*Most goals conceded in a season: 60 (1986)
*Most wins in a season: 19 (1990)
*Fewest wins in a season: 5 (1985)
*Most defeats in a season: 15 (1985)
*Fewest defeats in a season: 3 (1994)

=== Premier Division record ===

== Coaching staff ==

==Players==
===First team squad===













==Jersey number retirement==

Jersey number 10 was retired to honour Jomo Sono when the club needed him at the match in 1980

Jomo Sono is currently the owner and founder of Jomo Cosmos at which he takes care of coaching job.

Jersey number 1 was retired to honour Senzo Meyiwa due his death when he was murdered at home 
He was number one goalkeeper in South Africa having a competitor Itumeleng Khune

==References==
==External links==
*
*PSL Club Info (archived 7 December 2008)
*Orlando Pirates results</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="0" end="29" title="Orlando Pirates F.C." label="Orlando Pirates Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="53" end="60" title="Orlando Pirates F.C." label="Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="94" end="102" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885934" start="117" end="132" title="Orlando, Soweto" label="Orlando, Soweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478206" start="170" end="194" title="Football in South Africa" label="Football in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="204" end="222" title="South African Premier Division" label="Betway Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681126" start="259" end="274" title="Orlando Stadium" label="Orlando Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q603439" start="423" end="444" title="Premier Soccer League" label="Premier Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="550" end="566" title="ABSA Premiership" label="ABSA Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163530" start="585" end="596" title="Nedbank Cup" label="Nedbank Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571479" start="615" end="620" title="MTN 8" label="MTN 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q601431" start="717" end="732" title="Telkom Knockout" label="Telkom Knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q784965" start="851" end="868" title="Mamelodi Sundowns" label="Mamelodi Sundowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="880" end="900" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q719885" start="948" end="973" title="2013 CAF Champions League" label="2013 CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q909863" start="1031" end="1052" title="CAF Confederation Cup" label="CAF Confederation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="1102" end="1135" title="Confederation of African Football" label="Confederation of African Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q603439" start="1191" end="1212" title="Premier Soccer League" label="Premier Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571479" start="1383" end="1388" title="MTN 8" label="MTN 8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2138" end="2177" title="Johannesburg Bantu Football Association" label="Johannesburg Bantu Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q603439" start="2925" end="2946" title="Premier Soccer League" label="Premier Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="3689" end="3706" title="African Super Cup" label="African Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="3993" end="4007" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301459" start="4082" end="4096" title="Kaizer Motaung" label="Kaizer Motaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520442" start="4105" end="4116" title="Jomo Cosmos F.C." label="Jomo Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702701" start="4129" end="4138" title="Jomo Sono" label="Jomo Sono"/>
<link wikidata="Q182081" start="4353" end="4371" title="Ellis Park Stadium" label="Ellis Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681126" start="5073" end="5088" title="Orlando Stadium" label="Orlando Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023641" start="5683" end="5695" title="Soweto derby" label="Soweto derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q247731" start="5704" end="5717" title="Kaizer Chiefs F.C." label="Kaizer Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="6346" end="6373" title="South African Premier Division" label="South African League titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="6380" end="6391" title="South African Premier Division" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948809" start="6408" end="6415" title="2000–01 Premier Soccer League" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948811" start="6417" end="6424" title="2002–03 Premier Soccer League" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948822" start="6426" end="6433" title="2010–11 Premier Soccer League" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108652" start="6435" end="6442" title="2011–12 Premier Soccer League" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948808" start="6472" end="6481" title="1999–2000 Premier Soccer League" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948813" start="6483" end="6490" title="2004–05 Premier Soccer League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396668" start="6492" end="6499" title="2005–06 Premier Soccer League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948819" start="6501" end="6508" title="2008–09 Premier Soccer League" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637594" start="6510" end="6517" title="2017–18 South African Premier Division" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388126" start="6519" end="6526" title="2018–19 South African Premier Division" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q113396353" start="6528" end="6535" title="2022–23 South African Premier Division" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q120176624" start="6537" end="6544" title="2023–24 South African Premier Division" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978478" start="6554" end="6576" title="National Soccer League (South Africa)" label="National Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241797" start="6593" end="6597" title="1994 NSL First Division" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975029" start="6599" end="6634" title="National Professional Soccer League (South Africa)" label="National Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223240" start="6652" end="6656" title="1971 NPSL First Division" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q25215429" start="6670" end="6674" title="1976 NPSL First Division" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163530" start="6701" end="6712" title="Nedbank Cup" label="Nedbank Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q130784561" start="6760" end="6764" title="1996 Bob Save Superbowl" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850244" start="6766" end="6773" title="2010–11 Nedbank Cup" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346055" start="6775" end="6782" title="2013–14 Nedbank Cup" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265721" start="6784" end="6791" title="2022–23 Nedbank Cup" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q124785326" start="6793" end="6800" title="2023–24 Nedbank Cup" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q124322830" start="6814" end="6818" title="2006 ABSA Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058202" start="6820" end="6827" title="2015–16 Nedbank Cup" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128467" start="6829" end="6836" title="2016–17 Nedbank Cup" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q601431" start="6837" end="6852" title="Telkom Knockout" label="Telkom Knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619959" start="6913" end="6917" title="2010 Telkom Knockout" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6919" end="6923" title="2013 Telkom Knockout" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750687" start="6925" end="6929" title="2018 Telkom Knockout" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571479" start="6930" end="6935" title="MTN 8" label="MTN 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388173" start="6996" end="7000" title="2010 MTN 8" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417292" start="7002" end="7006" title="2011 MTN 8" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855248" start="7008" end="7012" title="2020 MTN 8" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q113576171" start="7014" end="7018" title="2022 MTN 8" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q120881889" start="7020" end="7024" title="2023 MTN 8" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q129321620" start="7026" end="7030" title="2024 MTN 8" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q123982803" start="7044" end="7048" title="SAA Supa 8 2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549324" start="7050" end="7054" title="2013 MTN 8" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q17988780" start="7056" end="7060" title="2014 MTN 8" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="7097" end="7117" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439178" start="7134" end="7138" title="1995 African Cup of Champions Clubs" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q719885" start="7157" end="7161" title="2013 CAF Champions League" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q909863" start="7162" end="7183" title="CAF Confederation Cup" label="CAF Confederation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823913" start="7201" end="7205" title="2015 CAF Confederation Cup" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616664" start="7207" end="7214" title="2021-22 CAF Confederation Cup" label="2021-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="7215" end="7228" title="CAF Super Cup" label="CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504552" start="7245" end="7249" title="1996 CAF Super Cup" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q387970" start="7250" end="7278" title="Afro-Asian Club Championship" label="Afro-Asian Club Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955891" start="7441" end="7464" title="Carling Black Label Cup" label="Carling Black Label Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q723257" start="7518" end="7535" title="Vodacom Challenge" label="Vodacom Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852064" start="7564" end="7582" title="Telkom Charity Cup" label="Telkom Charity Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120686" start="7636" end="7654" title="PSL Reserve League" label="PSL Reserve League"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="7772" end="7775" title="Confederation of African Football" label="CAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="7840" end="7844" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="7911" end="7941" title="African Cup of Champions Clubs" label="African Cup of Champions Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="7944" end="7964" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="8006" end="8036" title="African Cup of Champions Clubs" label="African Cup of Champions Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="8081" end="8101" title="CAF Champions League" label="CAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q909863" start="8227" end="8248" title="CAF Confederation Cup" label="CAF Confederation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q384042" start="8265" end="8294" title="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="African Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q937649" start="8310" end="8323" title="CAF Super Cup" label="CAF Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q960688" start="8426" end="8438" title="2001 CAF Cup" label="2001 CAF Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976082" start="9452" end="9470" title="CAF 5-year ranking" label="CAF 5-year ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966491" start="9503" end="9518" title="Walter Da Silva" label="Walter Da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494478" start="9528" end="9543" title="Shepherd Murape" label="Shepherd Murape"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209928" start="9553" end="9567" title="Joe Frickleton" label="Joe Frickleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093190" start="9577" end="9594" title="Viktor Bondarenko (Russian football coach)" label="Viktor Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730463" start="9609" end="9621" title="Shaibu Amodu" label="Shaibu Amodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066707" start="9636" end="9647" title="Ted Dumitru" label="Ted Dumitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904363" start="9662" end="9676" title="Gordon Igesund" label="Gordon Igesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170155" start="9691" end="9708" title="Jean-Yves Kerjean" label="Jean-Yves Kerjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433449" start="9723" end="9734" title="Kosta Papić" label="Kosta Papić"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384789" start="9749" end="9767" title="Milutin Sredojević" label="Milutin Sredojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903002" start="9782" end="9795" title="Bibey Mutombo" label="Bibey Mutombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114445" start="9805" end="9817" title="Owen Da Gama" label="Owen Da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q313180" start="9832" end="9841" title="Ruud Krol" label="Ruud Krol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627846" start="9856" end="9872" title="Júlio César Leal" label="Júlio César Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025990" start="9887" end="9903" title="Augusto Palacios" label="Augusto Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q10364026" start="9922" end="9933" title="Roger De Sa" label="Roger De Sa"/>
<link wikidata="Q927969" start="9948" end="9960" title="Eric Tinkler" label="Eric Tinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897061" start="9979" end="9998" title="Vladimir Vermezović" label="Vladimir Vermezović"/>
<link wikidata="Q927969" start="10013" end="10025" title="Eric Tinkler" label="Eric Tinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070123" start="10040" end="10055" title="Muhsin Ertuğral" label="Muhsin Ertuğral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025990" start="10065" end="10081" title="Augusto Palacios" label="Augusto Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744051" start="10105" end="10119" title="Kjell Jonevret" label="Kjell Jonevret"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384789" start="10129" end="10147" title="Milutin Sredojević" label="Milutin Sredojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q96654627" start="10162" end="10176" title="Rulani Mokwena" label="Rulani Mokwena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706119" start="10195" end="10210" title="Josef Zinnbauer" label="Josef Zinnbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429270" start="10226" end="10238" title="Fadlu Davids" label="Fadlu Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q106860298" start="10245" end="10259" title="Mandla Ncikazi" label="Mandla Ncikazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q70571759" start="10284" end="10296" title="José Riveiro" label="José Riveiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652880" start="10342" end="10352" title="Happy Jele" label="Happy Jele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10370" end="10387" title="Zweli Zubula (association football)" label="Benedict Vilakazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315706" start="10412" end="10423" title="Teko Modise" label="Teko Modise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313309" start="10473" end="10485" title="Senzo Meyiwa" label="Senzo Meyiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539395" start="10502" end="10514" title="Oupa Manyisa" label="Oupa Manyisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609796" start="10532" end="10544" title="Willy Okpara" label="Willy Okpara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120347" start="10585" end="10596" title="Dennis Lota" label="Dennis Lota"/>
<link wikidata="Q181398" start="10743" end="10766" title="Loftus Versfeld Stadium" label="Loftus Versfeld Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="10768" end="10776" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702701" start="11218" end="11227" title="Jomo Sono" label="Jomo Sono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702701" start="11275" end="11284" title="Jomo Sono" label="Jomo Sono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520442" start="11323" end="11334" title="Jomo Cosmos" label="Jomo Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313309" start="11414" end="11426" title="Senzo Meyiwa" label="Senzo Meyiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216707" start="11536" end="11551" title="Itumeleng Khune" label="Itumeleng Khune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334803" wikidata="Q294217" url="?curid=334803" title="Public sector">
<text>The public sector, also called the state sector, is the part of the economy composed of both public services and public enterprises. Public sectors include the public goods and governmental services such as the military, law enforcement, public infrastructure, public transit, public education, along with public health care and those working for the government itself, such as elected officials. The public sector might provide services that a non-payer cannot be excluded from (such as street lighting), services which benefit all of society rather than just the individual who uses the service. Public enterprises, or state-owned enterprises, are self-financing commercial enterprises that are under public ownership which provide various private goods and services for sale and usually operate on a commercial basis.

Organizations that are not part of the public sector are either part of the private sector or voluntary sector. The private sector is composed of the economic sectors that are intended to earn a profit for the owners of the enterprise. The voluntary, civic, or social sector concerns a diverse array of non-profit organizations emphasizing civil society. In the United Kingdom, the term &quot;wider public sector&quot; is often used, referring to public sector organizations outside central government.

==Organization==
The organization of the public sector can take several forms, including:
* Direct administration funded through taxation; the delivering organization generally has no specific requirement to meet commercial success criteria, and production decisions are determined by government.
* State-owned enterprises; which differ from direct administration in that they have greater management autonomy and operate according to commercial criteria, and production decisions are not generally taken by a government (although goals may be set for them by the government).
*The public sector in many countries is organized at three levels: Federal or National, Regional (State or Provincial), and Local (Municipal or County).
* Partial outsourcing (of the scale many businesses do, e.g. for IT services) is considered a public sector model.

A borderline form is as follows:
* Complete outsourcing or contracting out, with a privately owned corporation delivering the entire service on behalf of the government. This may be considered a mixture of private sector operations with public ownership of assets, although in some forms the private sector&#x27;s control and/or risk is so great that the service may no longer be considered part of the public sector (Barlow et al., 2010). (See the United Kingdom&#x27;s Private Finance Initiative.)
* Public employee unions represent workers. Since contract negotiations for these workers are dependent on the size of government budgets, this is the one segment of the labor movement that can actually contribute directly to the people with ultimate responsibility for its livelihood. While their giving pattern matches that of other unions, public sector unions also concentrate contributions on members of Congress from both parties who sit on committees that deal with federal budgets and agencies.

==Infrastructure==
&quot;Infrastructure&quot; includes areas that support both the public&#x27;s members and the public sector itself. Streets and highways are used both by those who work for the public sector and also by the citizenry. The former, who are public employees, are also part of the citizenry.

Public roads, bridges, tunnels, water supply, sewers, electrical grids and telecommunications networks are among the public infrastructure.

==Public sector staff==
Rates of pay for public sector staff may be negotiated by employers and their staff or staff representatives such as trade unions. In some cases, for example in the United Kingdom, a pay review body is charged with making independent recommendations on rates of pay for groups of public sector staff.

==By country==

=== France ===
As of 2017, France had 5.6 million civil servants, amounting to 20% of all jobs in France. They are subdivided into three types: the State civil service (, FPE) includes teachers and soldiers, and employs 44% of the workforce. The local civil service (; FPT) is made up of employees of town halls and regional councils: 25% of the workforce. The hospital civil service (, FPH) consists of doctors and nurses and is 21% of the workforce.

==Criticism==
Right-libertarian and Austrian School economists have criticized the idea of public sector provision of goods and services as inherently inefficient. In 1961, Murray Rothbard wrote: &quot;Any reduction of the public sector, any shift of activities from the public to the private sphere, is a net moral and economic gain.&quot;

American libertarians and anarcho-capitalists have also argued that the system by which the public sector is funded, namely taxation, is itself coercive and unjust. However, some small-government proponents have pushed back on this point of view, citing the ultimate necessity of a public sector for provision of certain services, such as national defense, public works and utilities, and pollution controls.

== See also ==

* Civil service
* Government agency
* List of countries by government spending as percentage of GDP
* List of countries by public sector
* Nationalization
* Privatization
* Private sector
* Public ownership
* Public–private partnership
* Public sector business cases for projects
* Special-purpose district
* State-owned enterprise

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* Barlow, J. Roehrich, J.K. and Wright, S. (2010). &quot;De facto privatisation or a renewed role for the EU? Paying for Europe&#x27;s healthcare infrastructure in a recession.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine&quot;. 103:51–55.
* Lloyd G. Nigro, &quot;Decision Making in the Public Sector&quot; (1984), Marcel Dekker Inc.
* David G. Carnevale, &quot;Organizational Development in the Public Sector&quot; (2002), Westview Pr.
* Jan-Erik Lane, &quot;The Public Sector: Concepts, Models and Approaches&quot; (1995), Sage Pubns.
* A Primer on Public-Private Partnerships PFM blog: A primer on Public-Private Partnerships
* What is the Public Sector? Definition &amp; Examples. (2016, June &amp; July). Retrieved June 10, 2017, from What is the Public Sector? Definition &amp; Examples

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="4" end="17" title="Public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="35" end="47" title="Public sector" label="state sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="93" end="107" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="113" end="130" title="public enterprise" label="public enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="211" end="219" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="221" end="236" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="238" end="259" title="Infrastructure#Public" label="public infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="261" end="275" title="public transit" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="277" end="293" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="306" end="324" title="publicly funded health care" label="public health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q599151" start="378" end="395" title="Official" label="elected officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="703" end="719" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="898" end="912" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063076" start="916" end="932" title="voluntary sector" label="voluntary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="972" end="987" title="economic sector" label="economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="1162" end="1175" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="1455" end="1463" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="1539" end="1549" title="commerce" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="1625" end="1647" title="State-owned enterprise" label="State-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="2066" end="2077" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="2216" end="2227" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="2643" end="2669" title="Private Finance Initiative" label="Private Finance Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="3484" end="3495" title="Public road" label="Public road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="3498" end="3504" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="3507" end="3513" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="3516" end="3528" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="3530" end="3536" title="sewage" label="sewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="3538" end="3553" title="electrical grid" label="electrical grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="3559" end="3585" title="telecommunications network" label="telecommunications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q202875" start="3693" end="3703" title="negotiation" label="negotiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3766" end="3777" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101435" start="3832" end="3847" title="Pay Review Body" label="pay review body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161855" start="4017" end="4031" title="civil servants (France)" label="civil servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="4434" end="4451" title="Right-libertarian" label="Right-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="4456" end="4471" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="4593" end="4608" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="4771" end="4783" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="4788" end="4807" title="anarcho-capitalists" label="anarcho-capitalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312687" start="4906" end="4925" title="Taxation as theft" label="coercive and unjust"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="4941" end="4957" title="small-government" label="small-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="5190" end="5203" title="Civil service" label="Civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="5206" end="5223" title="Government agency" label="Government agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779422" start="5226" end="5287" title="List of countries by past government spending" label="List of countries by government spending as percentage of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907522" start="5290" end="5324" title="List of countries by public sector" label="List of countries by public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="5327" end="5342" title="Nationalization" label="Nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="5345" end="5358" title="Privatization" label="Privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="5361" end="5375" title="Private sector" label="Private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="5378" end="5394" title="Public ownership" label="Public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="5397" end="5423" title="Public–private partnership" label="Public–private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5426" end="5467" title="Business case#Public sector projects" label="Public sector business cases for projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q610237" start="5470" end="5494" title="Special-purpose district" label="Special-purpose district"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="5497" end="5519" title="State-owned enterprise" label="State-owned enterprise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334804" wikidata="Q930338" url="?curid=334804" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States">
<text>The world&#x27;s first skyscraper was built in Chicago in 1885. Since then, the United States has been home to some of the world&#x27;s tallest skyscrapers. New York City, and especially the borough of Manhattan, has the tallest skyline in the country. Eleven American buildings have held the title of tallest building in the world. New York City and Chicago have been the centers of American skyscraper building. The 10-story Home Insurance Building, built in Chicago in 1885, is regarded as the world&#x27;s first skyscraper; the building was constructed using a novel steel-loadbearing frame which became a standard of the industry worldwide.

Since its topping out in 2013, One World Trade Center in New York City has been the tallest skyscraper in the United States. Its spire brings the structure to a symbolic architectural height of , connoting the year the Declaration of Independence was signed, though the absolute tip (or pinnacle) of the structure is measured at . However, the observation deck elevation and the height to the highest occupied floor of One World Trade Center are surpassed by Central Park Tower, 432 Park Avenue, 111 West 57th Street, and Chicago&#x27;s Willis Tower, which was formerly and is still commonly known as Sears Tower. Tribune East Tower in Chicago will also have a higher occupied floor and roof upon its completion.

Prior to the September 11 attacks in New York City, the twin towers of the first World Trade Center occupied the second and third positions on the list below. The North Tower (1 WTC) stood at , while the South Tower (2 WTC) was tall, then surpassed only by the Willis Tower at . If they were still standing today, they would occupy the seventh and eighth positions on the list below, with their replacement—the new One World Trade Center—being excluded.

There are numerous skyscrapers and supertall buildings both proposed and under construction throughout the country, concentrated in Chicago and New York City. 270 Park Avenue, in New York City, is currently under construction. In Chicago, work for Tribune East Tower has not begun but tentatively planned to start in February 2024. Other tall buildings that are proposed include the Legends Tower in Oklahoma City, the One Bayfront Plaza, and the One Brickell Centre in Miami.

==Tallest buildings==
This list ranks completed and topped-out buildings in the United States that stand at least tall, based on standard height measurement which includes spires and architectural details, but excludes antenna masts. An equal sign (=) following a rank indicates the same height between two or more buildings. The &quot;Year&quot; column indicates the year in which a building was or will be completed. Note that this list dosen&#x27;t feature every building 780 feet or taller.


* Indicates building is still under construction, but has been topped out.

==Tallest buildings by pinnacle height==

This lists ranks completed and topped out buildings in the United States that stand at least tall based on pinnacle height measurement, which includes antenna masts. Standard architectural height measurement, which excludes antennas in building height, is included for comparative purposes.

Indicates building is still under construction, but has been topped out.

==Cities with the most skyscrapers==
American cities with at least 5 completed skyscrapers over high .


==Tallest under construction, approved and proposed==

===Under construction===
This lists buildings that are under construction in the United States and are planned to rise at least . Buildings that have already been topped out are excluded.

* Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding building dates of completion has not yet been released.

===Approved and proposed===

This lists buildings that are proposed for construction in the United States and are planned to rise at least . A floor count of 50 stories is used as the cutoff for buildings whose heights have not yet been released by their developers.

* Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding building heights, floor counts or dates of completion has not yet been released.
==Tallest destroyed==
This table lists the 10 tallest buildings in the United States that have been demolished, destroyed, or are undergoing demolition.
 

==Timeline of tallest buildings==
This is a list of the history of the tallest buildings in the United States by architectural height.

This lists buildings that once held the title of tallest building in the United States.
 
==See also==

===General lists===
*Lists of buildings and structures
*List of cities with the most skyscrapers
*List of tallest buildings
*List of tallest buildings by U.S. state and territory
*List of tallest structures in the United States

===By city===
*List of tallest buildings in Atlanta
*List of tallest buildings in Austin, Texas
*List of tallest buildings in Boston
*List of tallest buildings in Charlotte
*List of tallest buildings in Chicago 
*List of tallest buildings in Dallas
*List of tallest buildings in Houston
*List of tallest buildings in Jersey City
*List of tallest buildings in Los Angeles
*List of tallest buildings in Miami 
*List of tallest buildings in New York City
*List of tallest buildings in Philadelphia
*List of tallest buildings in San Francisco
*List of tallest buildings in Seattle

===By region===
*List of tallest buildings in California
*List of tallest buildings in Texas
*List of tallest buildings in North America

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5326897" start="17" end="33" title="Early skyscrapers" label="first skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="47" end="54" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="80" end="93" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="157" end="170" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="191" end="198" title="New York City borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="202" end="211" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698493" start="302" end="331" title="History of the tallest buildings in the world" label="tallest building in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q944544" start="427" end="450" title="Home Insurance Building" label="Home Insurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245" start="678" end="700" title="One World Trade Center" label="One World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="866" end="893" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631701" start="1106" end="1124" title="Central Park Tower" label="Central Park Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q233940" start="1126" end="1141" title="432 Park Avenue" label="432 Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631268" start="1143" end="1163" title="111 West 57th Street" label="111 West 57th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="1184" end="1196" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q54952515" start="1261" end="1279" title="Tribune East Tower" label="Tribune East Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1374" end="1394" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="1436" end="1460" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="first World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q109648853" start="1975" end="1990" title="270 Park Avenue (2021–present)" label="270 Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q124650744" start="2199" end="2212" title="Legends Tower" label="Legends Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="2216" end="2229" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023952" start="2235" end="2253" title="One Bayfront Plaza" label="One Bayfront Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041505" start="2263" end="2282" title="One Brickell Centre" label="One Brickell Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="2286" end="2291" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075723" start="2346" end="2356" title="Topping out" label="topped-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075723" start="2940" end="2950" title="Topping out" label="topped out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176199" start="4583" end="4616" title="Lists of buildings and structures" label="Lists of buildings and structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575895" start="4618" end="4658" title="List of cities with the most skyscrapers" label="List of cities with the most skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="4660" end="4685" title="List of tallest buildings" label="List of tallest buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501893" start="4687" end="4740" title="List of tallest buildings by U.S. state and territory" label="List of tallest buildings by U.S. state and territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642428" start="4742" end="4789" title="List of tallest structures in the United States" label="List of tallest structures in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492793" start="4806" end="4842" title="List of tallest buildings in Atlanta" label="List of tallest buildings in Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062400" start="4844" end="4886" title="List of tallest buildings in Austin, Texas" label="List of tallest buildings in Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388778" start="4888" end="4923" title="List of tallest buildings in Boston" label="List of tallest buildings in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120726" start="4925" end="4963" title="List of tallest buildings in Charlotte" label="List of tallest buildings in Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416850" start="4965" end="5001" title="List of tallest buildings in Chicago" label="List of tallest buildings in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504054" start="5004" end="5039" title="List of tallest buildings in Dallas" label="List of tallest buildings in Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368167" start="5041" end="5077" title="List of tallest buildings in Houston" label="List of tallest buildings in Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q948315" start="5079" end="5119" title="List of tallest buildings in Jersey City" label="List of tallest buildings in Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q83806" start="5121" end="5161" title="List of tallest buildings in Los Angeles" label="List of tallest buildings in Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5163" end="5198" title="List of tallest buildings in Miami " label="List of tallest buildings in Miami "/>
<link wikidata="Q838997" start="5200" end="5242" title="List of tallest buildings in New York City" label="List of tallest buildings in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q196442" start="5244" end="5285" title="List of tallest buildings in Philadelphia" label="List of tallest buildings in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662975" start="5287" end="5329" title="List of tallest buildings in San Francisco" label="List of tallest buildings in San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q83751" start="5331" end="5367" title="List of tallest buildings in Seattle" label="List of tallest buildings in Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642195" start="5386" end="5425" title="List of tallest buildings in California" label="List of tallest buildings in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598631" start="5427" end="5461" title="List of tallest buildings in Texas" label="List of tallest buildings in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q64995255" start="5463" end="5505" title="List of tallest buildings in North America" label="List of tallest buildings in North America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334816" wikidata="Q621636" url="?curid=334816" title="Route of administration">
<text>In pharmacology and toxicology, a route of administration is the way by which a drug, fluid, poison, or other substance is taken into the body.

Routes of administration are generally classified by the location at which the substance is applied. Common examples include oral and intravenous administration. Routes can also be classified based on where the target of action is. Action may be topical (local), enteral (system-wide effect, but delivered through the gastrointestinal tract), or parenteral (systemic action, but is delivered by routes other than the GI tract). Route of administration and dosage form are aspects of drug delivery.

==Classification==
Routes of administration are usually classified by application location (or exposition).

The route or course the active substance takes from application location to the location where it has its target effect is usually rather a matter of pharmacokinetics (concerning the processes of uptake, distribution, and elimination of drugs). Exceptions include the transdermal or transmucosal routes, which are still commonly referred to as &quot;routes of administration&quot;.

The location of the target effect of active substances is usually rather a matter of pharmacodynamics (concerning, for example, the physiological effects of drugs). An exception is topical administration, which generally means that both the application location and the effect thereof is local.

Topical administration is sometimes defined as both a local application location and local pharmacodynamic effect, and sometimes merely as a local application location regardless of location of the effects.

===By application location===
====Enteral/gastrointestinal route====
Through the gastrointestinal tract is sometimes termed &quot;enteral or enteric administration&quot; (literally meaning &#x27;through the intestines&#x27;). &quot;Enteral/enteric administration&quot; usually includes &quot;oral&quot; (through the mouth) and &quot;rectal&quot; (into the rectum) administration, in the sense that these are taken up by the intestines. However, uptake of drugs administered orally may also occur already in the stomach, and as such &quot;gastrointestinal&quot; (along the gastrointestinal tract) may be a more fitting term for this route of administration. Furthermore, some application locations often classified as &quot;enteral&quot;, such as sublingual (under the tongue) and sublabial or buccal (between the cheek and gums/gingiva), are taken up in the proximal part of the gastrointestinal tract without reaching the intestines. Strictly enteral administration (directly into the intestines) can be used for systemic administration, as well as local (sometimes termed topical), such as in a contrast enema, whereby contrast media are infused into the intestines for imaging. However, for the purposes of classification based on location of effects, the term enteral is reserved for substances with systemic effects.
Many drugs as tablets, capsules, or drops are taken orally. Administration methods directly into the stomach include those by gastric feeding tube or gastrostomy. Substances may also be placed into the small intestines, as with a duodenal feeding tube and enteral nutrition. Enteric coated tablets are designed to dissolve in the intestine, not the stomach, because the drug present in the tablet causes irritation in the stomach.

The rectal route is an effective route of administration for many medications, especially those used at the end of life. The walls of the rectum absorb many medications quickly and effectively. Medications delivered to the distal one-third of the rectum at least partially avoid the &quot;first pass effect&quot; through the liver, which allows for greater bio-availability of many medications than that of the oral route. Rectal mucosa is highly vascularized tissue that allows for rapid and effective absorption of medications. A suppository is a solid dosage form that fits for rectal administration. In hospice care, a specialized rectal catheter, designed to provide comfortable and discreet administration of ongoing medications provides a practical way to deliver and retain liquid formulations in the distal rectum, giving health practitioners a way to leverage the established benefits of rectal administration. The Murphy drip is an example of rectal infusion.

====Parenteral route====

The parenteral route is any route that is not enteral (&quot;&quot; + &quot;enteral&quot;).

Parenteral administration can be performed by injection, that is, using a needle (usually a hypodermic needle) and a syringe, or by the insertion of an indwelling catheter.

Locations of application of parenteral administration include:
* Central nervous system:
:* Epidural (synonym: peridural) (injection or infusion into the epidural space), e.g. epidural anesthesia.
:* Intracerebral (into the cerebrum) administration by direct injection into the brain. Used in experimental research of chemicals and as a treatment for malignancies of the brain. The intracerebral route can also interrupt the blood brain barrier from holding up against subsequent routes.
:* Intracerebroventricular (into the cerebral ventricles) administration into the ventricular system of the brain. One use is as a last line of opioid treatment for terminal cancer patients with intractable cancer pain.

* Epicutaneous (application onto the skin). It can be used both for local effect as in allergy testing and typical local anesthesia, as well as systemic effects when the active substance diffuses through skin in a transdermal route.
*Sublingual and buccal medication administration is a way of giving someone medicine orally (by mouth). Sublingual administration is when medication is placed under the tongue to be absorbed by the body. The word &quot;sublingual&quot; means &quot;under the tongue.&quot; Buccal administration involves placement of the drug between the gums and the cheek. These medications can come in the form of tablets, films, or sprays. Many drugs are designed for sublingual administration, including cardiovascular drugs, steroids, barbiturates, opioid analgesics with poor gastrointestinal bioavailability, enzymes and, increasingly, vitamins and minerals.
* Extra-amniotic administration, between the endometrium and fetal membranes.
* Nasal administration (through the nose) can be used for topically acting substances, as well as for insufflation of e.g. decongestant nasal sprays to be taken up along the respiratory tract. Such substances are also called &quot;inhalational&quot;, e.g. inhalational anesthetics.
* Intra-arterial (into an artery), e.g. vasodilator drugs in the treatment of vasospasm and thrombolytic drugs for treatment of embolism.
* Intra-articular, into a joint space. It is generally performed by joint injection. It is mainly used for symptomatic relief in osteoarthritis.
* Intracardiac (into the heart), e.g. adrenaline during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (no longer commonly performed).
* Intracavernous injection, an injection into the base of the penis.
* Intradermal, (into the skin itself) is used for skin testing some allergens, and also for mantoux test for tuberculosis.
* Intralesional (into a skin lesion), is used for local skin lesions, e.g. acne medication.
* Intramuscular (into a muscle), e.g. many vaccines, antibiotics, and long-term psychoactive agents. Recreationally the colloquial term &#x27;muscling&#x27; is used.

* Intraocular, into the eye, e.g., some medications for glaucoma or eye neoplasms.
* Intraosseous infusion (into the bone marrow) is, in effect, an indirect intravenous access because the bone marrow drains directly into the venous system. This route is occasionally used for drugs and fluids in emergency medicine and pediatrics when intravenous access is difficult.
* Intraperitoneal, (infusion or injection into the peritoneum) e.g. peritoneal dialysis.
* Intrathecal (into the spinal canal) is most commonly used for spinal anesthesia and chemotherapy.
* Intrauterine.
* Intravaginal administration, in the vagina.
* Intravenous (into a vein), e.g. many drugs, total parenteral nutrition.
* Intravesical infusion is into the urinary bladder.
* Intravitreal, through the eye.
* Subcutaneous (under the skin). This generally takes the form of subcutaneous injection, e.g. with insulin. Skin popping is a slang term that includes subcutaneous injection, and is usually used in association with recreational drugs. In addition to injection, it is also possible to slowly infuse fluids subcutaneously in the form of hypodermoclysis.
* Transdermal (diffusion through the intact skin for systemic rather than topical distribution), e.g. transdermal patches such as fentanyl in pain therapy, nicotine patches for treatment of addiction and nitroglycerine for treatment of angina pectoris.
* Perivascular administration (perivascular medical devices and perivascular drug delivery systems are conceived for local application around a blood vessel during open vascular surgery).
* Transmucosal (diffusion through a mucous membrane), e.g. insufflation (snorting) of cocaine, sublingual, i.e. under the tongue, sublabial, i.e. between the lips and gingiva, and oral spray or vaginal suppository for nitroglycerine.

===Topical route===

The definition of the topical route of administration sometimes states that both the application location and the pharmacodynamic effect thereof is local.

In other cases, &quot;topical&quot; is defined as applied to a localized area of the body or to the surface of a body part regardless of the location of the effect. By this definition, topical administration also includes transdermal application, where the substance is administered onto the skin but is absorbed into the body to attain systemic distribution.

If defined strictly as having local effect, the topical route of administration can also include enteral administration of medications that are poorly absorbable by the gastrointestinal tract. One such medication is the antibiotic vancomycin, which cannot be absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and is used orally only as a treatment for &quot;Clostridioides difficile&quot; colitis.

== Choice of routes ==
The reason for choice of routes of drug administration are governing by various factors:

* Physical and chemical properties of the drug. The physical properties are solid, liquid and gas. The chemical properties are solubility, stability, pH, irritancy etc.
* Site of desired action: the action may be localised and approachable or generalised and not approachable.
* Rate of extent of absorption of the drug from different routes.
* Effect of digestive juices and the first pass metabolism of drugs.
* Condition of the patient.

In acute situations, in emergency medicine and intensive care medicine, drugs are most often given intravenously. This is the most reliable route, as in acutely ill patients the absorption of substances from the tissues and from the digestive tract can often be unpredictable due to altered blood flow or bowel motility.

===Convenience===
Enteral routes are generally the most convenient for the patient, as no punctures or sterile procedures are necessary. Enteral medications are therefore often preferred in the treatment of chronic disease. However, some drugs can not be used enterally because their absorption in the digestive tract is low or unpredictable. Transdermal administration is a comfortable alternative; there are, however, only a few drug preparations that are suitable for transdermal administration.

===Desired target effect===
Identical drugs can produce different results depending on the route of administration. For example, some drugs are not significantly absorbed into the bloodstream from the gastrointestinal tract and their action after enteral administration is therefore different from that after parenteral administration. This can be illustrated by the action of naloxone (Narcan), an antagonist of opiates such as morphine. Naloxone counteracts opiate action in the central nervous system when given intravenously and is therefore used in the treatment of opiate overdose. The same drug, when swallowed, acts exclusively on the bowels; it is here used to treat constipation under opiate pain therapy and does not affect the pain-reducing effect of the opiate.

===Oral===
The oral route is generally the most convenient and costs the least. However, some drugs can cause gastrointestinal tract irritation. For drugs that come in delayed release or time-release formulations, breaking the tablets or capsules can lead to more rapid delivery of the drug than intended. The oral route is limited to formulations containing small molecules only while biopharmaceuticals (usually proteins) would be digested in the stomach and thereby become ineffective. Biopharmaceuticals have to be given by injection or infusion. However, recent research found various ways to improve oral bioavailability of these drugs. In particular permeation enhancers, ionic liquids, lipid-based nanocarriers, enzyme inhibitors and microneedles have shown potential.

Oral administration is often denoted &quot;PO&quot; from &quot;per os&quot;, the Latin for &quot;by mouth&quot;.

The bioavailability of oral administration is affected by the amount of drug that is absorbed across the intestinal epithelium and first-pass metabolism.

===Oral mucosal===
The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth.

====Buccal====
Buccally administered medication is achieved by placing the drug between gums and the inner lining of the cheek. In comparison with sublingual tissue, buccal tissue is less permeable resulting in slower absorption.

====Sublabial====
====Sublingual====
Sublingual administration is fulfilled by placing the drug between the tongue and the lower surface of the mouth. The sublingual mucosa is highly permeable and thereby provides access to the underlying expansive network composed of capillaries, leading to rapid drug absorption.

===Intranasal===
Drug administration via the nasal cavity yields rapid drug absorption and therapeutic effects. This is because drug absorption through the nasal passages does not go through the gut before entering capillaries situated at tissue cells and then systemic circulation and such absorption route allows transport of drugs into the central nervous system via the pathways of olfactory and trigeminal nerve.

Intranasal absorption features low lipophilicity, enzymatic degradation within the nasal cavity, large molecular size, and rapid mucociliary clearance from the nasal passages, which explains the low risk of systemic exposure of the administered drug absorbed via intranasal.

===Local===
By delivering drugs almost directly to the site of action, the risk of systemic side effects is reduced.

Skin absorption (dermal absorption), for example, is to directly deliver drug to the skin and, hopefully, to the systemic circulation. However, skin irritation may result, and for some forms such as creams or lotions, the dosage is difficult to control. Upon contact with the skin, the drug penetrates into the dead stratum corneum and can afterwards reach the viable epidermis, the dermis, and the blood vessels.

===Parenteral===
The term parenteral is from para-1 &#x27;beside&#x27; + Greek enteron &#x27;intestine&#x27; + -al. This name is due to the fact that it encompasses a route of administration that is not intestinal. However, in common English the term has mostly been used to describe the four most well-known routes of injection.


The term injection encompasses intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM), subcutaneous (SC) and intradermal (ID) administration.

Parenteral administration generally acts more rapidly than topical or enteral administration, with onset of action often occurring in 15–30 seconds for IV, 10–20 minutes for IM and 15–30 minutes for SC. They also have essentially 100% bioavailability and can be used for drugs that are poorly absorbed or ineffective when they are given orally. Some medications, such as certain antipsychotics, can be administered as long-acting intramuscular injections. Ongoing IV infusions can be used to deliver continuous medication or fluids.

Disadvantages of injections include potential pain or discomfort for the patient and the requirement of trained staff using aseptic techniques for administration. However, in some cases, patients are taught to self-inject, such as SC injection of insulin in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. As the drug is delivered to the site of action extremely rapidly with IV injection, there is a risk of overdose if the dose has been calculated incorrectly, and there is an increased risk of side effects if the drug is administered too rapidly.

===Respiratory tract===

====Mouth inhalation====


Inhaled medications can be absorbed quickly and act both locally and systemically. Proper technique with inhaler devices is necessary to achieve the correct dose. Some medications can have an unpleasant taste or irritate the mouth.

In general, only 20–50% of the pulmonary-delivered dose rendered in powdery particles will be deposited in the lung upon mouth inhalation. The remainder of 50-70% undeposited aerosolized particles are cleared out of lung as soon as exhalation.

An inhaled powdery particle that is &gt;8 μm is structurally predisposed to depositing in the central and conducting airways (conducting zone) by inertial impaction.

An inhaled powdery particle that is between 3 and 8 μm in diameter tend to largely deposit in the transitional zones of the lung by sedimentation.

An inhaled powdery particle that is &lt;3 μm in diameter is structurally predisposed to depositing primarily in the respiratory regions of the peripheral lung via diffusion.

Particles that deposit in the upper and central airways are generally absorbed systemically to great extent because they are only partially removed by mucociliary clearance, which results in orally mediated absorption when the transported mucus is swallowed, and first pass metabolism or incomplete absorption through loss at the fecal route can sometimes reduce the bioavailability. This should in no way suggest to clinicians or researchers that inhaled particles are not a greater threat than swallowed particles, it merely signifies that a combination of both methods may occur with some particles, no matter the size of or lipo/hydrophilicity of the different particle surfaces.

====Nasal inhalation====
Inhalation by nose of a substance is almost identical to oral inhalation, except that some of the drug is absorbed intranasally instead of in the oral cavity before entering the airways. Both methods can result in varying levels of the substance to be deposited in their respective initial cavities, and the level of mucus in either of these cavities will reflect the amount of substance swallowed. The rate of inhalation will usually determine the amount of the substance which enters the lungs. Faster inhalation results in more rapid absorption because more substance finds the lungs. Substances in a form that resists absorption in the lung will likely resist absorption in the nasal passage, and the oral cavity, and are often even more resistant to absorption after they fail absorption in the former cavities and are swallowed.

==Research==
Neural drug delivery is the next step beyond the basic addition of growth factors to nerve guidance conduits. Drug delivery systems allow the rate of growth factor release to be regulated over time, which is critical for creating an environment more closely representative of in vivo development environments.

==See also==
* ADME
* Catheter
* Dosage form
* Drug injection
* Ear instillation
* Hypodermic needle
* Intravenous marijuana syndrome
* List of medical inhalants
* Nanomedicine
* Absorption (pharmacology)

==References==
==External links==
* The 10th US-Japan Symposium on Drug Delivery Systems
* FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Data Standards Manual: Route of Administration.
* FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Data Standards Manual: Dosage Form.
* A.S.P.E.N. American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="3" end="15" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="20" end="30" title="toxicology" label="toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="34" end="57" title="Route of administration" label="route of administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="80" end="84" title="medication" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="270" end="274" title="oral administration" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="279" end="290" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="391" end="398" title="topical medication" label="topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="408" end="415" title="enteral administration" label="enteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="463" end="485" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="491" end="501" title="#Parenteral" label="parenteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q718608" start="601" end="612" title="dosage form" label="dosage form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392806" start="628" end="641" title="drug delivery" label="drug delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="903" end="919" title="pharmacokinetics" label="pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375179" start="1021" end="1032" title="transdermal" label="transdermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="1221" end="1237" title="pharmacodynamics" label="pharmacodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="1317" end="1339" title="topical medication" label="topical administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="1432" end="1454" title="Topical medication" label="Topical administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="1523" end="1538" title="pharmacodynamic" label="pharmacodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="1721" end="1743" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="1847" end="1857" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="1932" end="1936" title="oral administration" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370895" start="1956" end="1961" title="Human mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q419892" start="1973" end="1979" title="Rectal (medicine)" label="rectal"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="1996" end="2002" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="2151" end="2158" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2212" end="2234" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q784720" start="2386" end="2396" title="sublingual administration" label="sublingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631447" start="2420" end="2429" title="sublabial administration" label="sublabial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963239" start="2433" end="2439" title="Buccal administration" label="buccal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104280" start="2468" end="2475" title="gingiva" label="gingiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2519" end="2541" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="2584" end="2606" title="enteral administration" label="enteral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="2714" end="2721" title="topical" label="topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="2746" end="2751" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q206077" start="2976" end="2983" title="Tablet (pharmacy)" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q519410" start="2985" end="2993" title="Capsule (pharmacy)" label="capsules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="3088" end="3108" title="gastric feeding tube" label="gastric feeding tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495687" start="3112" end="3123" title="gastrostomy" label="gastrostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="3164" end="3179" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="3192" end="3200" title="duodenal" label="duodenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="3218" end="3235" title="enteral administration" label="enteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="3398" end="3404" title="rectal" label="rectal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045105" start="3502" end="3513" title="end-of-life care" label="end of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330121" start="3683" end="3700" title="first pass effect" label="first pass effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="3751" end="3767" title="bio-availability" label="bio-availability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="3824" end="3830" title="mucosa" label="mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q539568" start="3841" end="3853" title="vascularized" label="vascularized"/>
<link wikidata="Q180799" start="3926" end="3937" title="suppository" label="suppository"/>
<link wikidata="Q718608" start="3949" end="3960" title="dosage form" label="dosage form"/>
<link wikidata="Q419892" start="3975" end="3996" title="rectal administration" label="rectal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="4001" end="4013" title="hospice care" label="hospice care"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351336" start="4036" end="4044" title="Macy Catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="4203" end="4209" title="distal" label="distal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939036" start="4319" end="4330" title="Murphy drip" label="Murphy drip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="4438" end="4445" title="Enteral administration" label="enteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q245359" start="4531" end="4540" title="Injection (medicine)" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165892" start="4577" end="4594" title="hypodermic needle" label="hypodermic needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273318" start="4602" end="4609" title="syringe" label="syringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="4637" end="4656" title="indwelling catheter" label="indwelling catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q841215" start="4751" end="4759" title="Epidural" label="Epidural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966104" start="4813" end="4827" title="epidural space" label="epidural space"/>
<link wikidata="Q29986117" start="5150" end="5173" title="intracerebroventricular injection" label="Intracerebroventricular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712728" start="5354" end="5365" title="cancer pain" label="cancer pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455662" start="5483" end="5499" title="local anesthesia" label="local anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5512" end="5520" title=":wikt:systemic" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375179" start="5582" end="5593" title="transdermal" label="transdermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784720" start="5705" end="5730" title="Sublingual administration" label="Sublingual administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422117" start="6252" end="6281" title="Extra-amniotic administration" label="Extra-amniotic administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="6295" end="6306" title="endometrium" label="endometrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445907" start="6311" end="6326" title="fetal membranes" label="fetal membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966562" start="6330" end="6350" title="Nasal administration" label="Nasal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153701" start="6430" end="6442" title="Insufflation (medicine)" label="insufflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430719" start="6451" end="6463" title="decongestant" label="decongestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="6502" end="6519" title="respiratory tract" label="respiratory tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q909194" start="6584" end="6608" title="inhalational anesthetics" label="inhalational anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="6636" end="6642" title="artery" label="artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="6650" end="6661" title="vasodilator" label="vasodilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849606" start="6688" end="6697" title="vasospasm" label="vasospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931577" start="6702" end="6719" title="thrombolytic drug" label="thrombolytic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q275466" start="6738" end="6746" title="embolism" label="embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9644" start="6756" end="6765" title="joint" label="articular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833215" start="6816" end="6831" title="joint injection" label="joint injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="6877" end="6891" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q366155" start="6895" end="6907" title="Intracardiac" label="Intracardiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="6931" end="6941" title="adrenaline" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="6949" end="6978" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004078" start="7013" end="7037" title="Intracavernous injection" label="Intracavernous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="7073" end="7078" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="7082" end="7093" title="Intradermal" label="Intradermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641267" start="7130" end="7142" title="Skin allergy test" label="skin testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186752" start="7148" end="7157" title="allergens" label="allergens"/>
<link wikidata="Q908699" start="7172" end="7184" title="mantoux test" label="mantoux test"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="7189" end="7201" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="7297" end="7310" title="Intramuscular injection" label="Intramuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="7319" end="7325" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="7338" end="7345" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="7518" end="7526" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420648" start="7530" end="7542" title="eye neoplasm" label="eye neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q573068" start="7547" end="7568" title="Intraosseous infusion" label="Intraosseous infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="7579" end="7583" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400536" start="7832" end="7847" title="intraperitoneal injection" label="Intraperitoneal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9629" start="7881" end="7891" title="peritoneum" label="peritoneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756474" start="7898" end="7917" title="peritoneal dialysis" label="peritoneal dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="7921" end="7932" title="Intrathecal" label="Intrathecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="7990" end="8000" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="8005" end="8017" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058566" start="8037" end="8064" title="Intravaginal administration" label="Intravaginal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="8073" end="8079" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="8083" end="8094" title="intravenous therapy" label="Intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="8103" end="8107" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="8127" end="8153" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="total parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q119131464" start="8157" end="8169" title="Intravesical drug delivery" label="Intravesical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180609" start="8210" end="8222" title="Intravitreal" label="Intravitreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="8307" end="8329" title="subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8341" end="8348" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535424" start="8350" end="8362" title="Skin popping" label="Skin popping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="8457" end="8475" title="recreational drugs" label="recreational drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="8577" end="8592" title="hypodermoclysis" label="hypodermoclysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375179" start="8596" end="8607" title="transdermal technology" label="Transdermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145270" start="8696" end="8713" title="transdermal patch" label="transdermal patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="8724" end="8732" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="8750" end="8758" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="8784" end="8793" title="Substance use disorder" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221044" start="8798" end="8812" title="Glyceryl trinitrate (pharmacology)" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="8830" end="8845" title="angina pectoris" label="angina pectoris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8849" end="8876" title="Perivascular administration" label="Perivascular administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153701" start="9094" end="9106" title="Insufflation (medicine)" label="insufflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="9121" end="9128" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q784720" start="9130" end="9140" title="sublingual" label="sublingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631447" start="9165" end="9174" title="Sublabial route of administration" label="sublabial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104280" start="9202" end="9209" title="gingiva" label="gingiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="9253" end="9267" title="nitroglycerine" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="9405" end="9420" title="pharmacodynamic" label="pharmacodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="9632" end="9654" title="topical administration" label="topical administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375179" start="9669" end="9680" title="transdermal" label="transdermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669896" start="9751" end="9759" title="absorption (skin)" label="absorbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663812" start="9784" end="9792" title="systemic administration" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="9905" end="9927" title="enteral administration" label="enteral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="9977" end="9999" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q424027" start="10039" end="10049" title="vancomycin" label="vancomycin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10149" end="10193" title="Clostridioides difficile colitis" label="&amp;quot;Clostridioides difficile&amp;quot; colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861470" start="10774" end="10792" title="emergency medicine" label="emergency medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="10797" end="10820" title="intensive care medicine" label="intensive care medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="11175" end="11182" title="sterile technique" label="sterile"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="11949" end="11957" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="11985" end="11991" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="12001" end="12009" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="12053" end="12075" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="12458" end="12480" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165929" start="12516" end="12531" title="delayed release (pharmacology)" label="delayed release"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165929" start="12535" end="12547" title="Time Release Capsule" label="time-release"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12683" end="12695" title="Formulation#Pharmacy" label="formulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988322" start="12707" end="12721" title="small molecule" label="small molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q898579" start="13027" end="13039" title="ionic liquid" label="ionic liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="13126" end="13145" title="Oral administration" label="Oral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q509615" start="13345" end="13366" title="intestinal epithelium" label="intestinal epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330121" start="13371" end="13392" title="first-pass metabolism" label="first-pass metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776131" start="13418" end="13429" title="oral mucosa" label="oral mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13478" end="13483" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963239" start="13501" end="13522" title="Buccal administration" label="Buccally administered"/>
<link wikidata="Q104280" start="13574" end="13578" title="gums" label="gums"/>
<link wikidata="Q47038" start="13607" end="13612" title="cheek" label="cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669898" start="13704" end="13714" title="Absorption (pharmacology)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q784720" start="13754" end="13779" title="Sublingual administration" label="Sublingual administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776131" start="13872" end="13889" title="sublingual mucosa" label="sublingual mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="14249" end="14260" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14273" end="14284" title="tissue cell" label="tissue cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="14377" end="14399" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="14420" end="14429" title="olfactory" label="olfactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189763" start="14434" end="14450" title="trigeminal nerve" label="trigeminal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="14652" end="14711" title="bioavailability" label="risk of systemic exposure of the administered drug absorbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="14821" end="14833" title="adverse effect" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038676" start="15163" end="15178" title="stratum corneum" label="stratum corneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="15215" end="15224" title="epidermis" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="15230" end="15236" title="dermis" label="dermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="15246" end="15258" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="15625" end="15636" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="15643" end="15656" title="intramuscular" label="intramuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="15663" end="15675" title="subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="15685" end="15696" title="Intradermal injection" label="intradermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="15954" end="15969" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="16098" end="16111" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079408" start="16137" end="16173" title="depot injection" label="long-acting intramuscular injections"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="16183" end="16194" title="IV infusion" label="IV infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="16244" end="16250" title="IV fluid" label="fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="16377" end="16394" title="aseptic technique" label="aseptic technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="16525" end="16560" title="insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus" label="insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="16665" end="16673" title="drug overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394363" start="16965" end="16972" title="inhaler" label="inhaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197000" start="17325" end="17335" title="exhalation" label="exhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="17464" end="17479" title="conducting zone" label="conducting zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834440" start="17603" end="17620" title="transitional zone" label="transitional zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17769" end="17787" title="respiratory region" label="respiratory region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17979" end="17990" title="mucociliary" label="mucociliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="19454" end="19468" title="growth factors" label="growth factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996839" start="19472" end="19495" title="nerve guidance conduits" label="nerve guidance conduits"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="19497" end="19518" title="Drug delivery systems" label="Drug delivery systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272286" start="19713" end="19717" title="ADME" label="ADME"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="19720" end="19728" title="Catheter" label="Catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q718608" start="19731" end="19742" title="Dosage form" label="Dosage form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369403" start="19745" end="19759" title="Drug injection" label="Drug injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325636" start="19762" end="19778" title="Ear instillation" label="Ear instillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165892" start="19781" end="19798" title="Hypodermic needle" label="Hypodermic needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944791" start="19801" end="19831" title="Intravenous marijuana syndrome" label="Intravenous marijuana syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627846" start="19834" end="19859" title="List of medical inhalants" label="List of medical inhalants"/>
<link wikidata="Q261659" start="19862" end="19874" title="Nanomedicine" label="Nanomedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669898" start="19877" end="19902" title="Absorption (pharmacology)" label="Absorption (pharmacology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334819" wikidata="Q1842924" url="?curid=334819" title="Prehistoric art">
<text>In the history of art, prehistoric art is all art produced in preliterate, prehistorical cultures beginning somewhere in very late geological history, and generally continuing until that culture either develops writing or other methods of record-keeping, or makes significant contact with another culture that has, and that makes some record of major historical events. At this point ancient art begins, for the older literate cultures. The end-date for what is covered by the term thus varies greatly between different parts of the world.

The earliest human artifacts showing evidence of workmanship with an artistic purpose are the subject of some debate. It is clear that such workmanship existed 40,000 years ago in the Upper Paleolithic era, although it is quite possible that it began earlier. In September 2018, scientists reported the discovery of the earliest known drawing by &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, which is estimated to be 73,000 years old, much earlier than the 43,000 years old artifacts understood to be the earliest known modern human drawings found previously.

Engraved shells created by &quot;Homo erectus&quot; dating as far back as 500,000 years ago have been found, although experts disagree on whether these engravings can be properly classified as &#x27;art&#x27;. From the Upper Paleolithic through to the Mesolithic, cave paintings and portable art such as figurines and beads predominated, with decorative figured workings also seen on some utilitarian objects. In the Neolithic evidence of early pottery appeared, as did sculpture and the construction of megaliths. Early rock art also first appeared during this period. The advent of metalworking in the Bronze Age brought additional media available for use in making art, an increase in stylistic diversity, and the creation of objects that did not have any obvious function other than art. It also saw the development in some areas of artisans, a class of people specializing in the production of art, as well as early writing systems. By the Iron Age, civilizations with writing had arisen from Ancient Egypt to Ancient China.

Many indigenous peoples from around the world continued to produce artistic works distinctive to their geographic area and culture, until exploration and commerce brought record-keeping methods to them. Some cultures, notably the Maya civilization, independently developed writing during the time they flourished, which was then later lost. These cultures may be classified as prehistoric, especially if their writing systems have not been deciphered.

==Paleolithic era==

===Lower and Middle Paleolithic===

The earliest undisputed art originated with the &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; Aurignacian archaeological culture in the Upper Paleolithic. However, there is some evidence that the preference for the aesthetic emerged in the Middle Paleolithic, from 100,000 to 50,000 years ago. Some archaeologists have interpreted certain Middle Paleolithic artifacts as early examples of artistic expression.
The symmetry of artifacts, evidence of attention to the detail of tool shape, has led some investigators to conceive of Acheulean hand axes and especially laurel points as having been produced with a degree of artistic expression.

Similarly, a zigzag engraving supposedly made with a shark tooth on a freshwater Pseudodon shell DUB1006-fL around 500,000 years ago (i.e. well into the Lower Paleolithic), associated with &quot;Homo erectus&quot;, could be the earliest evidence of artistic activity, but the actual intent behind this geometric ornament is not known.

There are other claims of Middle Paleolithic sculpture, dubbed the &quot;Venus of Tan-Tan&quot; (before 300 kya) and the &quot;Venus of Berekhat Ram&quot; (250 kya). In 2002 in Blombos cave, situated in South Africa, stones were discovered engraved with grid or cross-hatch patterns, dated to some 70,000 years ago. This suggested to some researchers that early &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; were capable of abstraction and production of abstract art or symbolic art. Several archaeologists including Richard Klein are hesitant to accept the Blombos caves as the first example of actual art.

In September 2018 the discovery in South Africa of the earliest known drawing by &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; was announced, which is estimated to be 73,000 years old, much earlier than the 43,000 years old artifacts understood to be the earliest known modern human drawings found previously. The drawing shows a crosshatched pattern made up of nine fine lines. The sudden termination of all of the lines on the fragment edges indicate that the pattern originally extended over a larger surface. It is also estimated that the pattern was most likely more complex and structured in its entirety than shown on the discovered area. Initially, when this drawing was found, there was much debate. To prove that this drawing was created by Homo Sapiens, French team members who specialized in chemical analysis of pigments, reproduced the same lines using a variety of techniques. They concluded that the lines making up the drawing were intentional and were most likely made with ocher. This discovery adds further dimensions to understanding the behavior and cognition of early homo sapiens.

Neanderthals may have made art. Painted designs in the caves of La Pasiega (Cantabria), a hand stencil in Maltravieso (Extremadura), and red-painted speleothems in Ardales (Andalusia) are dated to 64,800 years ago, predating by at least 20,000 years the arrival of modern humans in Europe. In July 2021, scientists reported the discovery of a bone carving, one of the world&#x27;s oldest works of art, made by Neanderthals about 51,000 years ago.

===Upper Paleolithic===

In November 2018, scientists reported the discovery of the oldest known figurative art painting, over 40,000 (perhaps as old as 52,000) years old, of an unknown animal, in the cave of Lubang Jeriji Saléh on the Indonesian island of Borneo, while in 2020 a Megaloceros bone was found in the Harz mountains in Germany, on which specimens of &quot;Homo neanderthalensis&quot; carved ornaments 51,000 years ago.

The oldest undisputed works of figurative art were found in the Schwäbische Alb, Baden-Württemberg, Germany. The earliest of these, the Venus figurine known as the Venus of Hohle Fels and the Lion-man figurine, date to some 40,000 years ago.
Further depictional art from the Upper Palaeolithic period (broadly 40,000 to 10,000 years ago) includes cave painting (e.g., those at Chauvet, Altamira, Pech Merle, Arcy-sur-Cure and Lascaux) and portable art: Venus figurines like the Venus of Willendorf, as well as animal carvings like the Swimming Reindeer, Wolverine pendant of Les Eyzies, and several of the objects known as bâtons de commandement.

Paintings in Pettakere cave on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi are up to 40,000 years old, a similar date to the oldest European cave art, which may suggest an older common origin for this type of art, perhaps in Africa.

Monumental open-air art in Europe from this period includes the rock-art at Côa Valley and Mazouco in Portugal, Domingo García and Siega Verde in Spain, and in France.

A cave at Turobong in South Korea containing human remains has been found to contain carved deer bones and depictions of deer that may be as much as 40,000 years old. Petroglyphs of deer or reindeer found at Sokchang-ri may also date to the Upper Paleolithic. Potsherds in a style reminiscent of early Japanese work have been found at Kosan-ri on Jeju island, which, due to lower sea levels at the time, would have been accessible from Japan.

The oldest petroglyphs are dated to approximately the Mesolithic and late Upper Paleolithic boundary, about 10,000 to 12,000 years ago.
The earliest undisputed African rock art dates back about 10,000 years. The first naturalistic paintings of humans found in Africa date back about 8,000 years apparently originating in the Nile River valley, spread as far west as Mali about 10,000 years ago.
Noted sites containing early art include Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer in southern Algeria, Tadrart Acacus in Libya (A Unesco World Heritage site), and the Tibesti Mountains in northern Chad. Rock carvings at the Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa have been dated to this age. Contentious dates as far back as 29,000 years have been obtained at a site in Tanzania. A site at the Apollo 11 Cave complex in Namibia has been dated to 27,000 years.

Göbekli Tepe in Turkey has circles of massive T-shaped stone pillars dating back to the 10th–8th millennium BCE; the world&#x27;s oldest known megaliths. Many of the pillars are decorated with abstract, enigmatic pictograms and carved animal reliefs.

==Asia==

Asia was the cradle for several significant civilizations, most notably those of China and South Asia. The prehistory of eastern Asia is especially interesting, as the relatively early introduction of writing and historical record-keeping in China has a notable impact on the immediately surrounding cultures and geographic areas. Little of the very rich traditions of the art of Mesopotamia counts as prehistoric, as writing was introduced so early there, but neighbouring cultures such as Urartu, Luristan and Persia had significant and complex artistic traditions.

===Indian sub-continent===
The earliest Indian paintings were the rock paintings of prehistoric times, the petroglyphs as found in places like the Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka, and some of them are dated to . The Indus Valley civilization produced fine small stamp seals and sculptures, and may have been literate, but after its collapse there are relatively few artistic remains until the literate period, probably as perishable materials were used.

===Azerbaijan===

The Gobustan National Park reserve located at the south-east of the Greater Caucasus Mountains in Azerbaijan, 60 km away from Baku date back more than 12 thousand years ago. The reserve has more than 6,000 rock carvings depicting mostly hunting scenes, human and animal figures. There are also longship illustrations similar to Viking ships. Gobustan is also characterized by its natural musical stone called Gavaldash (tambourine stone).

===China===

Prehistoric artwork such as painted pottery in Neolithic China can be traced back to the Yangshao culture and Longshan culture of the Yellow River valley. During China&#x27;s Bronze Age, Chinese of the ancient Shang dynasty and Zhou dynasty produced multitudes of Chinese ritual bronzes, which are elaborate versions of ordinary vessels and other objects used in rituals of ancestor veneration, decorated with &quot;taotie&quot; motifs and by the late Shang Chinese bronze inscriptions. Discoveries in 1987 in Sanxingdui in central China revealed a previously unknown pre-literate Bronze Age culture whose artefacts included spectacular very large bronze figures (example left), and which appeared culturally very different from the contemporary late Shang, which has always formed part of the account of the continuous tradition of Chinese culture.

===Japan===

According to archeological evidence, the Jōmon people in ancient Japan were among the first to develop pottery, dated from the 11th millennium BCE. With growing sophistication, the Jōmon created patterns by impressing the wet clay with braided or unbraided cord and sticks.

===Korea===


The earliest examples of Korean art consist of Stone Age works dating from 3000 BCE. These mainly consist of votive sculptures, although petroglyphs have also been recently rediscovered. Rock arts, elaborate stone tools, and potteries were also prevalent.

This early period was followed by the art styles of various Korean kingdoms and dynasties. In these periods, artists often adopted Chinese style in their artworks. However, Koreans not only adopted but also modified Chinese culture with a native preference for simple elegance, purity of nature and spontaneity. This filtering of Chinese styles later influenced Japanese artistic traditions, due to cultural and geographical circumstances.

The prehistory of Korea ends with the founding of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, which are documented in the Samguk Sagi, a 12th-century CE text written in Classical Chinese (the written language of the literati in traditional Korea), as beginning in the 1st century BCE; some mention of earlier history is also made in Chinese texts, like the 3rd-century CE Sanguo Zhi.

====Jeulmun period====

Clearer evidence of culture emerges in the late Neolithic, known in Korea as the Jeulmun pottery period, with pottery similar to that found in the adjacent regions of China, decorated with Z-shaped patterns. The earliest Neolithic sites with pottery remains, for example Osan-ri, date to 6000–4500 BCE. This pottery is characterized by comb patterning, with the pot frequently having a pointed base. Ornaments from this time include masks made of shell, with notable finds at Tongsam-dong, Osan-ri, and Sinam-ri. Hand-shaped clay figurines have been found at Nongpo-dong.

====Mumun period====
During the Mumun pottery period, roughly between 1500 BCE and 300 BCE, agriculture expanded, and evidence of larger-scale political structures became apparent, as villages grew and some burials became more elaborate. Megalithic tombs and dolmens throughout Korea date to this time. The pottery of the time is in a distinctive undecorated style. Many of these changes in style may have occurred due to immigration of new peoples from the north, although this is a subject of debate. At a number of sites in southern Korea there are rock art panels that are thought to date from this period, mainly for stylistic reasons.

While the exact date of the introduction of bronzework into Korea is also a matter of debate, it is clear that bronze was being worked by about 700 BCE. Finds include stylistically distinctive daggers, mirrors, and belt buckles, with evidence by the 1st century BCE of a widespread, locally distinctive, bronzeworking culture.

====Protohistoric Korea====

The time between 300 BCE and the founding and stabilization of the Three Kingdoms around 300 CE is characterized artistically and archaeologically by increasing trade with China and Japan, something that Chinese histories of the time corroborate. The expansionist Chinese invaded and established commanderies in northern Korea as early as the 1st century BCE; they were driven out by the 4th century CE. The remains of some of these, especially that of Lelang, near modern Pyongyang, have yielded many artifacts in a typical Han style.

Chinese histories also record the beginnings of iron works in Korea in the 1st century BCE. Stoneware and kiln-fired pottery also appears to date from this time, although there is controversy over the dates. Pottery of distinctly Japanese origin is found in Korea, and metalwork of Korean origin is found in northeastern China.

===Steppes Art===
Superb samples of Steppes art – mostly golden jewellery and trappings for horse – are found over a vast expanses of land stretching from Hungary to Mongolia. Dating from the period between the 7th and 3rd centuries BCE, the objects are usually diminutive, as may be expected from nomadic people always on the move. Art of the steppes is primarily an animal art, i.e., combat scenes involving several animals (real or imaginary) or single animal figures (such as golden stags) predominate. The best known of the various peoples involved are the Scythians, at the European end of the steppe, who were especially likely to bury gold items.

Among the most famous finds was made in 1947, when the Soviet archaeologist Sergei Rudenko discovered a royal burial at Pazyryk, Altay Mountains, which featured – among many other important objects – the most ancient extant pile rug, probably made in Persia. Unusually for prehistoric burials, those in the northern parts of the area may preserve organic materials such as wood and textiles that normally would decay. Steppes people both gave and took influences from neighbouring cultures from Europe to China, and later Scythian pieces are heavily influenced by ancient Greek style, and probably often made by Greeks in Scythia.

===Near East===

The &quot;Ain Sakhri Lovers&quot; from modern Israel, is a small Natufian carving in calcite, from about 9,000 BCE. Around the same time, the extraordinary site of Göbekli Tepe in eastern Turkey was begun. During the first phase, belonging to the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), circles of massive but neatly shaped T-shaped stone pillars were erected – the world&#x27;s oldest known megaliths. More than 200 pillars in about 20 circles are currently known through geophysical surveys. Each pillar has a height of up to and weighs up to 10 tons. They are fitted into sockets that were hewn out of the bedrock. In the second phase, belonging to the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB), the erected pillars are smaller and stood in rectangular rooms with floors of polished lime. On the smoothed surfaces of the pillars there are reliefs of animals, abstract patterns, and some human figures.

By convention, prehistory in the Near East is taken to continue until the rise of the Achaemenid Empire in the 6th century BCE, although writing existed in the region from nearly 2,000 years earlier. On that basis the very rich and long tradition of the art of Mesopotamia, as well as Assyrian sculpture, Hittite art and many other traditions such as the Luristan bronzes all fall under prehistoric art, even if covered with texts extolling the ruler, as many Assyrian palace reliefs are.

==Europe==

===Stone Age===

The Art of the Upper Paleolithic includes carvings on antler and bone, especially of animals, as well as the so-called Venus figurines and cave paintings, discussed above. Despite a warmer climate, the Mesolithic period undoubtedly shows a falling-off from the heights of the preceding period. Rock art is found in Scandinavia and northern Russia, and around the Mediterranean in eastern Spain and the earliest of the Rock Drawings in Valcamonica in northern Italy, but not in between these areas. Examples of portable art include painted pebbles from the Azilian culture which succeeded the Magdalenian, and patterns on utilitarian objects, like the paddles from Tybrind Vig, Denmark. The Mesolithic statues of Lepenski Vir at the Iron Gate, Serbia date to the 7th millennium BCE and represent either humans or mixtures of humans and fish. Simple pottery began to develop in various places, even in the absence of farming.

====Mesolithic====
Compared to the preceding Upper Paleolithic and the following Neolithic, there is rather less surviving art from the Mesolithic. The Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin, which probably spreads across from the Upper Paleolithic, is a widespread phenomenon, much less well known than the cave-paintings of the Upper Paleolithic, with which it makes an interesting contrast. The sites are now mostly cliff faces in the open air, and the subjects are now mostly human rather than animal, with large groups of small figures; there are 45 figures at Roca dels Moros. Clothing is shown, and scenes of dancing, fighting, hunting and food-gathering. The figures are much smaller than the animals of Paleolithic art, and depicted much more schematically, though often in energetic poses. A few small engraved pendants with suspension holes and simple engraved designs are known, some from northern Europe in amber, and one from Starr Carr in Britain in shale.

The rock art in the Urals appears to show similar changes after the Paleolithic, and the wooden Shigir Idol is a rare survival of what may well have been a very common material for sculpture. It is a plank of larch carved with geometric motifs, but topped with a human head. Now in fragments, it would apparently have been over 5 metres tall when made.

====Neolithic====

In Central Europe, many Neolithic cultures, like Linearbandkeramic, Lengyel and Vinča, produced female (rarely male) and animal statues that can be called art, and elaborate pottery decoration in, for example, the Želiesovce and painted Lengyel style.

Megalithic (i.e., large stone) monuments are found in the Neolithic Era from Malta to Portugal, through France, and across southern England to most of Wales and Ireland. They are also found in northern Germany and Poland, as well as in Egypt in the Sahara desert (at Nabta Playa and other sites). The best preserved of all temples and the oldest free standing structures are the Megalithic Temples of Malta. They start in the 5th millennium BC, though some authors speculate on Mesolithic roots. One of the best-known prehistoric sites is Stonehenge, part of the Stonehenge World Heritage Site which contains hundreds of monuments and archaeological sites. Monuments have been found throughout most of Western and Northern Europe, notably at Carnac, France.

The large mound tomb at Newgrange, Ireland, dating to around 3200 BC, has its entrance marked with a massive stone carved with a complex design of spirals. The mound at nearby Knowth has large flat rocks with rock engravings on their vertical faces all around its circumference, for which various meanings have been suggested, including depictions of the local valley, and the oldest known image of the Moon. Many of these monuments were megalithic tombs, and archaeologists speculate that most have religious significance. Knowth is reputed to have approximately one third of all megalithic art in Western Europe.

In the central Alps, the Camunni made some 350,000 petroglyphs: see Rock Drawings in Valcamonica.

===Bronze Age===

During the 3rd millennium BCE, the Bronze Age began in Europe, bringing with it a new medium for art. The increased efficiency of bronze tools also meant an increase in productivity, which led to a surplus — the first step in the creation of a class of artisans. Because of the increased wealth of society, luxury goods began to be created, especially decorated weapons.

Examples include ceremonial bronze helmets, ornamental ax-heads and swords, elaborate instruments such as lurer, and other ceremonial objects without a practical purpose, such as the oversize Oxborough Dirk. Special objects were made in gold; many more gold objects have survived from Western and Central Europe than from the Iron Age, many mysterious and strange objects ranging from lunulas, apparently an Irish speciality, the Mold Cape and Golden hats. Pottery from Central Europe can be elaborately shaped and decorated. Rock art, showing scenes from the religious rituals have been found in many areas, for example in Bohuslän, Sweden and the Val Camonica in northern Italy.

In the Mediterranean, the Minoan civilization was highly developed, with palace complexes from which sections of frescos have been excavated. Contemporary Ancient Egyptian art and that of other advanced Near Eastern cultures can no longer be treated as &quot;prehistoric&quot;.

===Iron Age===

The Iron Age saw the development of anthropomorphic sculptures, such as the warrior of Hirschlanden, and the statue from the Glauberg, Germany. Hallstatt artists in the early Iron Age favored geometric, abstract designs perhaps influenced by trade links with the Classical world.

The more elaborate and curvilinear La Tène style developed in Europe in the later Iron Age from a centre in the Rhine valley but it soon spread across the continent. The rich chieftain classes appear to have encouraged ostentation and Classical influences such as bronze drinking vessels attest to a new fashion for wine drinking. Communal eating and drinking were an important part of Celtic society and culture and much of their art was often expressed through plates, knives, cauldrons and cups. Horse tack and weaponry were also decorated. Mythical animals were a common motif along with religious and natural subjects and their depiction is a mix between the naturalistic and the stylized. Megalithic art was still sometimes practiced, examples include the carved limestone pillars of the sanctuary at Entremont in modern-day France. Personal adornment included torc necklaces whilst the introduction of coinage provided a further opportunity for artistic expression. The coins of this period are derivatives of Greek and Roman types, but showing the more exuberant Celtic artistic style.
The famous late 4th century BCE Waldalgesheim chariot burial in the Rhineland produced many fine examples of La Tène art including a bronze flagon and bronze plaques with repoussé human figures. Many pieces had curvy, organic styles thought to be derived from Classical tendril patterns.

In much of western Europe elements of this artistic style can be discerned surviving in the art and architecture of the Roman colonies. In particular in Britain and Ireland there is a tenuous continuity through the Roman period, enabling Celtic motifs to resurface with new vigour in the Christian Insular art from the 6th century onwards.

The sophisticated Etruscan culture developed from the 9th to 2nd centuries, with considerable influence from the Greeks, before finally being absorbed by the Romans. By the end of the period they had developed writing, but early Etruscan art can be called prehistoric.

==Africa==
Ancient Egypt falls outside the scope of this article; it had a close relationship with the Sudan in particular, known in this period as Nubia, where there were advanced cultures from the 4th millennium BCE, such as the &quot;A-Group&quot;, &quot;C-Group&quot;, and the Kingdom of Kush.

===Southern Africa===
In September 2018, scientists from the University of Bergen, the University of Bordeaux and the University of the Witwatersrand together reported the discovery of the earliest known drawing by &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; at Blombos Cave, South Africa which is estimated to be 73,000 years old, much earlier than the 43,000 years old artifacts understood to be the earliest known modern human drawings found previously.

There is a significant body of rock painting in the region around Matobo National Park of Zimbabwe dating from as early as 6000 BCE to 500 CE.

Significant San rock paintings exist in the Waterberg area above the Palala River and around Drakensberg in South Africa, some of which are considered to derive from the period 8000 BCE. These images are very clear and depict a variety of human and wildlife motifs, especially antelope. There appears to be a fairly continuous history of rock painting in this area; some of the art clearly dates into the 19th century. They include depictions of horses with riders, which were not introduced to the area until the 1820s.

Namibia, in addition to the Apollo 11 Cave complex, has a significant array of San rock art near Twyfelfontein. This work is several thousand years old, and appears to end with the arrival of pastoral tribes in the area.

===Horn of Africa===
Laas Geel is a complex of caves and rock shelters in northwestern Somalia. Famous for their rock art, the caves are located in a rural area on the outskirts of Hargeisa. They contain some of the earliest known cave paintings in the Horn of Africa, many of which depict pastoral scenes. Laas Geel&#x27;s rock art is estimated to date back to somewhere between 9,000–8,000 and 3,000 BCE.

In 2008, archaeologists also announced the discovery of cave paintings in Somalia&#x27;s northern Dhambalin region, which the researchers suggest includes one of the earliest known depictions of a hunter on horseback. The rock art is in the Ethiopian-Arabian style, dated to 1000 to 3000 BCE.

Other prehistoric art in the Horn region include stone megaliths and engravings, some of which are 3,500 years old. The town of Dillo in Ethiopia has a hilltop covered with stone stelae. It is one of several such sites in southern Ethiopia dating from historic period (10th–14th centuries).

===Saharan Africa===
The early art of this region has been divided into five periods:

* Bubalus Period, roughly 12-8 kya
* Round Head Period, roughly 10-8 kya
* Pastoral Period, roughly 7.5-4 kya
* Horse Period, roughly 3-2 kya
* Camel Period, 2,000 years ago to the present

Works of the Bubalus period span the Sahara, with the finest work, carvings of naturalistically depicted megafauna, concentrated in the central highlands. The Round Head Period is dominated by paintings of strangely shaped human forms, and few animals, suggesting the artists were foragers. These artists may have been producing rock art 2,000 years before domestication. These works are largely limited to Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer and the Tadrart Acacus. Some works show figures with bows near herds of cattle and a reunion of members near cattle. Round heads are found in Tassili, Jebel Uweinat and Ennedi, which may indicate similar cultures between these populations.
Other animals represented in the Round head art are hippopotamus, elephant, and bovids. Animals like antelope and mouflon are also represented; fauna remains have been found in archaeological sites during excavations. About 90% of Round Head art is animal representation. Toward the end of the period, images of domesticated animals, as well as decorative clothing and headdresses appear. Some domesticated animals are cattle from the &quot;Bovidae&quot; family.

Pastoral Period art was more focused on domestic scenes, including herding and dancing. As well as hunting scenes of mouflon. Unlike in the Round Head art, the bow is relevant to Pastoral art since hunting scenes were depicted during this time. Pastoral figures are seen on the same wall of Round Heads except they are along the borders. The foragers may have been respecting the previous artwork and did not paint over the figures. The quality of artwork declined, as figures became more simplified.

The Horse Period began in the eastern Sahara and spread west. Depictions from this period include carvings and paintings of horses, chariots, and warriors with metal weapons, although there are also frequent depictions of wildlife such as giraffes. Humans are generally depicted in a stylized way. Some of the chariot art bears resemblance to temple carvings from ancient Egypt. Occasionally, art panels are accompanied by Tifinagh script, still in use by the Berber people and the Tuareg today; however, modern Tuareg are generally unable to read these inscriptions. The final Camel period features carvings and paintings in which camels predominate, but also include humans with swords, and later, guns; the art of this time is relatively crude.

===North Africa===
====Laghouat Province, Algeria====


==The Americas==
===North America===
Belonging in the Lithic stage, the oldest known art in the Americas is the Vero Beach bone, possibly a mammoth bone, etched with a profile of walking mammoth that dates back to 11,000 BCE. The oldest known painted object in the Americas is the Cooper Bison Skull from 10,900 to 10,200 BCE.

===Mesoamerica===

The ancient Olmec &quot;Bird Vessel&quot; and bowl, both ceramic and dating to circa 1000 BC as well as other ceramics were produced in kilns capable of exceeding approximately 900 °C. The only other prehistoric culture known to have achieved such high temperatures is that of Ancient Egypt.

Much Olmec art is highly stylized and uses an iconography reflective of the religious meaning of the artworks. Some Olmec art, however, is surprisingly naturalistic, displaying an accuracy of depiction of human anatomy perhaps equaled in the pre-Columbian New World only by the best Maya Classic-era art. Olmec art-forms emphasize monumental statuary and small jade carvings. A common theme is to be found in representations of a divine jaguar. Olmec figurines were also found abundantly through their period.

===South America===
Lithic age art in South America includes Monte Alegre culture rock paintings created at Caverna da Pedra Pintada dating back to 9250–8550 BCE. Guitarrero Cave in Peru has the earliest known textiles in South America, dating to 8000 BCE.

====Peru and the central Andes====
=====Lithic and preceramic periods=====

Peru, including an area of the central Andes stretching from the northern part of the country to northern Chile, has a rich cultural history, with evidence of human habitation dating to roughly 10,000 BCE. Prior to the emergence of ceramics in this region around 1850 BCE, cave paintings and beads have been found. These finds include rock paintings that controversially date as far back as 9500 BCE in the Toquepala Caves. Burial sites in Peru like one at Telarmachay as old as 8600–7200 BCE contained evidence of ritual burial, with red ocher and bead necklaces.

The earliest ceramics that appear in Peru may have been imported from the Validivia region; indigenous pottery production almost certainly arrived in the highlands around 1800 BCE at Kotosh, and on the coast at La Florida c. 1700 BCE. Older calabash gourd vessels with human faces burned into them were found at Huaca Prieta, a site dating to 2500–2000 BCE. Huaca Prieta also contained some early patterned and dyed textiles made from twisted plant fibers.

=====Initial Period and First Horizon=====
The Initial Period in Central Andean cultures lasted roughly from 1800 BCE to 900 BCE. Textiles from this time found at Huaca Prieta are of astonishing complexity, including images such as crabs whose claws transform into snakes, and double-headed birds. Many of these images are similar to optical illusions, where which image dominates depends in part on which the viewer chooses to see. Other portable artwork from this time includes decorated mirrors, bone and shell jewelry, and unfired clay female effigies. Public architecture, including works estimated to require the movement of more than 100,000 tons of stone, are to be found at sites like Kotosh, El Paraíso, Peru, and La Galgada (archaeological site). Kotosh, a site in the Andean highlands, is especially noted as the site of the Temple of the Crossed Hands, in which there are two reliefs of crossed forearms, one pair male, one pair female. Also of note is one of South America&#x27;s largest ceremonial sites, Sechín Alto. This site&#x27;s crowning work is a twelve-story platform, with stones incised with military themes. The architecture and art of the highlands, in particular, laid down the groundwork for the rise of the Chavín culture.

The Chavín culture dominated the central Andes during the First Horizon, beginning around 900 BCE, and is generally divided into two stages. The first, running until about 500 BCE, represented a significant cultural unification of the highland and coastal cultures of the time. Imagery in all manner of art (textiles, ceramics, jewelry, and architectural) included sometimes fantastic imagery such as jaguars, snakes, and human–animal composites, much of it seemingly inspired by the jungles to the east.

The later stage of the Chavín culture is primarily represented by a significant architectural expansion of the Chavín de Huantar site around 500 BCE, accompanied by a set of stylistic changes. This expansion included, among other changes, over forty large stone heads, whose reconstructed positions represent a transformation from human to supernatural animal visages. Much of the other art at the complex from this time contains such supernatural imagery. The portable art associated with this time included sophisticated metalworking, including alloying of metals and soldering. Textiles found at sites like Karwa clearly depict Chavín cultural influences, and the Cupisnique style of pottery disseminated by the Chavín would set standards all across the region for later cultures. (The vessel pictured at the top of this article, while from the later Moche culture, is representative of the stirrup-spouted vessels of the Chavín.)

=====Early Intermediate Period=====
The Early Intermediate Period lasted from about 200 BCE to 600 CE. Late in the First Horizon, the Chavín culture began to decline, and other cultures, predominantly in the coastal areas, began to develop. The earliest of these was the Paracas culture, centered on the Paracas Peninsula of central Peru. Active from 600 BCE to 175 BCE, their early work clearly shows Chavín influence, but a locally distinctive style and technique developed. It was characterized by technical and time-consuming detail work, visually colorful, and a profusion visual elements. Distinctive technical differences include painting on clay after firing, and embroidery on textiles. One notable find is a mantle that was clearly used for training purposes; it shows obvious indications of experts doing some of the weaving, interspersed with less technically proficient trainee work.
The Nazca culture of southern Peru, which is widely known for the enormous figures traced on the ground by the Nazca lines in southern Peru, shared some similarities with the Paracas culture, but techniques (and scale) differed. The Nazca painted their ceramics with slip, and also painted their textiles. Nazca ceramics featured a wide variety of subjects, from the mundane to the fantastic, including utilitarian vessels and effigy figures. The Nazca also excelled at goldsmithing, and made pan pipes from clay in a style not unlike the pipes heard in music of the Andes today.

The famous Nazca lines are accompanied by temple-like constructions (showing no sign of permanent habitation) and open plazas that presumably had ritual purposes related to the lines. The lines themselves are laid out on a sort of natural blackboard, where a thin layer of dark stone covers lighter stone; the lines were thus created by simply removing the top layer where desired, after using surveying techniques to lay out the design.
In the north of Peru, the Moche culture dominated during this time. Also known as &quot;Mochica&quot; or &quot;Early Chimú&quot;, this warlike culture dominated the area until about 500 CE, apparently using conquest to gain access to critical resources along the desert coast: arable land and water. Moche art is again notably distinctive, expressive and dynamic in a way that many other Andean cultures were not. Knowledge of the period has been notably expanded by finds like the pristine royal tombs at Sipán.

The Moche very obviously absorbed some elements of the Chavín culture, but also absorbed ideas from smaller nearby cultures that they assimilated, such as the Recuay culture and the Vicús. They made fully sculpted ceramic animal figures, worked gold, and wove textiles. The art often featured everyday images, but seemingly always with a ritual intent.

In its later years, the Moche came under the influence of the expanding Huari empire. The Cerro Blanco site of Huaca del Sol appears to have been the Moche capital. Largely destroyed by natural events around 600 CE, it was further damaged by Spanish conquistadors searching for gold, and continues with modern looters.

=====Middle Horizon=====

The Middle Horizon lasted from 600 CE to 1000 CE, and was dominated by two cultures: the Huari and the Tiwanaku. The Tiwanaku (also spelled &quot;Tiahuanaco&quot;) culture arose near Lake Titicaca (on the modern border between Peru and Bolivia), while the Wari culture arose in the southern highlands of Peru. Both cultures appear to have been influenced by the Pukara culture, which was active during the Early Intermediate in between the primary centers of the Wari and Tiwanaku. These cultures both had wide-ranging influence, and shared some common features in their portable art, but their monumental arts were somewhat distinctive.

The monumental art of the Tiwanaku demonstrated technical prowess in stonework, including fine detailed reliefs, and monoliths such as the Ponce monolith (photo to the left), and the Sun Gate, both in the main Tiwanaku site. The portable art featured &quot;portrait vessels&quot;, with figured heads on ceramic vessels, as well as natural imagery like jaguars and raptors. A full range of materials, from ceramics to textiles to wood, bone, and shell, were used in creative endeavours. Textiles with a weave of 300 threads per inch (80 threads per cm) have been found at Tiwanaku sites.
The Wari dominated an area from northern to central Peru, with their main center near Ayacucho. Their art is distinguished from the Tiwanaku style by the use of bolder colors and patterns. Notable among Wari finds are tapestry garments, presumed to be made for priests or rulers to wear, often bearing abstract geometric designs of significant complexity, but also bearing images of animals and figures. Wari ceramics, also of high technical quality, are similar in many ways to those of the preceding cultures, where local influences from fallen cultures, like the Moche, are still somewhat evident. Metalwork, while rarely found due to its desirability by looters, shows elegant simplicity and, once more, a high level of workmanship.

=====Late Intermediate Period=====

Following the decline of the Wari and Tiwanaku, the northern and central coastal areas were somewhat dominated by the Chimú culture, which included notable subcultures like the Lambayeque (or Sicán) and Chancay cultures. To the south, coastal cultures dominated in the Ica region, and there was a significant cultural crossroads at Pachacamac, near Lima. These cultures would dominate from about 1000 CE until the 1460s and 1470s, as the Inca Empire began to take shape and eventually absorbed the geographically smaller nearby cultures.

Chimú and Sicán Cultures

The Chimú culture in particular was responsible for an extremely large number of artworks. Its capital city, Chan Chan, appears to have contained building that appeared to function as museums—they seem to have been used for displaying and preserving artwork. Much of the artwork from Chan Chan in particular has been looted, some by the Spanish after the Spanish conquest. The art from this time at times displays amazing complexity, with &quot;multimedia&quot; works that require artists working together in a diversity of media, including materials believed to have come from as far away as Central America. Items of increasing splendor or value were produced, apparently as the society became increasing stratified. At the same, the quality of some of the work declined, as demand for pieces pushed production rates up and values down.

The Sicán culture flourished from 700 CE to about 1400 CE, although it came under political domination of the Chimú around 1100 CE, at which time many of its artists may have moved to Chan Chan. There was significant copperworking by the Sicán, including what seems to be a sort of currency based on copper objects that look like axes. Artwork includes burial masks, beakers and metal vessels that previous cultures traditionally made of clay. The metalwork of the Sicán was particularly sophisticated, with innovations including repoussé and shell inlay. Sheet metal was also often used to cover other works.

Prominent in Sicán iconography is the Sicán deity, which appears on all manner of work, from the portable to the monumental. Other imagery includes geometric and wave patterns, as well as scenes of fishing and shell diving.

Chancay culture
Chancay culture, before it was subsumed by the Chimú, did not feature notable monumental art. Ceramics and textiles were made, but the quality and skill level was uneven. Ceramics are generally black on white, and often suffer from flaws like poor firing, and drips of the slip used for color; however, fine examples exist. Textiles are overall of a higher quality, including the use of painted weaves and tapestry techniques, and were produced in large quantities. The color palette of the Chancay was not overly bold: golds, browns, white, and scarlet predominate.

Pachacamac
Pachacamac is a temple site south of Lima, Peru that was an important pilgrimage center into Spanish colonial times. The site boasts temple constructions from several periods, culminating in Inca constructions that are still in relatively good condition. The temples were painted with murals depicting plants and animals. The main temple contained a carved wooden sculpture akin to a totem pole.

Ica culture
The Ica region, which had been dominated by the Nazca, was fragmented into several smaller political and culture groups. The pottery produced in this region was of the highest quality at the time, and its aesthetics would be adopted by the Inca when they conquered the area.

=====Late Horizon and Inca culture=====


This time period represents the era in which the culture of the central Andes is almost completely dominated by the Inca Empire, which began its expansion in 1438. It lasted until the Spanish conquest in 1533. The Inca absorbed much technical skill from the cultures they conquered, and disseminated it, along with standard shapes and patterns, throughout their area of influence, which extended from Quito, Ecuador to Santiago, Chile. Inca stonework is notably proficient; giant stones are set so tightly without mortar that a knife blade will not fit in the gap. Many of the Inca&#x27;s monumental structures deliberately echoed the natural environment around them; this is particularly evident in some of the structures at Machu Picchu. The Inca laid the city of Cusco in the shape of a puma, with the head of the puma at Sacsayhuaman, a shape that is still discernible in aerial photographs of the city today.

The iconography of Inca art, while clearly drawing from its many predecessors, is still recognizably Inca. Bronzework owes a clear debt to the Chimú, as do a number of cultural traditions: the finest goods were reserved to the rulers, who wore the finest textiles, and ate and drank from gold and silver vessels. As a result, Inca metalwork was relatively rare, and an obvious source of plunder for the conquering Spanish.

Textiles were widely prized within the empire, in part as they were somewhat more portable in the far-flung empire.

Ceramics were made in large quantities, and, as with other media, in standardized shapes and patterns. One common shape is the &quot;urpu&quot;, a distinctive urn shape that came in a wide variety of standard capacities, much as modern storage containers do. In spite of this standardization, many local areas retained some distinctive aspects of their culture in the works they produced; ceramics produced in areas under significant Chimú control prior to the Inca rule still retain characteristics indicative of that style.

Following the Spanish conquest, the art of the central Andes was significantly affected by the conflict and diseases brought by the Spanish. Early colonial period art, began to show influences of both Christianity and Inca religious and artistic ideas, and eventually also began to encompass new techniques brought by the conquerors, including oil painting on canvas.

====Early ceramics in northern South America====

The earliest evidence of decorated pottery in South America is to be found in two places. A variety of sites in the Santarém region of Brazil contain ceramic sherds dating to a period between 5000 and 3000 BCE. Sites in Colombia, at Monsú and San Jacinto contained pottery finds in different styles, and date as far back as 3500 BCE. This is an area of active research and subject to change. The ceramics were decorated with curvilinear incisions. Another ancient site at Puerto Hormiga in the Bolívar Department of Colombia dating to 3100 BCE contained pottery fragments that included figured animals in a style related to later Barrancoid cultural finds in Colombia and Venezuela. Valdivia, Ecuador also has a site dated to roughly 3100 BCE containing decorated fragments, as well as figurines, many represent nude females. The Valdivian style stretched as far south as northern Peru, and may, according to Lavallée, yet yield older artifacts.
By 2000 BCE, pottery was evident in eastern Venezuela. The La Gruta style, often painted in red or white, included incised animal figures in the ceramic, as well as ceramic vessels shaped as animal effigies. The Rancho Peludo style of western Venezuela featured relatively simple textile-type decorations and incisions. Finds in the central Andes dating to 1800 BCE and later appear to be derived from the Valdivian tradition of Ecuador.
====Early art in eastern South America====

Relatively little is known about the early settlement of much of South America east of the Andes. This is due to the lack of stone (generally required for leaving durable artifacts), and a jungle environment that rapidly recycles organic materials. Beyond the Andean regions, where the inhabitants were more clearly related to the early cultures of Peru, early finds are generally limited to coastal areas and those areas where there are stone outcrops. While there is evidence of human habitation in northern Brazil as early as 8000 BCE, and rock art of unknown (or at best uncertain) age, ceramics appear to be the earliest artistic artifacts. The Mina civilization of Brazil (3000–1600 BCE) had simple round vessels with a red wash, that were stylistic predecessors to later Bahia and Guyanese cultures.
====Southern South America====
The southern reaches of South America show evidence of human habitation as far back as 10,000 BCE. A site at Arroio do Fosseis on the pampa in southern Brazil has shown reliable evidence to that time, and the Tierra del Fuego at the southern tip of the continent has been occupied since 7000 BCE. Artistic finds are scarce; in some parts of Patagonia ceramics were never made, only being introduced by contact with Europeans.
==Oceania==

===Australia===
From earliest times Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders have been creating distinctive patterns of art. Much of the art is transitory, drawn in sand or on the human body to illustrate a place, a totem, or a cultural story. Early surviving artworks are mostly rock paintings. Some are called X-ray paintings because they show the bones and organs of the animals they depict. Some Aboriginal art appears as abstract to modern viewers; Aboriginal art employs geometrical figures, dots and lines to present the story being told.
The Gwion Gwion rock art are one of many styles of rock art found in Western Australia. They are predominantly human figures drawn in fine detail with accurate anatomical proportioning. They are usually dated to be at least 17,000 years old, and there have been suggestions they are as much as 70,000 years old. The Sydney rock engravings are also a prominent rock art site in the country.

===Polynesia===
The natives of Polynesia have a distinct artistic heritage. While many of their artifacts were made with organic materials and thus lost to history, some of their most striking achievements survive in clay and stone. Among these are numerous pottery fragments from western Oceania, from the late 2nd millennium BCE. Also, the natives of Polynesia left scattered around their islands Petroglyphs, stone platforms or Marae, and sculptures of ancestor figures, the most famous of which are the Moai of Easter Island.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
*
*
*
* 
*
==External links==
* RockArtScandinavia Tanums Hällristningsmuseum Underslös. Rock art research centre.
* EuroPreArt database of European Prehistoric Art
* Human Timeline (Interactive) – Smithsonian, National Museum of Natural History (August 2016).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="7" end="21" title="history of art" label="history of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="23" end="38" title="Prehistoric art" label="prehistoric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="75" end="88" title="Prehistory" label="prehistorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277510" start="384" end="395" title="ancient art" label="ancient art"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="725" end="742" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="893" end="905" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="1115" end="1127" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="1334" end="1344" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="1346" end="1359" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746936" start="1365" end="1377" title="portable art" label="portable art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="1386" end="1394" title="figurine" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="1400" end="1404" title="bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1499" end="1508" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1527" end="1534" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="1552" end="1561" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="1586" end="1594" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="1603" end="1611" title="rock art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="1666" end="1678" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1686" end="1696" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340267" start="1997" end="2018" title="history of writing" label="early writing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2027" end="2035" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2080" end="2093" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2097" end="2110" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="Ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="2343" end="2360" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2677" end="2689" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q221901" start="2696" end="2707" title="Aurignacian" label="Aurignacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465299" start="2708" end="2730" title="archaeological culture" label="archaeological culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="2817" end="2826" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="2842" end="2860" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="3132" end="3141" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="3142" end="3150" title="hand axe" label="hand axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q198438" start="3257" end="3263" title="zigzag" label="zigzag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="3297" end="3302" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q106679034" start="3325" end="3351" title="Pseudodon shell DUB1006-fL" label="Pseudodon shell DUB1006-fL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="3397" end="3414" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="3439" end="3451" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q856764" start="3653" end="3669" title="Venus of Tan-Tan" label="Venus of Tan-Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q793335" start="3707" end="3728" title="Venus of Berekhat Ram" label="Venus of Berekhat Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="3757" end="3769" title="Blombos cave" label="Blombos cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3783" end="3795" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3936" end="3966" title="Human#Paleolithic" label="early &amp;quot;Homo sapiens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164276" start="4076" end="4089" title="Richard Klein (paleoanthropologist)" label="Richard Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="4255" end="4267" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="5253" end="5265" title="Neanderthals" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5266" end="5283" title="Neanderthal behavior#Claims of art and adornment" label="may have made art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776436" start="5317" end="5327" title="La Pasiega" label="La Pasiega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946" start="5329" end="5338" title="Cantabria" label="Cantabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813753" start="5359" end="5370" title="Cave of Maltravieso" label="Maltravieso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="5372" end="5383" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="5402" end="5413" title="speleothems" label="speleothems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623994" start="5417" end="5424" title="Ardales" label="Ardales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="5426" end="5435" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263024" start="5596" end="5608" title="bone carving" label="bone carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q755548" start="5634" end="5653" title="Art of the Upper Paleolithic" label="oldest works of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622217" start="5798" end="5821" title="Figurative art" label="figurative art painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q58441632" start="5910" end="5929" title="Lubang Jeriji Saléh" label="Lubang Jeriji Saléh"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="5937" end="5946" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="5958" end="5964" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="6016" end="6020" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="6071" end="6092" title="Neanderthal" label="Homo neanderthalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159589" start="6199" end="6214" title="Schwäbische Alb" label="Schwäbische Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="6216" end="6233" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="6271" end="6285" title="Venus figurine" label="Venus figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312522" start="6299" end="6318" title="Venus of Hohle Fels" label="Venus of Hohle Fels"/>
<link wikidata="Q702658" start="6327" end="6344" title="Lion-man" label="Lion-man figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="6482" end="6495" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q374096" start="6512" end="6519" title="Chauvet Cave" label="Chauvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133575" start="6521" end="6529" title="Altamira (cave)" label="Altamira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758359" start="6531" end="6541" title="Pech Merle" label="Pech Merle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117249" start="6543" end="6556" title="Caves of Arcy-sur-Cure" label="Arcy-sur-Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q172125" start="6561" end="6568" title="Lascaux" label="Lascaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746936" start="6574" end="6586" title="portable art" label="portable art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131397" start="6613" end="6632" title="Venus of Willendorf" label="Venus of Willendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q116580" start="6670" end="6687" title="Swimming Reindeer" label="Swimming Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030554" start="6689" end="6720" title="Wolverine pendant of Les Eyzies" label="Wolverine pendant of Les Eyzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q694094" start="6758" end="6780" title="bâtons de commandement" label="bâtons de commandement"/>
<link wikidata="Q66023283" start="6796" end="6810" title="Pettakere cave" label="Pettakere cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="6839" end="6847" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q552106" start="7083" end="7093" title="Côa Valley Paleolithic Art" label="Côa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7098" end="7105" title="Mazouco" label="Mazouco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919296" start="7119" end="7133" title="Domingo García, Segovia" label="Domingo García"/>
<link wikidata="Q552106" start="7138" end="7149" title="Siega Verde" label="Siega Verde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7186" end="7194" title="Turobong cave" label="Turobong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109175" start="7436" end="7445" title="Sherd" label="Potsherds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29151" start="7523" end="7534" title="Jeju island" label="Jeju island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="7631" end="7641" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="7694" end="7711" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7780" end="7796" title="Rock art#Africa" label="African rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="7945" end="7955" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="8056" end="8076" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q308807" start="8098" end="8112" title="Tadrart Acacus" label="Tadrart Acacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309104" start="8162" end="8179" title="Tibesti Mountains" label="Tibesti Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543042" start="8219" end="8234" title="Wonderwerk Cave" label="Wonderwerk Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q14755864" start="8382" end="8396" title="Apollo 11 Cave" label="Apollo 11 Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q214944" start="8449" end="8461" title="Göbekli Tepe" label="Göbekli Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072751" start="9084" end="9102" title="art of Mesopotamia" label="art of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="9202" end="9208" title="Urartu" label="Urartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131727" start="9210" end="9218" title="Luristan" label="Luristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9223" end="9229" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="9364" end="9375" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="9387" end="9397" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q331603" start="9427" end="9453" title="Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka" label="Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="9491" end="9516" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342540" start="9537" end="9547" title="stamp seal" label="stamp seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q318181" start="9752" end="9774" title="Gobustan National Park" label="Gobustan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q486986" start="9816" end="9842" title="Greater Caucasus" label="Greater Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="9874" end="9878" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q211969" start="10076" end="10088" title="Viking ships" label="Viking ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284498" start="10248" end="10263" title="Neolithic China" label="Neolithic China"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="10290" end="10306" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057935" start="10311" end="10327" title="Longshan culture" label="Longshan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="10376" end="10386" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="10411" end="10424" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="10429" end="10441" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167876" start="10465" end="10487" title="Chinese ritual bronzes" label="Chinese ritual bronzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752556" start="10575" end="10594" title="ancestor veneration in China" label="ancestor veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q758058" start="10617" end="10623" title="taotie" label="taotie"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="10659" end="10686" title="Chinese bronze inscriptions" label="Chinese bronze inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q929072" start="10711" end="10721" title="Sanxingdui" label="Sanxingdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="11106" end="11111" title="Jōmon" label="Jōmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390366" start="11168" end="11175" title="Jomon pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q115603" start="11192" end="11211" title="11th millennium BCE" label="11th millennium BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="11463" end="11480" title="Votive offering" label="votive sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="11541" end="11549" title="Rock art" label="Rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="11562" end="11573" title="stone tools" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="11579" end="11588" title="pottery" label="potteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="12106" end="12129" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q485552" start="12159" end="12170" title="Samguk Sagi" label="Samguk Sagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="12206" end="12223" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q247318" start="12409" end="12419" title="Sanguo Zhi" label="Sanguo Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497916" start="12527" end="12549" title="Jeulmun pottery period" label="Jeulmun pottery period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12717" end="12724" title="Osan-ri" label="Osan-ri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296014" start="12922" end="12934" title="Dongsam-dong Shell Midden" label="Tongsam-dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q721164" start="13051" end="13071" title="Mumun pottery period" label="Mumun pottery period"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="13278" end="13284" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q517267" start="14314" end="14326" title="Commandery (China)" label="commanderies"/>
<link wikidata="Q701376" start="14471" end="14477" title="Lelang Commandery" label="Lelang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="14491" end="14500" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="14661" end="14665" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092377" start="14920" end="14931" title="Steppes art" label="Steppes art"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="15039" end="15046" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="15050" end="15058" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q576717" start="15252" end="15262" title="animal style" label="animal art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="15446" end="15455" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q646383" start="15616" end="15630" title="Sergei Rudenko" label="Sergei Rudenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273537" start="15660" end="15667" title="Pazyryk burials" label="Pazyryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="15669" end="15684" title="Altay Mountains" label="Altay Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q29886501" start="15764" end="15772" title="pile rug" label="pile rug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214531" start="16199" end="16216" title="Ain Sakhri Lovers" label="Ain Sakhri Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="16235" end="16241" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="16254" end="16262" title="Natufian" label="Natufian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="16274" end="16281" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q214944" start="16353" end="16365" title="Göbekli Tepe" label="Göbekli Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="16377" end="16383" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="16436" end="16459" title="pre-pottery Neolithic A" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="16573" end="16581" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610005" start="16654" end="16673" title="Geophysical survey (archaeology)" label="geophysical surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="16790" end="16797" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q897323" start="16837" end="16860" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="16956" end="16960" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="17012" end="17018" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="17162" end="17179" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072751" start="17330" end="17348" title="art of Mesopotamia" label="art of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035292" start="17361" end="17379" title="Assyrian sculpture" label="Assyrian sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q10523720" start="17381" end="17392" title="Hittite art" label="Hittite art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680883" start="17431" end="17447" title="Luristan bronzes" label="Luristan bronzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q755548" start="17599" end="17627" title="Art of the Upper Paleolithic" label="Art of the Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="17714" end="17729" title="Venus figurines" label="Venus figurines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="17734" end="17748" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="17797" end="17807" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="17889" end="17897" title="Rock art" label="Rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975533" start="17975" end="17988" title="Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin" label="eastern Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q945514" start="18013" end="18041" title="Rock Drawings in Valcamonica" label="Rock Drawings in Valcamonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q793777" start="18151" end="18158" title="Azilian" label="Azilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q693549" start="18187" end="18198" title="Magdalenian" label="Magdalenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112063823" start="18259" end="18270" title="Tybrind Vig" label="Tybrind Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="18272" end="18279" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q906669" start="18307" end="18319" title="Lepenski Vir" label="Lepenski Vir"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="18327" end="18336" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="18338" end="18344" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32820" start="18357" end="18375" title="7th millennium BCE" label="7th millennium BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975533" start="18672" end="18715" title="Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin" label="Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390174" start="19091" end="19106" title="Roca dels Moros" label="Roca dels Moros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111434" start="19346" end="19353" title="pendant" label="pendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="19445" end="19450" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299200" start="19465" end="19475" title="Starr Carr" label="Starr Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="19490" end="19495" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="19518" end="19523" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523656" start="19594" end="19605" title="Shigir Idol" label="Shigir Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="19707" end="19712" title="larch" label="larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="19874" end="19888" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="19895" end="19904" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="19920" end="19937" title="Linearbandkeramic" label="Linearbandkeramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027240" start="19939" end="19946" title="Lengyel" label="Lengyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q831336" start="19951" end="19956" title="Vinča culture" label="Vinča"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20085" end="20095" title="Želiesovce" label="Želiesovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027240" start="20108" end="20115" title="Lengyel" label="Lengyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="20124" end="20134" title="Megalithic" label="Megalithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="20201" end="20206" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="20373" end="20386" title="Sahara desert" label="Sahara desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535226" start="20391" end="20402" title="Nabta Playa" label="Nabta Playa"/>
<link wikidata="Q753383" start="20503" end="20530" title="Megalithic Temples of Malta" label="Megalithic Temples of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="20663" end="20673" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q587584" start="20687" end="20717" title="Stonehenge World Heritage Site" label="Stonehenge World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q70925" start="20866" end="20872" title="Carnac" label="Carnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q339503" start="20907" end="20916" title="Newgrange" label="Newgrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="21020" end="21037" title="Triple spiral" label="design of spirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482124" start="21059" end="21065" title="Knowth" label="Knowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031802" start="21524" end="21531" title="Camunni" label="Camunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q945514" start="21567" end="21595" title="Rock Drawings in Valcamonica" label="Rock Drawings in Valcamonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="21651" end="21661" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q778999" start="22094" end="22097" title="lur" label="lur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887776" start="22180" end="22194" title="Oxborough Dirk" label="Oxborough Dirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637151" start="22373" end="22379" title="Gold lunula" label="lunula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499805" start="22418" end="22427" title="Mold Cape" label="Mold Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q737406" start="22432" end="22442" title="Golden hat" label="Golden hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="22514" end="22522" title="Rock art" label="Rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="22612" end="22620" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="22622" end="22628" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q734317" start="22637" end="22649" title="Val Camonica" label="Val Camonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22662" end="22667" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="22696" end="22715" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="22783" end="22789" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q318394" start="22825" end="22845" title="Ancient Egyptian art" label="Ancient Egyptian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="22969" end="22977" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q571515" start="23041" end="23064" title="warrior of Hirschlanden" label="warrior of Hirschlanden"/>
<link wikidata="Q564771" start="23090" end="23098" title="Glauberg" label="Glauberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="23109" end="23118" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q914395" start="23281" end="23294" title="La Tène style" label="La Tène style"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="23358" end="23363" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="23632" end="23636" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="23725" end="23733" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="23745" end="23755" title="Horse tack" label="Horse tack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573930" start="23941" end="23955" title="Megalithic art" label="Megalithic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="24113" end="24117" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="24155" end="24159" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541088" start="24372" end="24400" title="Waldalgesheim chariot burial" label="Waldalgesheim chariot burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="24408" end="24417" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="24511" end="24519" title="repoussé" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="24927" end="24938" title="Insular art" label="Insular art"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="24988" end="25004" title="Etruscan culture" label="Etruscan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="25199" end="25211" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="25251" end="25264" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="25343" end="25348" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="25388" end="25393" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277797" start="25477" end="25484" title="A-Group" label="A-Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022291" start="25498" end="25505" title="C-Group" label="C-Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="25521" end="25536" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kingdom of Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="25760" end="25772" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="25782" end="25794" title="Blombos Cave" label="Blombos Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778838" start="26044" end="26064" title="Matobo National Park" label="Matobo National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354778" start="26134" end="26151" title="San rock art" label="San rock painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691293" start="26166" end="26175" title="Waterberg National Park" label="Waterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126645" start="26191" end="26203" title="Palala River" label="Palala River"/>
<link wikidata="Q183295" start="26215" end="26226" title="Drakensberg" label="Drakensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="26371" end="26379" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="26399" end="26407" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14755864" start="26672" end="26686" title="Apollo 11 Cave" label="Apollo 11 Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q754791" start="26741" end="26754" title="Twyfelfontein" label="Twyfelfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799347" start="26887" end="26896" title="Laas Geel" label="Laas Geel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="26913" end="26917" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149405" start="26923" end="26935" title="rock shelter" label="rock shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="26953" end="26960" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168652" start="27047" end="27055" title="Hargeisa" label="Hargeisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="27119" end="27133" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q597145" start="27246" end="27251" title="9th millennium BCE" label="9,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q33652" start="27252" end="27257" title="8th millennium BCE" label="8,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q29945" start="27262" end="27267" title="3rd millennium BCE" label="3,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="27268" end="27271" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207527" start="27372" end="27381" title="Dhambalin" label="Dhambalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="27623" end="27631" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="27705" end="27713" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="27747" end="27753" title="stele" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583093" start="27949" end="27963" title="Bubalus Period" label="Bubalus Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q57404139" start="27984" end="28001" title="Round Head Period" label="Round Head Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008600" start="28022" end="28037" title="Pastoral period" label="Pastoral Period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28059" end="28071" title="Horse Period" label="Horse Period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28091" end="28103" title="Camel Period" label="Camel Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="28544" end="28564" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q308807" start="28573" end="28587" title="Tadrart Acacus" label="Tadrart Acacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="30143" end="30148" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208503" start="30194" end="30202" title="Tifinagh" label="Tifinagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="30231" end="30244" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="30253" end="30259" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q231748" start="30543" end="30560" title="Laghouat Province" label="Laghouat Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="30562" end="30569" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159063" start="30688" end="30698" title="Vero man" label="Vero Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167746" start="30857" end="30875" title="Cooper Bison Skull" label="Cooper Bison Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="30935" end="30940" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="30980" end="30987" title="pottery" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="31033" end="31041" title="Ceramics (art)" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="31059" end="31063" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="31123" end="31134" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="31200" end="31213" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="31577" end="31581" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="31653" end="31659" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864715" start="31661" end="31675" title="Olmec figurine" label="Olmec figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055053" start="31835" end="31859" title="Caverna da Pedra Pintada" label="Caverna da Pedra Pintada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554172" start="31890" end="31905" title="Guitarrero Cave" label="Guitarrero Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="32061" end="32065" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="32100" end="32105" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="32167" end="32172" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q568661" start="32468" end="32483" title="Toquepala Caves" label="Toquepala Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669852" start="32810" end="32816" title="Kotosh" label="Kotosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632701" start="32939" end="32951" title="Huaca Prieta" label="Huaca Prieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="33419" end="33435" title="optical illusion" label="optical illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717894" start="33787" end="33803" title="El Paraíso, Peru" label="El Paraíso, Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963500" start="33809" end="33841" title="La Galgada (archaeological site)" label="La Galgada (archaeological site)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123106" start="34105" end="34116" title="Sechín Alto" label="Sechín Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341477" start="34322" end="34336" title="Chavín culture" label="Chavín culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q732554" start="34956" end="34973" title="Chavín de Huantar" label="Chavín de Huantar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35455" end="35460" title="Karwa" label="Karwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212414" start="35512" end="35522" title="Cupisnique" label="Cupisnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q208188" start="35699" end="35704" title="Moche (culture)" label="Moche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127723" start="36051" end="36066" title="Paracas culture" label="Paracas culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735703" start="36084" end="36101" title="Paracas Peninsula" label="Paracas Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q210570" start="36681" end="36694" title="Nazca culture" label="Nazca culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620036" start="36788" end="36799" title="Nazca lines" label="Nazca lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971493" start="36944" end="36948" title="slip (ceramics)" label="slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="37170" end="37179" title="pan pipes" label="pan pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208188" start="37722" end="37727" title="Moche (culture)" label="Moche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716571" start="38202" end="38207" title="Sipán" label="Sipán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658710" start="38369" end="38383" title="Recuay culture" label="Recuay culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q605340" start="38636" end="38641" title="Huari culture" label="Huari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632711" start="38675" end="38688" title="Huaca del Sol" label="Huaca del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q605340" start="38999" end="39004" title="Huari culture" label="Huari"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="39013" end="39021" title="Tiwanaku" label="Tiwanaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q35342" start="39093" end="39106" title="Lake Titicaca" label="Lake Titicaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="39146" end="39153" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357480" start="39272" end="39286" title="Pukara culture" label="Pukara culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q904443" start="40064" end="40080" title="thread count" label="threads per inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q205112" start="40222" end="40230" title="Ayacucho, Peru" label="Ayacucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q581741" start="41028" end="41041" title="Chimú culture" label="Chimú culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q175801" start="41087" end="41108" title="Sican Culture" label="Lambayeque (or Sicán)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061632" start="41113" end="41120" title="Chancay culture" label="Chancay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208186" start="41179" end="41189" title="Ica region" label="Ica region"/>
<link wikidata="Q430563" start="41242" end="41252" title="Pachacamac" label="Pachacamac"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="41348" end="41359" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q581741" start="41479" end="41492" title="Chimú culture" label="Chimú culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q277540" start="41584" end="41593" title="Chan Chan" label="Chan Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="41830" end="41846" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="Spanish conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="42845" end="42853" title="repoussé" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061632" start="43167" end="43182" title="Chancay culture" label="Chancay culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q430563" start="43746" end="43756" title="Pachacamac" label="Pachacamac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="43783" end="43793" title="Lima, Peru" label="Lima, Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="44130" end="44140" title="totem pole" label="totem pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q208186" start="44159" end="44169" title="Ica region" label="Ica region"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="44589" end="44600" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="44657" end="44673" title="Spanish conquest of Peru" label="Spanish conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="44874" end="44888" title="Quito, Ecuador" label="Quito, Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="44892" end="44907" title="Santiago, Chile" label="Santiago, Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q676203" start="45199" end="45211" title="Machu Picchu" label="Machu Picchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="45239" end="45244" title="Cusco" label="Cusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="45263" end="45267" title="puma (animal)" label="puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q828336" start="45298" end="45310" title="Sacsayhuaman" label="Sacsayhuaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="47010" end="47016" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="47095" end="47103" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47108" end="47113" title="Monsú, Colombia" label="Monsú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441919" start="47118" end="47129" title="San Jacinto, Colombia" label="San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q762517" start="47339" end="47361" title="Puerto Hormiga archaeological site" label="site at Puerto Hormiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q230597" start="47369" end="47387" title="Bolívar Department" label="Bolívar Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="47391" end="47399" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="47547" end="47556" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47558" end="47575" title="Valdivia, Ecuador" label="Valdivia, Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="48492" end="48498" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49250" end="49267" title="Arroio do Fosseis" label="Arroio do Fosseis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="49350" end="49366" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="49616" end="49653" title="Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander" label="Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="49890" end="49895" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="50004" end="50012" title="abstract art" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q897081" start="50128" end="50148" title="Gwion Gwion rock art" label="Gwion Gwion rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q941694" start="50440" end="50462" title="Sydney rock engravings" label="Sydney rock engravings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="50546" end="50555" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="50804" end="50811" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="50914" end="50924" title="Petroglyph" label="Petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="50946" end="50951" title="Marae" label="Marae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50971" end="50986" title="ancestor figure" label="ancestor figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="51022" end="51026" title="Moai" label="Moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="51030" end="51043" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="51304" end="51315" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="51317" end="51351" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334820" wikidata="Q2035485" url="?curid=334820" title="Subcutaneous administration">
<text>Subcutaneous administration is the insertion of medications beneath the skin either by injection or infusion.

A subcutaneous injection is administered as a bolus into the subcutis, the layer of skin directly below the dermis and epidermis, collectively referred to as the cutis. The instruments are usually a hypodermic needle and a syringe. Subcutaneous injections are highly effective in administering medications such as insulin, morphine, diacetylmorphine and goserelin. Subcutaneous administration may be abbreviated as SC, SQ, subcu, sub-Q, SubQ, or subcut. Subcut is the preferred abbreviation to reduce the risk of misunderstanding and potential errors.

Subcutaneous tissue has few blood vessels and so drugs injected into it are intended for slow, sustained rates of absorption, often with some amount of depot effect. Compared with other routes of administration, it is slower than intramuscular injections but still faster than intradermal injections. Subcutaneous infusion (as opposed to subcutaneous injection) is similar but involves a continuous drip from a bag and line, as opposed to injection with a syringe.

==Medical uses==

A subcutaneous injection is administered into the fatty tissue of the subcutaneous tissue, located below the dermis and epidermis. They are commonly used to administer medications, especially those which cannot be administered by mouth as they would not be absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. A subcutaneous injection is absorbed slower than a substance injected intravenously or into a muscle, but faster than a medication administered by mouth.

===Medications===
Medications commonly administered via subcutaneous injection or infusion include insulin, live vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, and heparin. These medications cannot be administered orally as the molecules are too large to be absorbed in the intestines. Subcutaneous injections can also be used when the increased bioavailability and more rapid effects over oral administration are preferred. They are also the easiest form of parenteral administration of medication to perform by lay people, and are associated with less adverse effects such as pain or infection than other forms of injection.

====Insulin====
Perhaps the most common medication administered subcutaneously is insulin. While attempts have been made since the 1920s to administer insulin orally, the large size of the molecule has made it difficult to create a formulation with absorption and predictability that comes close to subcutaneous injections of insulin. People with type 1 diabetes almost all require insulin as part of their treatment regimens, and a smaller proportion of people with type 2 diabetes do as well — with tens of millions of prescriptions per year in the United States alone.

Insulin historically was injected from a vial using a syringe and needle, but may also be administered subcutaneously using devices such as injector pens or insulin pumps. An insulin pump consists of a catheter which is inserted into the subcutaneous tissue, and then secured in place to allow insulin to be administered multiple times through the same injection site.

===Recreational drug use===
Subcutaneous injection may also be used by people to (self-) administer recreational drugs. This can be referred to as skin popping. In some cases, the administration of illicit drugs in this way is associated with unsafe practices leading to infections and other adverse effects. In rare cases, this results in serious side effects such as AA amyloidosis. Recreational drugs reported to be administered subcutaneously have included cocaine, mephedrone, and amphetamine derivatives such as PMMA.

==Contraindications==
Contraindications to subcutaneous injections primarily depend on the specific medication being administered. Doses which would require more than 2 mL to be injected at once are not administered subcutaneously. Medications which may cause necrosis or otherwise be damaging or irritating to tissues should also not be administered subcutaneously. An injection should not be given at a specific site if there is inflammation or skin damage in the area.

==Risks and complications==
With normal doses of medicine (less than 2 mL in volume), complications or adverse effects are very rare. The most common adverse reactions after subcutaneous injections are administered are termed &quot;injection site reactions&quot;. This term encompasses any combination of redness, swelling, itching, bruising, or other irritation that does not spread beyond the immediate vicinity of the injection. Injection site reactions may be minimized if repeated injections are necessary by moving the injection site at least one inch from previous injections, or using a different injection location altogether. There may also be specific complications associated with the specific medication being administered.

===Medication-specific===
Due to the frequency of injections required for the administration of insulin products via subcutaneous injection, insulin is associated with the development of lipohypertrophy and lipoatrophy. This can lead to slower or incomplete absorption from the injection site. Rotating the injection site is the primary method of preventing changes in tissue structure from insulin administration. Heparin-based anticoagulants injected subcutaneously may cause hematoma and bruising around the injection site due to their anticoagulant effect. This includes heparin and low molecular weight heparin products such as enoxaparin. There is some low certainty evidence that administering the injection more slowly may decrease the pain from heparin injections, but not the risk of or extent of bruising. Subcutaneous heparin-based anticoagulation may also lead to necrosis of the surrounding skin or lesions, most commonly when injected in the abdomen.

Many medications have the potential to cause local lesions or swelling due to the irritating effect the medications have on the skin and subcutaneous tissues. This includes medications such as apomorphine and hyaluronic acid injected as a filler, which may cause the area to appear bruised. Hyaluronic acid &quot;bruising&quot; may be treated using injections of hyaluronidase enzyme around the location.

Other common medication-specific side effects include pain, burning or stinging, warmth, rash, flushing, or multiple of these reactions at the injection site, collectively termed &quot;injection site reactions&quot;. This is seen with the subcutaneous injection of triptans for migraine headache, medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception, as well as many monoclonal antibodies. In most cases, injection site reactions are self-limiting and resolve on their own after a short time without treatment, and do not require the medication to be discontinued.

The administration of vaccines subcutaneously is also associated with injection site reactions. This includes the BCG vaccine which is associated with a specific scar appearance which can be used as evidence of prior vaccination. Other subcutaneous vaccines, many of which are live vaccines including the MMR vaccine and the varicella vaccine, which may cause fever and rash, as well as a feeling of general malaise for a day or two following the vaccination.

==Technique==

Subcutaneous injections are performed by cleaning the area to be injected followed by an injection, usually at a 45-degree angle to the skin when using a syringe and needle, or at a 90-degree angle (perpendicular) if using an injector pen. The appropriate injection angle is based on the length of needle used, and the depth of the subcutaneous fat in the skin of the specific person. A 90-degree angle is always used for medications such as heparin. If administered at an angle, the skin and underlying tissue may be pinched upwards prior to injection. The injection is administered slowly, lasting about 10 seconds per milliliter of fluid injected, and the needle may be left in place for 10 seconds following injection to ensure the medicine is fully injected.

===Equipment===
The gauge of the needle used can range from 25 gauge to 27 gauge, while the length can vary between -inch to -inch for injections using a syringe and needle. For subcutaneous injections delivered using devices such as injector pens, the needle used may be as thin as 34 gauge (commonly 30–32 gauge), and as short as 3.5 mm (commonly 3.5 mm to 5 mm). Subcutaneous injections can also be delivered via a pump system which uses a cannula inserted under the skin. The specific needle size/length, as well as appropriateness of a device such as a pen or pump, is based on the characteristics of a person&#x27;s skin layers.

===Locations===

Commonly used injection sites include:
* The outer area of the upper arm.
* The abdomen, avoiding a 2-inch circle around the navel.
* The front of the thigh, between 4 inches from the top of the thigh and 4 inches above the knee.
* The upper back.
* The upper area of the buttock, just behind the hip bone.

The choice of specific injection site is based on the medication being administered, with heparin almost always being administered in the abdomen, as well as preference. Injections administered frequently or repeatedly should be administered in a different location each time, either within the same general site or a different site, but at least one inch away from recent injections.

===Self-administration===
As opposed to intramuscular or intravenous injections, subcutaneous injections can be easily performed by people with minor skill and training required. The injection sites for self-injection of medication are the same as for injection by a healthcare professional, and the skill can be taught to patients using pictures, videos, or models of the subcutaneous tissue for practice. People who are to self-inject medicine subcutaneously should be trained how to evaluate and rotate the injection site if complications or contraindications arise. Self-administration by subcutaneous injection generally does not require disinfection of the skin outside of a hospital setting as the risk of infection is extremely low, but instead it is recommended to ensure that the site and person&#x27;s hands are simply clean prior to administration.

===Infusion===
Subcutaneous infusion, also known as interstitial infusion or hypodermoclysis, is a form of subcutaneous (under the skin) administration of fluids to the body, often saline or glucose solutions. It is the infusion counterpart of subcutaneous injection with a syringe.

Subcutaneous infusion can be used where a slow rate of fluid uptake is required compared to intravenous infusion. Typically, it is limited to 1 mL per minute, although it is possible to increase this by using two sites simultaneously. The chief advantages of subcutaneous infusion over intravenous infusion is that it is cheap and can be administered by non-medical personnel with minimal supervision. It is therefore particularly suitable for home care. The enzyme hyaluronidase can be added to the fluid to improve absorption during the infusion.

Subcutaneous infusion can be speeded up by applying it to multiple sites simultaneously. The technique was pioneered by Evan O&#x27;Neill Kane in 1900. Kane was looking for a technique that was as fast as intravenous infusion but not so risky to use on trauma patients in unhygienic conditions in the field.

== See also ==

* Intramuscular injection
* Intravenous injection
* Intradermal injection

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="0" end="27" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="Subcutaneous administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="113" end="135" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="subcutaneous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q607561" start="157" end="162" title="bolus (medicine)" label="bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="172" end="180" title="subcutis" label="subcutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="219" end="225" title="dermis" label="dermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="230" end="239" title="Epidermis (skin)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196857" start="273" end="278" title="Cutis (anatomy)" label="cutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165892" start="310" end="327" title="hypodermic needle" label="hypodermic needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273318" start="334" end="341" title="syringe" label="syringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="425" end="432" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="434" end="442" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="444" end="460" title="heroin" label="diacetylmorphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992653" start="465" end="474" title="goserelin" label="goserelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510171" start="511" end="522" title="List of medical abbreviations" label="abbreviated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="526" end="528" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="530" end="532" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="SQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="534" end="539" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="subcu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="541" end="546" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="sub-Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="548" end="552" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="SubQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="557" end="563" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="subcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="565" end="571" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="Subcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079408" start="816" end="821" title="depot injection" label="depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="850" end="874" title="route of administration" label="routes of administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="894" end="917" title="intramuscular injection" label="intramuscular injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="941" end="962" title="intradermal injection" label="intradermal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="965" end="986" title="Subcutaneous administration" label="Subcutaneous infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="1218" end="1237" title="subcutaneous tissue" label="subcutaneous tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="1257" end="1263" title="dermis" label="dermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="1268" end="1277" title="Epidermis (skin)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="1423" end="1445" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="1517" end="1530" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="1534" end="1547" title="intramuscular injection" label="into a muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="1701" end="1708" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810913" start="1710" end="1723" title="Attenuated vaccine" label="live vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422248" start="1725" end="1746" title="monoclonal antibodies" label="monoclonal antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="1752" end="1759" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="2047" end="2072" title="parenteral administration" label="parenteral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="2563" end="2578" title="type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="2683" end="2698" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936640" start="2929" end="2941" title="injector pen" label="injector pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q941674" start="2946" end="2958" title="insulin pump" label="insulin pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="3259" end="3277" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535424" start="3306" end="3318" title="skin popping" label="skin popping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844591" start="3528" end="3542" title="AA amyloidosis" label="AA amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="3620" end="3627" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262613" start="3629" end="3639" title="mephedrone" label="mephedrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="3645" end="3656" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948506" start="3677" end="3681" title="para-Methoxy-N-methylamphetamine" label="PMMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034307" start="4389" end="4412" title="injection site reaction" label="injection site reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827374" start="5082" end="5097" title="lipohypertrophy" label="lipohypertrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500973" start="5102" end="5113" title="lipoatrophy" label="lipoatrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="5373" end="5381" title="hematoma" label="hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="5470" end="5477" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750727" start="5482" end="5510" title="low molecular weight heparin" label="low molecular weight heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269111" start="6055" end="6066" title="apomorphine" label="apomorphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q337231" start="6071" end="6086" title="hyaluronic acid" label="hyaluronic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q904015" start="6225" end="6238" title="hyaluronidase" label="hyaluronidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q423866" start="6533" end="6540" title="triptan" label="triptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823834" start="6565" end="6592" title="medroxyprogesterone acetate" label="medroxyprogesterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q798309" start="6941" end="6952" title="BCG vaccine" label="BCG vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908104" start="7132" end="7143" title="MMR vaccine" label="MMR vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721987" start="7152" end="7169" title="varicella vaccine" label="varicella vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="7187" end="7192" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="7235" end="7242" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="7745" end="7752" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8088" end="8093" title="Birmingham gauge#Sizes of hypodermic needles" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936640" start="8302" end="8314" title="injector pen" label="injector pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841423" start="8784" end="8793" title="upper arm" label="upper arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q129757" start="8872" end="8877" title="thigh" label="thigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="8993" end="9000" title="buttock" label="buttock"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="9018" end="9026" title="human pelvis" label="hip bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="9119" end="9126" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="10458" end="10464" title="saline (medicine)" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="10521" end="10543" title="subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="10653" end="10673" title="intravenous infusion" label="intravenous infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q904015" start="11027" end="11040" title="hyaluronidase" label="hyaluronidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415502" start="11231" end="11253" title="Evan O&amp;#x27;Neill Kane" label="Evan O&amp;#x27;Neill Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="11438" end="11461" title="Intramuscular injection" label="Intramuscular injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="11464" end="11485" title="Intravenous injection" label="Intravenous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="11488" end="11509" title="Intradermal injection" label="Intradermal injection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334821" wikidata="Q432083" url="?curid=334821" title="Intramuscular injection">
<text>Intramuscular injection, often abbreviated IM, is the injection of a substance into a muscle. In medicine, it is one of several methods for parenteral administration of medications. Intramuscular injection may be preferred because muscles have larger and more numerous blood vessels than subcutaneous tissue, leading to faster absorption than subcutaneous or intradermal injections. Medication administered via intramuscular injection is not subject to the first-pass metabolism effect which affects oral medications.

Common sites for intramuscular injections include the deltoid muscle of the upper arm and the gluteal muscle of the buttock. In infants, the vastus lateralis muscle of the thigh is commonly used. The injection site must be cleaned before administering the injection, and the injection is then administered in a fast, darting motion to decrease the discomfort to the individual. The volume to be injected in the muscle is usually limited to 2–5 milliliters, depending on injection site. A site with signs of infection or muscle atrophy should not be chosen. Intramuscular injections should not be used in people with myopathies or those with trouble clotting.

Intramuscular injections commonly result in pain, redness, and swelling or inflammation around the injection site. These side effects are generally mild and last no more than a few days at most. Rarely, nerves or blood vessels around the injection site can be damaged, resulting in severe pain or paralysis. If proper technique is not followed, intramuscular injections can result in localized infections such as abscesses and gangrene. While historically aspiration, or pulling back on the syringe before injection, was recommended to prevent inadvertent administration into a vein, it is no longer recommended for most injection sites by some countries.

==Uses==
Intramuscular injection is commonly used for medication administration. Medication administered in the muscle is generally quickly absorbed in the bloodstream, and avoids the first pass metabolism which occurs with oral administration. The medication may not be considered 100% bioavailable as it must still be absorbed from the muscle, which occurs over time. An intramuscular injection is less invasive than an intravenous injection and also generally takes less time, as the site of injection (a muscle versus a vein) is much larger. Medications administered in the muscle may also be administered as depot injections, which provide slow, continuous release of medicine over a longer period of time. Certain substances, including ketamine, may be injected intramuscularly for recreational purposes. Disadvantages of intramuscular administration include skill and technique required, pain from injection, anxiety or fear (especially in children), and difficulty in self-administration which limits its use in outpatient medicine.

Vaccines, especially inactivated vaccines, are commonly administered via intramuscular injection. However, it has been estimated that for every vaccine injected intramuscularly, 20 injections are given to administer drugs or other therapy. This can include medications such as antibiotics, immunoglobulin, and hormones such as testosterone and medroxyprogesterone. In a case of severe allergic reaction, or anaphylaxis, a person may use an epinephrine autoinjector to self-administer epinephrine into the muscle.

==Contraindications==
Because an intramuscular injection can be used to administer many types of medications, specific contraindications depend in large part on the medication being administered. Injections of medications are necessarily more invasive than other forms of administration such as by mouth or topical and require training to perform appropriately, without which complications can arise regardless of the medication being administered. For this reason, unless there are desired differences in rate of absorption, time to onset, or other pharmacokinetic parameters in the specific situation, a less invasive form of drug administration (usually by mouth) is preferred.

Intramuscular injections are generally avoided in people with low platelet count or clotting problems, to prevent harm due to potential damage to blood vessels during the injection. They are also not recommended in people who are in hypovolemic shock, or have myopathy or muscle atrophy, as these conditions may alter the absorption of the medication. The damage to the muscle caused by an intramuscular injections may interfere with the accuracy of certain cardiac tests for people with suspected myocardial infarction and for this reason other methods of administration are preferred in such instances. In people with an active myocardial infarction, the decrease in circulation may result in slower absorption from an IM injection. Specific sites of administration may also be contraindicated if the desired injection site has an infection, swelling, or inflammation. Within a specific site of administration, the injection should not be given directly over irritation or redness, birthmarks or moles, or areas with scar tissue.

==Risks and complications==
As an injection necessitates piercing the skin, there is a risk of infection from bacteria or other organisms present in the environment or on the skin before the injection. This risk is minimized by using proper aseptic technique in preparing the injection and sanitizing the injection site before administration. Intramuscular injections may also cause an abscess or gangrene at the injection site, depending on the specific medication and amount administered. There is also a risk of nerve or vascular injury if a nerve or blood vessel is inadvertently hit during injection. If single-use or sterilized equipment is not used, there is the risk of transmission of infectious disease between users, or to a practitioner who inadvertently injures themselves with a used needle, termed a needlestick injury.

===Site-specific complications===
Injections into the deltoid site in the arm can result in unintentional damage to the radial and axillary nerves. In rare cases when not performed properly, the injection may result in shoulder dysfunction. The most frequent complications of a deltoid injection include pain, redness, and inflammation around the injection site, which are almost always mild and last only a few days at most.

The dorsogluteal site of injection is associated with a higher risk of skin and tissue trauma, muscle fibrosis or contracture, hematoma, nerve palsy, paralysis, and infections such as abscesses and gangrene. Furthermore, injection in the gluteal muscle poses a risk for damage to the sciatic nerve, which may cause shooting pain or a sensation of burning. Sciatic nerve damage can also affect a person&#x27;s ability to move their foot on the affected side, and other parts of the body controlled by the nerve. Damage to the sciatic nerve can be prevented by using the ventrogluteal site instead, and by selecting an appropriate size and length of needle for the injection.

==Technique==
An intramuscular injection can be administered in multiple different muscles of the body. Common sites for intramuscular injection include: deltoid, dorsogluteal, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis and ventrogluteal muscles. Sites that are bruised, tender, red, swollen, inflamed or scarred are generally avoided. The specific medication and amount being administered will influence the decision of the specific muscle chosen for injection.

The injection site is first cleaned using an antimicrobial and allowed to dry. The injection is performed in a quick, darting motion perpendicular to the skin, at an angle between 72 and 90 degrees. The practitioner will stabilize the needle with one hand while using their other hand to depress the plunger to slowly inject the medication – a rapid injection causes more discomfort. The needle is withdrawn at the same angle inserted. Gentle pressure may be applied with gauze if bleeding occurs. Pressure or gentle massage of the muscle following injection may reduce the risk of pain.

=== Aspiration ===
Aspirating for blood to rule out injecting into a blood vessel is not recommended by the US CDC, Public Health Agency of Canada, or Norway Institute of Public Health, as the injection sites do not contain large blood vessels and aspiration results in greater pain. There is no evidence that aspiration is useful to increase safety of intramuscular injections when injecting in a site other than the dorsogluteal site. 

Aspiration was recommended by the Danish Health Authority for COVID-19 vaccines for a time to investigate the potential rare risk of blood clotting and bleeding, but it is no longer a recommendation.

=== Z-track method ===
The Z-track method is a method of administering an IM injection that prevents the medication being tracked through the subcutaneous tissue, sealing the medication in the muscle, and minimizing irritation from the medication. Using the Z-track technique, the skin is pulled laterally, away from the injection site, before the injection; then the medication is injected, the needle is withdrawn, and the skin is released. This method can be used if the overlying tissue can be displaced.

===Injection sites===
The deltoid muscle in the outer portion of the upper arm is used for injections of small volume, usually equal to or less than 1 mL. This includes most intramuscular vaccinations. It is not recommended to use the deltoid for repeated injections due to its small area, which makes it difficult to space out injections from each other. The deltoid site is located by locating the lower edge of the acromion process, and injecting in the area which forms an upside down triangle with its base at the acromion process and its midpoint in line with the armpit. An injection into the deltoid muscle is commonly administered using a 1-inch long needle, but may use a -inch long needle for younger people or very frail elderly people.

The ventrogluteal site on the hip is used for injections which require a larger volume to be administered, greater than 1 mL, and for medications which are known to be irritating, viscous, or oily. It is also used to administer narcotic medications, antibiotics, sedatives and anti-emetics. The ventrogluteal site is located in a triangle formed by the anterior superior iliac spine and the iliac crest, and may be located using a hand as a guide. The ventrogluteal site is less painful for injection than other sites such as the deltoid site.

The vastus lateralis site is used for infants less than 7 months old and people who are unable to walk or who have loss of muscular tone. The site is located by dividing the front thigh into thirds vertically and horizontally to form nine squares; the injection is administered in the outer middle square. This site is also the usual site of administration for epinephrine autoinjectors, which are used in the outer thigh, corresponding to the location of the vastus lateralis muscle.

The dorsogluteal site of the buttock site is not routinely used due to its location near major blood vessels and nerves, as well as having inconsistent depth of adipose tissue. Many injections in this site do not penetrate deep enough under the skin to be correctly administered in the muscle. While current evidence-based practice recommends against using this site, many healthcare providers still use this site, often due to a lack of knowledge about alternative sites for injection. 
This site is located by dividing the buttock into four using a cross shape, and administering the injection in the upper outer quadrant. This is the only intramuscular injection site for which aspiration is recommended of the syringe before injection, due to higher likelihood of accidental intravenous administration in this area. However, aspiration is not recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which considers it outdated for any intramuscular injection.

===Special populations===
Some populations require a different injection site, needle length, or technique. In very young or weak elderly patients, a normal-length needle may be too long to inject properly. In these patients, a shorter needle is indicated to avoid injecting too deeply. It is also recommended to consider using the anterolateral thigh as an injection site in infants under one year old.

To help infants and children cooperate with injection administration, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices in the United States recommends using distractions, giving something sweet, and rocking the baby side to side. In people who are overweight, a 1.5-inch needle may be used to ensure the injection is given below the subcutaneous layer of skin, while a -inch needle may be used for people who weigh under . In any case, the skin does not need to be pinched up before injecting when the appropriate length needle is used.

==History==
Injections into muscular tissue may have taken place as early as the year 500 AD. Beginning in the late 1800s, the procedure began to be described in more detail and techniques began to be developed by physicians. In the early days of intramuscular injections, the procedure was performed almost exclusively by physicians. After the introduction of antibiotics in the middle of the 20th century, nurses began preparing equipment for intramuscular injections as part of their delegated duties from physicians, and by 1961 they had &quot;essentially taken over the procedure&quot;. Until this delegation became virtually universal, there were no uniform procedures or education for nurses in proper administration of intramuscular injections, and complications from improper injection were common.

Intramuscular injections began to be used for administration of vaccines for diphtheria in 1923, whooping cough in 1926, and tetanus in 1927. By the 1970s, researchers and instructors began forming guidance on injection site and technique to reduce the risk of injection complications and side effects such as pain. Also in the early 1970s, botulinum toxin began to be injected into muscles to intentionally paralyze them for therapeutic reasons, and later for cosmetic reasons. Until the 2000s, aspiration after inserting the needle was recommended as a safety measure, to ensure the injection was being administered in a muscle and not inadvertently in a vein. However, this is no longer recommended as evidence shows no safety benefit and it lengthens the time taken for injection, which causes more pain.

==Veterinary medicine==
In animals common sites for intramuscular injection include the quadriceps, the lumbodorsal muscles, and the triceps muscle.

==See also==
* Subcutaneous injection
* Intradermal injection
* Intravenous injection

==References==
==External links==
* Prevention and Control of Influenza, Recommendations of ACIP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="0" end="23" title="Intramuscular injection" label="Intramuscular injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="43" end="45" title="Intramuscular injection" label="IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q245359" start="54" end="63" title="medical injection" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="86" end="92" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="97" end="105" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="140" end="165" title="parenteral" label="parenteral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="269" end="281" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="343" end="355" title="subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="359" end="380" title="intradermal injection" label="intradermal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330121" start="457" end="478" title="first-pass metabolism" label="first-pass metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130243" start="573" end="587" title="deltoid muscle" label="deltoid muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478147" start="613" end="627" title="gluteal muscle" label="gluteal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q975459" start="660" end="683" title="vastus lateralis muscle" label="vastus lateralis muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="963" end="973" title="milliliter" label="milliliter"/>
<link wikidata="Q692536" start="1135" end="1145" title="myopathy" label="myopathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="1254" end="1266" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="1382" end="1387" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="1476" end="1485" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="1592" end="1599" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="1606" end="1614" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330121" start="2020" end="2041" title="first pass metabolism" label="first pass metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="2123" end="2135" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailable"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079408" start="2449" end="2464" title="depot injection" label="depot injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="2578" end="2586" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="2624" end="2636" title="recreational drug use" label="recreational"/>
<link wikidata="Q695416" start="2856" end="2875" title="Outpatient clinic (hospital department)" label="outpatient medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="2878" end="2885" title="Vaccine" label="Vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560939" start="2899" end="2918" title="inactivated vaccine" label="inactivated vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="3155" end="3165" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="3168" end="3182" title="immunoglobulin" label="immunoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="3188" end="3195" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q416667" start="3222" end="3241" title="medroxyprogesterone" label="medroxyprogesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="3285" end="3296" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163586" start="3318" end="3329" title="epinephrine (medication)" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q786860" start="3330" end="3342" title="autoinjector" label="autoinjector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="3511" end="3527" title="contraindication" label="contraindication"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="4136" end="4154" title="thrombocytopenia" label="low platelet count"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959670" start="4307" end="4324" title="hypovolemic shock" label="hypovolemic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557686" start="4346" end="4360" title="muscle atrophy" label="muscle atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="4572" end="4593" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5217" end="5225" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="5348" end="5365" title="aseptic technique" label="aseptic technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565962" start="5922" end="5940" title="needlestick injury" label="needlestick injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365325" start="6063" end="6069" title="radial nerve" label="radial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547173" start="6074" end="6088" title="axillary nerve" label="axillary nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034286" start="6472" end="6480" title="Injection fibrosis" label="fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480291" start="6484" end="6495" title="contracture" label="contracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="6497" end="6505" title="hematoma" label="hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q68212673" start="6513" end="6518" title="palsy" label="palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="6520" end="6529" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="6554" end="6561" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="6568" end="6576" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q307869" start="6654" end="6667" title="sciatic nerve" label="sciatic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q130243" start="7199" end="7206" title="Deltoid muscle" label="deltoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478147" start="7208" end="7220" title="Gluteal muscles" label="dorsogluteal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633822" start="7222" end="7236" title="Rectus femoris muscle" label="rectus femoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q975459" start="7238" end="7254" title="Vastus lateralis muscle" label="vastus lateralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478147" start="7259" end="7272" title="ventrogluteal" label="ventrogluteal"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="8199" end="8202" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826604" start="8204" end="8234" title="Public Health Agency of Canada" label="Public Health Agency of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061149" start="8239" end="8272" title="Norwegian Institute of Public Health" label="Norway Institute of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583472" start="8561" end="8584" title="Danish Health Authority" label="Danish Health Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="8589" end="8606" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q615414" start="9656" end="9672" title="acromion process" label="acromion process"/>
<link wikidata="Q499" start="9808" end="9814" title="axilla" label="armpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="10216" end="10224" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="10238" end="10248" title="Antibiotics" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="10251" end="10259" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="10265" end="10276" title="Antiemetic" label="anti-emetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771403" start="10341" end="10370" title="anterior superior iliac spine" label="anterior superior iliac spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774464" start="10379" end="10390" title="iliac crest" label="iliac crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q975459" start="10537" end="10553" title="vastus lateralis" label="vastus lateralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129757" start="10713" end="10718" title="thigh" label="thigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736787" start="10894" end="10918" title="epinephrine autoinjector" label="epinephrine autoinjector"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="11114" end="11126" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="11132" end="11137" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="11180" end="11194" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354820" start="11327" end="11350" title="evidence-based practice" label="evidence-based practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="11798" end="11824" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenous administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11885" end="11927" title="US CDC" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686835" start="12470" end="12514" title="Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices" label="Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="12729" end="12741" title="subcutaneous tissue" label="subcutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="13295" end="13306" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="13820" end="13830" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="13840" end="13854" title="pertussis" label="whooping cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="13868" end="13875" title="tetanus" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="14084" end="14099" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504536" start="14641" end="14651" title="Quadriceps femoris muscle" label="quadriceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="14718" end="14740" title="Subcutaneous injection" label="Subcutaneous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671547" start="14743" end="14764" title="Intradermal injection" label="Intradermal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="14767" end="14788" title="Intravenous injection" label="Intravenous injection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334825" wikidata="Q2277510" url="?curid=334825" title="Ancient art">
<text>Ancient art refers to the many types of art produced by the advanced cultures of ancient societies with different forms of writing, such as those of ancient China, India, Mesopotamia, Persia, Palestine, Egypt, Greece, and Rome. The art of pre-literate societies is normally referred to as prehistoric art and is not covered here. Although some pre-Columbian cultures developed writing during the centuries before the arrival of Europeans, on grounds of dating these are covered at pre-Columbian art and articles such as Maya art, Aztec art, and Olmec art.

==Middle East and Mediterranean==
===Mesopotamia===

Mesopotamia (from the Greek Μεσοποταμία &quot;[land] between the rivers&quot;, in Syriac called ܒܝܬ ܢܗܪܝܢ pronounced &quot;Beth Nahrain&quot;, &quot;Land of rivers&quot;, rendered in Arabic as بلاد الرافدين bilād al-rāfidayn) is a toponym for the area of the Tigris-Euphrates river system, largely corresponding to modern-day Iraq, as well as some parts of northeastern Syria, southeastern Turkey, and southwestern Iran. Within its boundaries, some of the most ancient civilizations known first developed writing and agriculture. Many civilizations flourished there, leaving behind a rich legacy of ancient art.

Bronze Age Mesopotamian civilizations included the Akkadian, Babylonian, and Assyrian empires, and Sumer. In the Iron Age, Mesopotamia was ruled by the Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian empires. The indigenous Sumerians and Akkadians (including Assyrians &amp; Babylonians) dominated Mesopotamia from the beginning of written history (c. 3100 BC) to the fall of Babylon in 539 BC, when it was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire. It fell to Alexander the Great in 332 BC and after his death, it became part of the Greek Seleucid Empire.

Around 150 BC, Mesopotamia was under the control of the Parthians. Mesopotamia became a battleground between the Romans and Parthians, with parts of Mesopotamia (particularly Assyria) coming under periodic Roman control. In 226 AD, it fell to the Sassanid Persians and remained under Persian rule until the 7th-century Arab Islamic conquest of the Sassanid Empire. A number of primarily Christian native Mesopotamian states existed between the 1st century BC and the 3rd century AD, including Adiabene, Oshroene, and Hatra.

====Sumer====

Archaeological evidence attests to their existence during the 5th millennium BC. The Sumerians decorated their pottery with cedar oil paints. The Sumerians also developed jewelry.

A notable example of surviving Sumerian art is the &quot;Standard of Ur,&quot; dated to approximately 2500 BC. The Standard is a wooden box inlaid with shells and lapis lazuli depicting soldiers presenting their king with prisoners on one side and peasants presenting him with gifts on the other.
====Babylon====
The conquest of Sumer and Akkad by Babylon marks a turning point in the artistic and political history of the region.

The Babylonians took advantage of the abundance of clay in Mesopotamia to create bricks. The use of brick led to the early development of the pilaster and column, as well as of frescoes and enameled tiles. The walls were brilliantly colored, and sometimes plated with bronze or gold as well as with tiles. Painted terra-cotta cones were also embedded in the plaster.

The Babylonians often worked with metal. They created functional tools with copper. It is possible that Babylonia was the original home of copperworking, which then spread westward. In addition, the want of stone in Babylonia made every pebble precious and led to a high perfection of the art of gem-cutting. The arts of Babylon also included tapestries, and Babylonian civilization was famous for its tapestries and rugs.

====Assyria====
When Babylon began to decline, it was conquered by Assyria, one of its former colonies. Assyria inherited its arts as well as its empire.

At first, Assyrian architects and artists copied Babylonian styles and materials. Later, Assyrians began to shake themselves free of Babylonian influences. The walls of the Assyrian palaces were lined with slabs of stone instead of brick and were colored instead of painted as in Chaldea. In place of the bas relief, we have sculpted figures, the earliest examples being the statues from Girsu.

No remarkable specimens of metallurgic art from early Assyria have been found, but at a later epoch, great excellence was attained in the manufacture of such jewellery as earrings and bracelets of gold. They also had skilled works using copper.

Assyrian pottery and porcelain were graceful. Transparent glass seems to have been first introduced in the reign of Sargon II, like the glass discovered in the palaces of Nineveh – derived from Egyptian originals. Stone, as well as clay and glass, were employed in the manufacture of vases. Vases of hard stone have been disinterred at Tello, similar to those of the early dynastic period of Egypt.

Ashurbanipal promoted art and culture and had a vast library of cuneiform tablets at Nineveh.

=== Hittite ===

Hittite art was produced by the Hittite civilization in ancient Anatolia, in modern-day Turkey, and also stretching into Syria during the second millennium BC from the nineteenth century up until the twelfth century BC. This period falls under the Anatolian Bronze Age. It is characterized by a long tradition of canonized images and motifs rearranged, while still being recognizable, by artists to convey meaning to a largely illiterate population. &quot;Owing to the limited vocabulary of figural types [and motifs], invention for the Hittite artist usually was a matter of combining and manipulating the units to form more complex compositions&quot;Many of these recurring images revolve around the depiction of Hittite deities and ritual practices. There is also a prevalence of hunting scenes in Hittite relief and representational animal forms. Much of the art comes from settlements like Alaca Höyük, or the Hittite capital of Hattusa near modern-day Boğazkale. Scholars do have difficulty dating a large portion of Hittite art, citing the fact that there is a lack of inscription and much of the found material, especially from burial sites, was moved from their original locations and distributed among museums during the nineteenth century.

=== Bactrian ===

The Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex is the modern archaeological designation for a Bronze Age civilization of Central Asia, dated to c. 2300–1700 BC, in present-day northern Afghanistan, eastern Turkmenistan, southern Uzbekistan, and western Tajikistan, centred on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus River). Its sites were discovered and named by the Soviet archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi (1976). Monumental urban centres, palaces, and cultic buildings were uncovered, notably at Gonur-depe in Turkmenistan.

BMAC materials have been found in the Indus Valley civilisation, on the Iranian Plateau, and in the Persian Gulf. Finds within BMAC sites provide further evidence of trade and cultural contacts. They include an Elamite-type cylinder seal and a Harappan seal stamped with an elephant and Indus script found at Gonur-depe. The relationship between Altyn-Depe and the Indus Valley seems to have been particularly strong. Among the finds, there were two Harappan seals and ivory objects. The Harappan settlement of Shortugai in Northern Afghanistan on the banks of the Amu Darya probably served as a trading station.

A famous type of Bactrian artwork is the &quot;Bactrian princesses&quot; ( &quot;Oxus ladies&quot;). Wearing large stylized dresses with puffed sleeves, as well as headdresses that merge with the hair, they embody the ranking goddess, a character of the central Asian mythology that plays a regulatory role, pacifying the untamed forces. These statuettes are made by combining and assembling materials of contrasting colours. The preferred materials are chlorite (or similar dark green stones), a whitish limestone or mottled alabaster, or marine shells from the Indian Ocean. The different elements of body and costume were carved separately and joined, as in a puzzle, by tenon and mortices glue.

===Achaemenid===

Achaemenid art includes frieze reliefs, metalwork, decoration of palaces, glazed brick masonry, fine craftsmanship (masonry, carpentry, etc.), and gardening. Most survivals of court art are monumental sculptures, above all the reliefs, double animal-headed Persian column capitals and other sculptures of Persepolis.

Although the Persians took artists, with their styles and techniques, from all corners of their empire, they produced not simply a combination of styles, but a synthesis of a new unique Persian style. Cyrus the Great in fact had an extensive ancient Iranian heritage behind him; the rich Achaemenid gold work, which inscriptions suggest may have been a specialty of the Medes, was for instance in the tradition of earlier sites.

There are a number of very fine pieces of jewellery or inlay in precious metal, also mostly featuring animals, and the Oxus Treasure has a wide selection of types. Small pieces, typically in gold, were sewn to clothing by the elite, and a number of gold torcs have survived.

=== Phoenician ===

Phoenician art lacks unique characteristics that might distinguish it from its contemporaries. This is due to its being highly influenced by foreign artistic cultures: primarily Egypt, Greece, and Assyria. Phoenicians who were taught on the banks of the Nile and the Euphrates gained a wide artistic experience and finally came to create their own art, which was an amalgam of foreign models and perspectives. In an article from &quot;The New York Times&quot; published on January 5, 1879, Phoenician art was described by the following:

===Pre-Islamic Arabia===
The art of Pre-Islamic Arabia is related to that of neighbouring cultures. Pre-Islamic Yemen produced stylized alabaster heads of great aesthetic and historic charm. Most of the pre-Islamic sculptures are made of alabaster.

Archaeology has revealed some early settled civilizations in Saudi Arabia: the Dilmun civilization on the east of the Arabian Peninsula, Thamud north of the Hejaz, and Kinda and Al-Magar civilization in the central of Arabian Peninsula.
The earliest known events in Arabian history are migrations from the peninsula into neighbouring areas. In antiquity, the role of South Arabian societies such as Saba (Sheba) in the production and trade of aromatics not only brought such kingdoms wealth but also tied the Arabian Peninsula into trade networks, resulting in far-ranging artistic influences.

It seems probable that before around 4000 BC the Arabian climate was somewhat wetter that today, benefitting from a monsoon system that has since moved south. During the late fourth millennium BC permanent settlements began to appear, and inhabitants adjusted to the emerging dryer conditions. In southwestern Arabia (modern Yemen) a moister climate supported several kingdoms during the second and first millennia BC. The most famous of these is Sheba, the kingdom of the biblical Queen of Sheba. These societies used a combination of trade in spices and the natural resources of the region, including aromatics such as frankincense and myrrh, to build wealthy kingdoms. Mārib, the Sabaean capital, was well positioned to tap into Mediterranean as well as Near Eastern trade, and in kingdoms to the east, in what is today Oman, trading links with Mesopotamia, Persia, and even India were possible. The area was never a part of the Assyrian or Persian empires, and even Babylonian control of north-west Arabia seems to have been relatively short-lived. Later Roman attempts to control the region&#x27;s lucrative trade were foundered. This impenetrability to foreign armies doubtless augmented ancient rulers&#x27; bargaining power in the spice and incense trade.

Although subject to external influences, south Arabia retained characteristics particular to itself. The human figure is typically based on strong, square shapes, the fine modeling of detail contrasting with a stylized simplicity of form.

===Egypt===

Due to the highly religious nature of ancient Ancient Egyptian civilization, many of the great works of ancient Egypt depict gods, goddesses, and Pharaohs, who were also considered divine. The idea of order characterizes ancient Egyptian art. Clear and simple lines combined with simple shapes and flat areas of colour helped to create a sense of order and balance in the art of ancient Egypt. Ancient Egyptian artists used vertical and horizontal reference lines to maintain the correct proportions in their work. Political and religious, as well as artistic, order was also maintained in Egyptian art. To clearly define the social hierarchy of a situation, figures were drawn to sizes that were based not on their distance from the painter&#x27;s perspective but on relative importance. For instance, the Pharaoh would be drawn as the largest figure in a painting no matter where he was situated, and a greater God would be drawn larger than a lesser god.

Symbolism also played an important role in establishing a sense of order. Symbolism, ranging from the Pharaoh&#x27;s regalia (symbolizing his power to maintain order) to the individual symbols of Egyptian gods and goddesses, was omnipresent in Egyptian art. Animals were usually also highly symbolic figures in Egyptian art. Colour, as well, had extended meaning—blue and green represented the Nile and life; yellow stood for the sun god; and red represented power and vitality. The colours in Egyptian artifacts have survived extremely well over the centuries because of Egypt&#x27;s dry climate.

Despite the stilted form caused by a lack of perspective, ancient Egyptian art is often highly realistic. Ancient Egyptian artists often show a sophisticated knowledge of anatomy and close attention to detail, especially in their renderings of animals.
During the 18th Dynasty of Egypt a Pharaoh by the name of Akhenaton took the throne and abolished the traditional polytheism. He formed a monotheistic religion based on the worship of Aten, a sun god. Artistic change followed political upheaval. A new style of art was introduced that was more naturalistic than the stylized frieze favored in Egyptian art for the previous 1700 years. After Akhenaton&#x27;s death, however, Egyptian artists reverted to their old styles.

Faience that was produced in ancient Egyptian antiquity as early as 3500 BC was in fact superior to the tin-glazed earthenware of the European 15th century. Ancient Egyptian faience was not made of clay but instead actually of a ceramic composed primarily of quartz.

===Minoan===

The greatest civilization of the Bronze Age was that of the Minoans, a mercantilist people who built a trading empire from their homeland of Crete and from other Aegean islands. Minoan civilization was known for its beautiful ceramics, but also for its frescos, landscapes, and stone carvings. In the early Minoan period, ceramics were characterized by spirals, triangles, curved lines, crosses, and fishbone motifs. In the middle Minoan period, naturalistic designs such as fish, squid, birds, and lilies were common. In the late Minoan period, flowers and animals were still the most characteristic, but variability had increased. The &#x27;palace style&#x27; of the region around Knossos is characterized by strong geometric simplification of naturalistic shapes and by monochromatic painting. The Palace at Knossos was decorated with frescoes that showed aspects of daily life, including court rituals and entertainment such as bull-leaping and boxing. The Minoans were skilled goldsmiths who created beautiful pendants and masks. The famous &quot;Malia Pendant&quot; of the Minoan times, found at Chryssolakkos and now on display at the Heraklion Archaeological Museum, is an example of high-quality gold-smithery.

===Mycenaean===
Mycenaean art is close to the Minoan and includes many splendid finds from the royal graves, most famously the Mask of Agamemnon, a gold funeral mask. As may be seen from this item, the Mycenaeans specialized in gold working. Their artworks are known for a plethora of decorative motifs employed. At some point in their cultural history, the Mycenaeans adopted the Minoan goddesses and associated these goddesses with their sky god; scholars believe that the Greek pantheon of deities does not reflect Mycenaean religion except for the goddesses and Zeus. These goddesses, however, are Minoan in origin.

===Greek===

Ancient Greek art includes much pottery and sculpture, as well as architecture. Greek sculpture is known for the contrapposto standing of the figures. The art of Ancient Greece is usually divided stylistically into three periods: the Archaic, the Classical, and the Hellenistic. The history of Ancient Greek pottery is divided stylistically into periods: the Protogeometric, the Geometric, the Late Geometric or Archaic, the Black Figure, and the Red Figure. Ancient Greek art has survived most successfully in the forms of sculpture and architecture, as well as in such minor arts as coin design, pottery, and gem engraving.

The most prestigious form of Ancient Greek painting was panel painting, now known only from literary descriptions; they perished rapidly after the 4th century AD when they were no longer actively protected. Today not much survives of Greek painting, except for late mummy paintings and a few paintings on the walls of tombs, mostly in Macedonia and Italy. Painting on pottery, of which a great deal survives, gives some sense of the aesthetics of Greek painting. The techniques involved, however, were very different from those used in large-format painting. It was mainly in black and gold and was painted using different paints than the ones used on walls or wood, because it was a different surface.

=== Etruscan ===

Etruscan art was produced by the Etruscan civilization in central Italy between the 9th and 2nd centuries BC. From around 600 BC it was heavily influenced by Greek art, which was imported by the Etruscans, but always retained distinct characteristics. Particularly strong in this tradition were figurative sculpture in terracotta (especially life-size on sarcophagi or temples), wall painting, and metalworking, especially in bronze. Jewelry and engraved gems of high quality were produced.

Etruscan sculpture in cast bronze was famous and widely exported, but relatively few large examples have survived (the material was too valuable, and recycled later). In contrast to terracotta and bronze, there was relatively little Etruscan sculpture in stone, despite the Etruscans controlling fine sources of marble, including Carrara marble, which seems not to have been exploited until the Romans.

The great majority of survivals came from tombs, which were typically crammed with sarcophagi and grave goods, and terracotta fragments of architectural sculpture, mostly around temples. Tombs have produced all the fresco wall paintings, which show scenes of feasting and some narrative mythological subjects.

===Rome===

It is commonly said that Roman art was derivative of Greek and Etruscan art. Indeed, the villas of the wealthy Romans unearthed in Pompeii and Herculaneum show a strong predilection for all things Greek. Many of the most significant Greek artworks survive by virtue of their Roman interpretation and imitation. Roman artists sought to commemorate great events in the life of their state and to glorify their emperors as well as record the inner life of people, and express ideas of beauty and nobility. Their busts, and especially the images of individuals on gravestones, are very expressive and lifelike, finished with skill and panache.

In Greece and Rome, wall painting was not considered high art. The most prestigious form of art besides sculpture was panel painting, i.e. tempera or encaustic painting on wooden panels. Unfortunately, since wood is a perishable material, only a very few examples of such paintings have survived, namely the Severan Tondo from circa 200 AD, a very routine official portrait from some provincial government office, and the well-known Fayum mummy portraits, all from Roman Egypt, and almost certainly not of the highest contemporary quality. The portraits were attached to burial mummies at the face, from which almost all have now been detached. They usually depict a single person, showing the head, or head and upper chest viewed frontally. The background is always monochrome, sometimes with decorative elements. In terms of artistic tradition, the images clearly derive more from Greco-Roman traditions than Egyptian ones. They are remarkably realistic, though variable in artistic quality, and may indicate the similar art which was widespread elsewhere but did not survive. A few portraits painted on glass and medals from the later empire have survived, as have coin portraits, some of which are considered very realistic as well. Pliny the Younger complained of the declining state of Roman portrait art, &quot;The painting of portraits which used to transmit through the ages the accurate likenesses of people, has entirely gone out [...] Indolence has destroyed the arts.&quot;

==South Asia==
The first sculptures in India date back to the Indus Valley civilization some 5,000 years ago when small stone carvings and bronze castings have been discovered. Later, as Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism developed further, India produced some of the most intricate bronzes in the world, as well as unrivaled temple carvings, some in huge shrines, such as the one at Ellora.

The Ajanta Caves in Maharashtra, India are rock-cut cave monuments dating back to the second century BC and containing paintings and sculpture considered to be masterpieces of both Buddhist religious art and universal pictorial art.

==East Asia==
===China===
Prehistoric artwork such as painted pottery in Neolithic China can be traced back to the Yangshao culture and Longshan culture of the Yellow River valley. During China&#x27;s Bronze Age, Chinese of the ancient Shang dynasty and Zhou dynasty produced multitudes of artistic bronzeware vessels for practical purposes, but also for religious ritual and geomancy. The earliest (surviving) Chinese paintings date to the Warring States period, and they were on silk as well as lacquerwares.

One of ancient China&#x27;s most famous artistic relics remains the Terracotta warriors, an assembly of 8,099 individual and life-size terracotta figures (such as infantry, horses with chariots and cavalry, archers, and military officers), buried in the tomb of Qin Shi Huang, the First Qin Emperor, in 210 BC. This tradition was carried into the subsequent Han dynasty, although their tombs contained miniature versions of the soldiers in addition to domestic servants to serve rulers and nobility in the afterlife. Chinese art arguably shows more continuity between ancient and modern periods than that of any other civilization, as even when foreign dynasties took the Imperial throne they did not impose new cultural or religious habits and were relatively quickly assimilated.
===Japan===

The eras of Japanese art correspond to the locations of various governments. The earliest known Japanese artifacts are attributable to the Aniu tribe, who influenced the Jōmon people, and these eras came to be known as the Jōmon and Yayoi time periods. Before the Yayoi invaded Japan, Jimmu in 660 B.C. was the crowned emperor. Later came the Haniwa of the Kofun era, then the Asuka when Buddhism reached Japan from China. Religion influenced Japanese art significantly for centuries thereafter.

==Mesoamerica==
===Olmec===

The ancient Olmec &quot;Bird Vessel&quot; and bowl, both ceramic and dating to circa 1000 BC as well as other ceramics are produced in kilns capable of exceeding approximately 900 °C. The only other prehistoric culture known to have achieved such high temperatures is that of Ancient Egypt.

Much Olmec art is highly stylized and uses iconography reflective of the religious meaning of the artworks. Some Olmec art, however, is surprisingly naturalistic, displaying an accuracy of the depiction of human anatomy perhaps equaled in the pre-Columbian New World only by the best Maya Classic era art. Olmec art forms emphasize monumental statuary and small jade carvings. A common theme is to be found in representations of a divine jaguar. Olmec figurines were also found abundantly through their period.
==See also==
* History of art
* Timeline of art

==References==

Sources

* Bailey, Douglass. (2005). &quot;Prehistoric Figurines: Representation and Corporeality in the Neolithic.&quot; Routledge Publishers. 


==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2277510" start="0" end="11" title="Ancient art" label="Ancient art"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="40" end="43" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="69" end="76" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="81" end="88" title="ancient" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="157" end="162" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="164" end="169" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="171" end="182" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="184" end="190" title="Ancient Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="192" end="201" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="203" end="208" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="210" end="216" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="222" end="226" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="289" end="304" title="prehistoric art" label="prehistoric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821484" start="344" end="366" title="pre-Columbian cultures" label="pre-Columbian cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091532" start="481" end="498" title="pre-Columbian art" label="pre-Columbian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626940" start="520" end="528" title="Maya art" label="Maya art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="530" end="539" title="Aztec art" label="Aztec art"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="545" end="550" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="610" end="621" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="869" end="875" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="876" end="885" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="1115" end="1122" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1127" end="1138" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q115964" start="2360" end="2377" title="5th millennium BC" label="5th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="2409" end="2416" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q184321" start="2422" end="2431" title="cedar oil" label="cedar oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="2432" end="2437" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="2469" end="2476" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q524447" start="2536" end="2550" title="Standard of Ur" label="Standard of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="2642" end="2654" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="2665" end="2673" title="soldiers" label="soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="2691" end="2695" title="monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="2727" end="2734" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="2808" end="2813" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="2818" end="2823" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="2827" end="2834" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2962" end="2966" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2970" end="2981" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="2992" end="2997" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="3053" end="3061" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="3066" end="3072" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="3088" end="3094" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="3179" end="3185" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3189" end="3193" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="3225" end="3236" title="terra-cotta" label="terra-cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="3313" end="3318" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3355" end="3361" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501187" start="3575" end="3578" title="engraved gem" label="gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="3622" end="3632" title="tapestries" label="tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="3770" end="3777" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="3877" end="3886" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="4138" end="4145" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="4163" end="4173" title="bas relief" label="bas relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="4183" end="4199" title="sculpture" label="sculpted figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q853946" start="4246" end="4251" title="Girsu" label="Girsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="4412" end="4421" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4451" end="4455" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="4521" end="4530" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="4616" end="4625" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="4636" end="4641" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="4671" end="4678" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4694" end="4699" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="5044" end="5064" title="Hittites" label="Hittite civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5076" end="5084" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5100" end="5106" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5133" end="5138" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5270" end="5280" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142277" start="5727" end="5763" title="Hittite mythology and religion" label="Hittite deities and ritual practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q558861" start="5907" end="5918" title="Alaca Höyük" label="Alaca Höyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q181007" start="5946" end="5953" title="Hattusa" label="Hattusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q848800" start="5970" end="5979" title="Boğazkale" label="Boğazkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6373" end="6383" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="6384" end="6396" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6400" end="6412" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6464" end="6475" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="6485" end="6497" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="6508" end="6518" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="6532" end="6542" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="6565" end="6574" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6632" end="6638" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q563640" start="6653" end="6669" title="Viktor Sarianidi" label="Viktor Sarianidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="6828" end="6853" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237660" start="6862" end="6877" title="Iranian Plateau" label="Iranian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="6890" end="6902" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="7034" end="7041" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="7240" end="7247" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550221" start="7301" end="7310" title="Shortugai" label="Shortugai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="7355" end="7364" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q593248" start="7858" end="7866" title="chlorite" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="7930" end="7939" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="7967" end="7979" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="8146" end="8152" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="8349" end="8355" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170232" start="8379" end="8393" title="Persian column" label="Persian column"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="8427" end="8437" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246609" start="8989" end="9002" title="Oxus Treasure" label="Oxus Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="9124" end="9128" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="9344" end="9349" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9363" end="9370" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="9420" end="9424" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="9433" end="9442" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9601" end="9619" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="9740" end="9758" title="Pre-Islamic Arabia" label="Pre-Islamic Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="9816" end="9821" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="9840" end="9849" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="9942" end="9951" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="9954" end="9965" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="10015" end="10027" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="10033" end="10039" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132376" start="10091" end="10097" title="Thamud" label="Thamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="10111" end="10116" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q605292" start="10122" end="10127" title="Kingdom of Kinda" label="Kinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20399406" start="10132" end="10140" title="Al-Magar" label="Al-Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="10321" end="10333" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="10359" end="10364" title="Sheba" label="Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="10463" end="10480" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="10874" end="10879" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="10996" end="11001" title="Sheba" label="Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="11031" end="11045" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Queen of Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11221" end="11226" title="Ma&amp;#x27;rib#Ancient" label="Mārib"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="11232" end="11239" title="Sabaeans" label="Sabaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="11372" end="11376" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="11397" end="11408" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11410" end="11416" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="11481" end="11488" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="11493" end="11507" title="Persian empire" label="Persian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="11519" end="11526" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="12113" end="12126" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="12213" end="12221" title="Pharaohs" label="Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="13936" end="13945" title="Akhenaton" label="Akhenaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="13992" end="14002" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="14350" end="14357" title="Faience" label="Faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q766876" start="14379" end="14395" title="History of ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377111" start="14465" end="14476" title="earthenware" label="earthenware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="14507" end="14520" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="14524" end="14531" title="faience" label="faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="14548" end="14552" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="14579" end="14586" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="14609" end="14615" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="14665" end="14675" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="14692" end="14699" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="14773" end="14778" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="14858" end="14866" title="ceramics (art)" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="14885" end="14891" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="14894" end="14903" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="15315" end="15322" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="15405" end="15418" title="monochromatic" label="monochromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="15581" end="15587" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="15593" end="15600" title="Minoans" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16332818" start="15684" end="15697" title="Malia Pendant" label="Malia Pendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="15869" end="15876" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126741" start="15980" end="15997" title="Mask of Agamemnon" label="Mask of Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q514847" start="16600" end="16612" title="contrapposto" label="contrapposto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439" start="17170" end="17184" title="panel painting" label="panel painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q646420" start="17380" end="17395" title="Fayum mummy portraits" label="mummy paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="17700" end="17704" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="17836" end="17848" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="17869" end="17890" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="17894" end="17907" title="central Italy" label="central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247086" start="17994" end="18003" title="Greek art" label="Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="18191" end="18201" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="18234" end="18246" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501187" start="18282" end="18294" title="engraved gem" label="engraved gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="18658" end="18672" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="18815" end="18825" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399692" start="18830" end="18841" title="grave goods" label="grave goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="18947" end="18953" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="19118" end="19130" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="19186" end="19193" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="19198" end="19209" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q308968" start="19846" end="19864" title="encaustic painting" label="encaustic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="20933" end="20950" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21223" end="21228" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="21246" end="21271" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="21371" end="21379" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="21381" end="21389" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="21394" end="21401" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="21564" end="21570" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="21577" end="21589" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="21593" end="21604" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587139" start="21616" end="21624" title="Rock cut architecture" label="rock-cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="21880" end="21889" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="21922" end="21938" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057935" start="21943" end="21959" title="Longshan culture" label="Longshan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="22008" end="22018" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="22043" end="22056" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="22061" end="22073" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q815750" start="22183" end="22191" title="geomancy" label="geomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="22248" end="22262" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="22288" end="22292" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q368972" start="22304" end="22315" title="lacquerware" label="lacquerware"/>
<link wikidata="Q47672" start="22387" end="22406" title="Terracotta warriors" label="Terracotta warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="22581" end="22594" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="22677" end="22688" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="23337" end="23342" title="Jōmon" label="Jōmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="23347" end="23352" title="Yayoi" label="Yayoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="23652" end="23657" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="23697" end="23704" title="pottery" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="23750" end="23758" title="Ceramics (art)" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="23775" end="23779" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="23839" end="23850" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="23916" end="23929" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="24294" end="24298" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="24370" end="24376" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864715" start="24378" end="24392" title="Olmec figurine" label="Olmec figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="24458" end="24472" title="History of art" label="History of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806015" start="24475" end="24490" title="Timeline of art" label="Timeline of art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334826" wikidata="Q641900" url="?curid=334826" title="National Hockey Association">
<text>The National Hockey Association (NHA), initially the National Hockey Association of Canada Limited, was a professional ice hockey organization with teams in Ontario and Quebec, Canada. It is the direct predecessor of today&#x27;s National Hockey League (NHL), and much of the business processes of the NHL today are based on the NHA. Founded in 1909 by Ambrose O&#x27;Brien, the NHA introduced six-man hockey by removing the rover position in 1911. During its lifetime, the league coped with competition for players with the rival Pacific Coast Hockey Association (PCHA), the enlistment of players for World War I and disagreements between owners. The disagreements between owners came to a head in 1917, when the NHA suspended operations in order to get rid of an unwanted owner, Eddie Livingstone. 

The remaining NHA team owners started the NHL in parallel as a temporary measure, to continue play while negotiations went on with Livingstone and other lawsuits were pending. A year later, after no progress was reached with Livingstone, the other NHA owners decided to permanently suspend the NHA. The NHA&#x27;s rules, constitution and trophies were reused in the NHL.

==History==
===Founding===

In November 1909, the Eastern Canada Hockey Association (ECHA), holder of the Stanley Cup and ostensibly the pre-eminent ice hockey league, was in the midst of a dispute. The Montreal Wanderers of the ECHA had been bought by P. J. Doran, owner of the Jubilee Rink in Montreal, and he intended to move the team&#x27;s games there. The Jubilee was smaller than the Wanderers&#x27; current rink, the Montreal Arena, which meant visiting teams would earn less on their trips to play the Wanderers. On November 25, 1909, the other teams in the league disbanded the ECHA and formed the new Canadian Hockey Association (CHA), which excluded the Wanderers.
At the same time, Ambrose O&#x27;Brien of Renfrew, Ontario– scion of a prosperous silver mine owner and founder of the Renfrew Creamery Kings ice hockey team –was seeking admission to the ECHA so as to be able to contest the Stanley Cup. The team had applied to the Stanley Cup trustees as champions of the Federal League, but had been rejected. At the November 25 CHA founding meeting, held at the Windsor Hotel in Montreal, O&#x27;Brien applied to join the CHA but the application was rejected. Sitting in the lobby of the hotel after the CHA meeting, O&#x27;Brien met Jimmy Gardner of the Wanderers, whose team had also been rejected by the CHA. Together, they decided to form their own league, the National Hockey Association (NHA). With Cobalt and Haileybury, two other teams controlled by O&#x27; Brien, the NHA was founded on December 2, 1909 at a private meeting at 300 St. James Street in Montreal, and adopted the constitution of the ECHA.

At the same time, to build a rivalry and capture francophone interest in Montreal, O&#x27;Brien and Gardner conceived of creating a team consisting of francophone players, to be managed by francophones. &#x27;Les Canadiens&#x27;, known today as the Montreal Canadiens, was admitted on December 4, 1909 to be managed by Jack Laviolette, but owned by O&#x27;Brien, on the understanding ownership was to be transferred to francophone sportsmen as soon as practicable. In all, O&#x27;Brien and his father, Michael John O&#x27;Brien, were financing four teams in the league: the Renfrew Creamery Kings (which became known as the Renfrew Millionaires), Cobalt, Haileybury, and &quot;Les Canadiens&quot;. The Cobalt and Haileybury clubs were from the Timiskaming Professional Hockey League (TPHL) and Renfrew from the Federal Hockey League. Along with the Wanderers, the league had five teams.

The O&#x27;Briens were determined to win the Stanley Cup and a bidding war for players immediately started. Frank and Lester Patrick were each signed by the Renfrew Millionaires for $3,000 apiece, the highest salaries recorded to that time. Renfrew also signed star player Cyclone Taylor of the champion Ottawa Senators team, reputedly at $5,000 per season.

Attendance at the CHA games was poor and a meeting of the NHA was held on January 15, 1910 to discuss a possible merger of the two leagues. Instead, the NHA admitted Ottawa and the Montreal Shamrocks to the NHA and the CHA folded. The owners of the Montreal Le National were offered the ownership of the Canadiens but turned it down. The Quebec Bulldogs and the other teams of the CHA were not even considered for membership. Games played prior to January 15 were thrown out, and the season began again, now with seven teams. 

Despite the efforts of O&#x27;Brien, who added Newsy Lalonde from the Canadiens to Renfrew, the first championship went to the Wanderers, taking over the Stanley Cup and successfully defending it against Edmonton. It would be the Wanderers&#x27; only championship in the NHA.

===1910–1914: Consolidation===
In November 1910, the league principals of Mike Quinn, Dickie Boon and Eddie McCafferty developed a new constitution differing from the ECHA constitution to put it on a more business-like basis. The league developed a standard player contract, a salary limit of per team, the requirement to &quot;waive&quot; players past other clubs before they were released from the league, and a &#x27;reserve clause&#x27; whereby teams could name ten players in a &quot;draft&quot; that could not join other clubs. The meetings of the association were private and only the president of the league could communicate about the meetings to the press. These rules would later be followed in the successor National Hockey League. These new principles were based on the rules of American baseball, likely due to the influence of McCafferty, who was the secretary of the Montreal Royals baseball team. The new constitution even dropped &#x27;of Canada&#x27; from the name of the corporation &quot;to permit of taking into affiliation hockey bodies that may be formed in the United States as well as in Canada, with a view to making it eventually the central organization in the game.&quot; The new constitution was published in the &quot;Montreal Gazette&quot; in November 1910.

The 1910 off-season led to changes in membership in the league, as Cobalt, Haileybury and Shamrocks dropped out. Les Canadiens would be taken over by George Kennedy and Quebec would join the league for the 1910–11 season. Lalonde was returned to the Canadiens. The two dormant O&#x27;Brien franchises were to be held for two Toronto teams to join the league in the future, to play in the new Arena Gardens planned for Toronto. The Wanderers incorporated, with Sam Lichtenhein taking a majority position.

The 1910–1911 season saw the start of labour unrest in the league, as the league imposed its $5,000 salary cap. The season almost foundered because of widespread dissatisfaction amongst the players at the salaries on offer, and players&#x27; unions were rumoured to be on the verge of creation at several points. The players at first intended to form their own league, but the arenas were under the NHA control and surrendered for that season. The clubs&#x27; bottom lines improved, Ottawa estimated to make six to eight thousand in profits, while the Canadiens made three to four thousand; the Wanderers two to three thousand; and Quebec at nine hundred. Only Renfrew lost money. The new constitution also affected the format of play. For the first time, the hour of play would be divided into three 20-minute periods, with five minutes of rest between the periods. Ottawa won the championship and held the Stanley Cup against Galt and Port Arthur.

In the 1911 off-season, O&#x27;Brien exited the hockey business and Renfrew exited the league. The Ottawa Hockey Club became the second club to incorporate. The NHA itself incorporated, forming a Canadian federal corporation capitalized at divided into five hundred shares of $100 each. The purpose of incorporation was &quot;to encourage, develop and improve the National Canadian winter game of hockey and athletic sports and pastimes.&quot;

For the 1911–12 season, the league dropped the rover position, changing the game to six-man hockey, although other leagues would hold on to seven-man play into the 1920s. Attempts would be made to reintroduce seven-man hockey in subsequent years but were unsuccessful. While the league delayed its schedule to try to accommodate the Toronto teams, who were waiting for the Arena Gardens&#x27; completion, in the end the league played with only four teams. In that same off-season, the Patrick brothers built two arenas in Vancouver and Victoria and formed the Pacific Coast Hockey Association (PCHA). The PCHA exploited the low pay of the NHA teams to raid the teams for players. Quebec won the league championship, winning its first Stanley Cup, defending it successfully against Moncton. Despite the raids by the PCHA, the NHA allowed a player-organized team of all-stars to play an exhibition series out west against the PCHA after the season. Some of the NHA players, notably Cyclone Taylor, would be enticed to join the PCHA in the following season.

In 1912–13, the two new Toronto teams joined the league, the Torontos, later dubbed the &#x27;Blueshirts&#x27;, and the Tecumsehs and the league expanded to six teams. Although the PCHA had raided Quebec for three players of its championship squad, they were replaced by top players from the Ontario and Maritime leagues, and Quebec repeated as champions. This year, the Quebec team travelled west to play the PCHA champion Victoria Aristocrats, in the first series between the two leagues&#x27; champion teams.

In the 1913 off-season, the NHA and the PCHA signed an agreement to end their bidding war for players. The agreement stipulated territorial rights, splitting Canada east and west of Port Arthur, Ontario. The four-year agreement meant each league would respect each other&#x27;s reserve clauses, conduct an intraleague draft for players, have a commissioner resolve disputes, and agreed to an annual series between the two leagues for the Stanley Cup. The NHA now introduced the &#x27;option clause&#x27; into player&#x27;s contracts, holding that the team now had an exclusive option to re-sign a player after their contract expired.

The 1913–14 season, the last before World War I, saw a tie between the Torontos and the Canadiens for first place, and the league&#x27;s first play-off was held. Toronto won the two-game series to win the championship and the first Stanley Cup win by any Toronto team. After the play-off, PCHA champion Victoria came east to play Toronto in a best-of-five series. The series was &#x27;unofficial&#x27; as it was not approved by the Stanley Cup trustees, but any controversy was moot as Toronto won the series in three-straight games.

Starting in the 1914–1915 season, the Stanley Cup was awarded exclusively to the winner of a playoff between the NHA and the PCHA regular season winners. The league championship was decided by a two-game total goal playoff between the Wanderers and the Senators. Ottawa won the championship, and the right to defend the Cup against Vancouver in a three-game series in which Vancouver won in dominating fashion. The notion of a league champion being awarded the Cup to defend ceased with that season, as the Portland Rosebuds were the PCHA champions in 1915–1916 but were not automatically accorded the Cup. Instead, they played the Montreal Canadiens for the trophy (and became the first American team to do so), which the Canadiens won in a five-game series.

===1915–1917: World War I and the end of the NHA===
The start of World War I meant that players started enlisting for the military to fight overseas. By 1915, World War I and PCHA raiding left the NHA without enough quality players. At first, the NHA and PCHA made peace with an agreement limiting PCHA signings of NHA players to those on teams designated by a &#x27;draft&#x27;. However the peace did not last and disputes within the NHA and with the PCHA led to the end of the NHA. Two factions developed, Toronto and Quebec City, and the Montreal teams and Ottawa.

Prior to the 1915–16 season, Toronto Shamrocks team owner Eddie Livingstone made two moves that infuriated the NHA and the PCHA. At that time Quebec was to be one of the designated NHA teams which the PCHA would draft players from. Livingstone arranged a trade with Quebec to hide some players from the draft, infuriating the PCHA. He bought the Toronto Blueshirts without league permission for its players, and ended up with no players for the Shamrocks team as the PCHA in retaliation raided the Blueshirts for players. The league ordered Livingstone to sell his Shamrocks franchise, but he was unable to do so as he had only enough players for one team. The 1915–16 season was played with only five teams, a situation whereby one team each week would not play, a situation limiting team owner revenues and infuriating the other owners. Instead of two games in Toronto to cover travel expenses from the other cities, there was only one per trip.

In 1916, the league stripped Livingstone of the Shamrocks franchise and fielded a second team in Toronto for the 1916–17 season. The team was composed of hockey players who had enlisted for wartime duty. The team, known as the 228th Battalion or Northern Fusiliers—formed in North Bay, Ontario—played wearing khaki military uniforms and was the league&#x27;s most popular and highest scoring club until the regiment was ordered overseas in February 1917 and the team was forced to withdraw. A scandal ensued when several stars were subsequently discharged and alleged they had been promised commissions solely to play hockey for the military team. The Battalion dropping out left the league at five teams again. Instead of continuing with five teams, the league suspended the Blueshirts also and dispersed its players to the other clubs and continued with four teams. Livingstone threatened to sue the league over the suspension, infuriating the other owners. The league next made a demand that Livingstone sell the Toronto franchise between April and June 1917. Instead of selling, Livingstone followed through with his threat to sue the NHA.

By this time, the owners of the Canadiens, Wanderers, Senators and Bulldogs wanted nothing more to do with Livingstone. However, they discovered the NHA constitution did not allow them to simply expel him from the league. Instead, on November 22, 1917, the other four owners voted to suspend the NHA&#x27;s operations. Two weeks later, the four clubs founded the National Hockey League so that they could continue the business of pro hockey without Livingstone. Every owner except Livingstone was granted a franchise in the NHL and the NHA contracts transferred. The NHL also continued to use the same rules and season format as the NHA, with the NHL champion now moving on to face the PCHA champion in the Stanley Cup Finals. Wanderers owner Sam Lichtenhein was quoted as saying, &quot;We didn&#x27;t throw Livingstone out; he&#x27;s still got his franchise in the old National Hockey Association. He has his team, and we wish him well. The only problem is he&#x27;s playing in a one-team league.&quot;

The Bulldogs, however, announced they didn&#x27;t have enough financing to ice a team for the NHL&#x27;s first season. Wanting to balance the schedule, and feeling it unthinkable not to have a team from Canada&#x27;s second-largest city, the NHL granted a temporary franchise to the Toronto Arena Company, which leased the Blueshirts&#x27; players from Livingstone pending resolution of the dispute. This temporary franchise would evolve into today&#x27;s Toronto Maple Leafs.

The NHA&#x27;s organization did not dissolve immediately. The owners had launched a lawsuit against the Battalion to attempt to make the Canadian Army pay $3000 for leaving the league and this had yet to be heard in court. The NHL could operate in the meantime, without Livingstone.

The NHA&#x27;s officials met nearly a year later, on September 20, 1918, when a vote was taken to permanently suspend operations over Livingstone&#x27;s objections. That fall, Livingstone, along with Percy Quinn, attempted to launch a rival &quot;Canadian Hockey Association&quot; (CHA) unsuccessfully. Blocked, Livingstone and Quinn called a final meeting of the NHA owners on December 11, 1918. The NHL owners, against the wishes of Frank Calder, attended the meeting. Calder considered that an NHA meeting could not proceed with shareholders not having paid legal fees owed the league books held in court for lawsuits. Livingstone&#x27;s plan was to use the fact that the Canadiens had a minority shareholder, contrary to NHA voting rules, to disallow the Canadiens vote and cause the vote to swing their way and lead to the resumption of the NHA. At first, Lichtenhein refused to recognize Quinn&#x27;s purchase of the Quebec NHL franchise, but agreed to if Quinn would pay the costs of the meeting itself, which he refused. The meeting ended when the NHL owners offered to pay legal fees owed to the NHA so as to proceed, according to Calder&#x27;s terms, but Livingstone and Quinn refused. The NHL owners then left the meeting. Separately, the Montreal and Ottawa NHA owners met and paid the fees owing to the league and Calder fined the Torontos, Ontarios and Quebec a further $200. Calder now publicly promised to file a court order to &quot;wind up&quot; the NHA organization. When the NHL decided to continue with play, Livingstone and Quinn threatened injunctions to stop the NHL from operating. However, the threats were not followed through on and the NHL season began on schedule. The NHA organization itself was not formally dissolved for several years afterwards and Frank Calder held the presidency in both organizations.

==Legacy==
The NHA was innovative for its time. The league put forth several innovations, among them the division of each game into three periods, the abolition of the rover position, the institution of match penalties, and allowing line changes on the fly. On the business side, the NHA introduced the standard contract, reserve clauses, waiver draft and the first salary cap.

While the originator of jersey numbers in ice hockey is disputed, the NHA is commonly cited as the first to use them, requiring players wear numbered armbands beginning with the 1911–12 season.

The championship trophy of the NHA was the O&#x27;Brien Cup, made of solid silver, donated by the O&#x27;Brien family. It survived as the championship trophy of the NHL until the Western Hockey League, the successor to the PCHA, folded after the 1925–26 hockey season. This left the NHL as the only professional league that competed for the Stanley Cup. Thus starting in the 1926–27 season, the Stanley Cup became the championship trophy of the NHL. The O&#x27;Brien Cup was then awarded annually as an NHL trophy until being retired in 1950.

Three current NHL teams, the Canadiens, Maple Leafs and Senators have roots in the NHA. While the Canadiens acknowledge their NHA history and records, the Maple Leafs do not claim the Blueshirts&#x27; history as their own, which would include an additional Stanley Cup championship. The original Ottawa Senators, the oldest of the three, continued in the NHL after the NHA&#x27;s disbandment, but ceased operations in 1935. Ottawa returned to the league in 1992 having been granted a new franchise to operate as the current Ottawa Senators. The current club honors the Ottawa club history dating back to the 1880s, with banners at the Canadian Tire Centre.

==Teams==
===Season by season record===
† Stanley Cup Champions. In 1910, both the Wanderers and Senators are considered champions.

*228th Battalion was from North Bay, Ontario, training at Camp Borden and in Toronto at the time. It dropped out after first half of season. Toronto was suspended by league after first half.

===Team history===
==NHA presidents==
Frank Robinson submitted his resignation letter during an NHA&#x27;s meeting on October 20, 1917. However, his resignation was not considered and he was voted as NHA president for another term. In Robinson&#x27;s absence, the secretary-treasurer of the league, Frank Calder, chaired NHA meetings and served as the acting president of the NHA.

==See also==
* 1918–19 NHL season
* List of ice hockey leagues
* List of pre-NHL seasons
* List of Stanley Cup champions

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641900" start="4" end="31" title="National Hockey Association" label="National Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q641900" start="33" end="36" title="National Hockey Association" label="NHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q641900" start="53" end="98" title="National Hockey Association" label="National Hockey Association of Canada Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="119" end="129" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="157" end="164" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="169" end="175" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="230" end="252" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180909" start="353" end="373" title="Ambrose O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ambrose O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q693982" start="425" end="430" title="Rover (ice hockey)" label="rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381725" start="531" end="563" title="Pacific Coast Hockey Association" label="Pacific Coast Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047289" start="781" end="798" title="Eddie Livingstone" label="Eddie Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q442219" start="1224" end="1257" title="Eastern Canada Hockey Association" label="Eastern Canada Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="1280" end="1291" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q459647" start="1377" end="1395" title="Montreal Wanderers" label="Montreal Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q599978" start="1453" end="1465" title="Jubilee Rink" label="Jubilee Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1469" end="1477" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q849938" start="1599" end="1613" title="Montreal Arena" label="Montreal Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q526679" start="1786" end="1813" title="Canadian Hockey Association (1909–1910)" label="Canadian Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180909" start="1869" end="1889" title="Ambrose O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ambrose O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143987" start="1893" end="1909" title="Renfrew, Ontario" label="Renfrew, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341714" start="1970" end="1992" title="Renfrew Creamery Kings" label="Renfrew Creamery Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240572" start="2158" end="2172" title="Federal Amateur Hockey League" label="Federal League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145697" start="2250" end="2263" title="Windsor Hotel (Montreal)" label="Windsor Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526237" start="2729" end="2745" title="Saint Jacques Street" label="St. James Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="3051" end="3069" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q446167" start="3121" end="3136" title="Jack Laviolette" label="Jack Laviolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240657" start="3546" end="3584" title="Timiskaming Professional Hockey League" label="Timiskaming Professional Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q450302" start="3798" end="3803" title="Frank Patrick (ice hockey)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="3808" end="3822" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008536" start="3963" end="3977" title="Cyclone Taylor" label="Cyclone Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753100" start="3994" end="4009" title="Ottawa Senators (original)" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341699" start="4230" end="4248" title="Montreal Shamrocks" label="Montreal Shamrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336964" start="4298" end="4318" title="Montreal Le National" label="Montreal Le National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469113" start="4387" end="4402" title="Quebec Bulldogs" label="Quebec Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360007" start="4624" end="4637" title="Newsy Lalonde" label="Newsy Lalonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446304" start="5737" end="5752" title="Montreal Royals" label="Montreal Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549535" start="6104" end="6120" title="Montreal Gazette" label="Montreal Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101991" start="6296" end="6310" title="George Kennedy (sports promoter)" label="George Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331013" start="6538" end="6551" title="Arena Gardens" label="Arena Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407795" start="6606" end="6621" title="Sam Lichtenhein" label="Sam Lichtenhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338139" start="6655" end="6664" title="1910–11 NHA season" label="1910–1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q693982" start="8094" end="8099" title="Rover (ice hockey)" label="rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="8569" end="8578" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="8583" end="8591" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381725" start="8607" end="8639" title="Pacific Coast Hockey Association" label="Pacific Coast Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271186" start="9164" end="9172" title="Toronto Blueshirts" label="Torontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q279435" start="9223" end="9232" title="Toronto Tecumsehs" label="Tecumsehs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787575" start="9527" end="9547" title="Victoria Aristocrats" label="Victoria Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230482" start="9798" end="9818" title="Port Arthur, Ontario" label="Port Arthur, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960629" start="10802" end="10811" title="1914–15 NHA season" label="1914–1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785037" start="11118" end="11127" title="Vancouver Millionaires" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341729" start="11293" end="11310" title="Portland Rosebuds (hockey)" label="Portland Rosebuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563356" start="11338" end="11347" title="1915–16 NHA season" label="1915–1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="12107" end="12113" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826459" start="12145" end="12162" title="Toronto Shamrocks" label="Toronto Shamrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047289" start="12174" end="12191" title="Eddie Livingstone" label="Eddie Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689667" start="13178" end="13192" title="1916–17 NHA season" label="1916–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342228" start="13292" end="13307" title="Toronto 228th Battalion (NHA)" label="228th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q912253" start="13340" end="13358" title="North Bay, Ontario" label="North Bay, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="14573" end="14595" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="15671" end="15690" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235790" start="17760" end="17772" title="Frank Calder" label="Frank Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757641" start="18434" end="18450" title="O&amp;#x27;Brien Cup" label="O&amp;#x27;Brien Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="19451" end="19474" title="Ottawa Senators" label="current Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327290" start="19570" end="19590" title="Canadian Tire Centre" label="Canadian Tire Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235790" start="20217" end="20229" title="Frank Calder" label="Frank Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q776728" start="20315" end="20333" title="1918–19 NHL season" label="1918–19 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863383" start="20336" end="20362" title="List of ice hockey leagues" label="List of ice hockey leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634728" start="20365" end="20388" title="List of pre-NHL seasons" label="List of pre-NHL seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783598" start="20391" end="20420" title="List of Stanley Cup champions" label="List of Stanley Cup champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334829" wikidata="Q16243117" url="?curid=334829" title="Art of Europe">
<text>The art of Europe, also known as Western art, encompasses the history of visual art in Europe. European prehistoric art started as mobile Upper Paleolithic rock and cave painting and petroglyph art and was characteristic of the period between the Paleolithic and the Iron Age. Written histories of European art often begin with the Aegean civilizations, dating from the 3rd millennium BC. However a consistent pattern of artistic development within Europe becomes clear only with Ancient Greek art, which was adopted and transformed by Rome and carried; with the Roman Empire, across much of Europe, North Africa and Western Asia.

The influence of the art of the Classical period waxed and waned throughout the next two thousand years, seeming to slip into a distant memory in parts of the Medieval period, to re-emerge in the Renaissance, suffer a period of what some early art historians viewed as &quot;decay&quot; during the Baroque period, to reappear in a refined form in Neo-Classicism and to be reborn in Post-Modernism.

Before the 1800s, the Christian church was a major influence on European art, and commissions from the Church provided the major source of work for artists. In the same period there was also a renewed interest in classical mythology, great wars, heroes and heroines, and themes not connected to religion. Most art of the last 200 years has been produced without reference to religion and often with no particular ideology at all, but art has often been influenced by political issues, whether reflecting the concerns of patrons or the artist.

European art is arranged into a number of stylistic periods, which, historically, overlap each other as different styles flourished in different areas. Broadly the periods are, Classical, Byzantine, Medieval, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassical, Modern, Postmodern and New European Painting.

==Prehistoric art==
European prehistoric art is an important part of the European cultural heritage. Prehistoric art history is usually divided into four main periods: Stone Age, Neolithic, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. Most of the remaining artifacts of this period are small sculptures and cave paintings.
Much surviving prehistoric art is small portable sculptures, with a small group of female Venus figurines such as the Venus of Willendorf (24,000–22,000 BC) found across central Europe; the 30 cm tall Löwenmensch figurine of about 30,000 BCE has hardly any pieces that can be related to it. The Swimming Reindeer of about 11,000 BCE is one of the finest of a number of Magdalenian carvings in bone or antler of animals in the art of the Upper Paleolithic, though they are outnumbered by engraved pieces, which are sometimes classified as sculpture. With the beginning of the Mesolithic in Europe figurative sculpture greatly reduced, and remained a less common element in art than relief decoration of practical objects until the Roman period, despite some works such as the Gundestrup cauldron from the European Iron Age and the Bronze Age Trundholm sun chariot.

The oldest European cave art dates back 40,800, and can be found in the El Castillo Cave in Spain. Other cave painting sites include Lascaux, Cave of Altamira, Grotte de Cussac, Pech Merle, Cave of Niaux, Chauvet Cave, Font-de-Gaume, Creswell Crags, Nottinghamshire, England, (Cave etchings and bas-reliefs discovered in 2003), Coliboaia cave from Romania (considered the oldest cave painting in central Europe) and Magura, Belogradchik, Bulgaria. Rock painting was also performed on cliff faces, but fewer of those have survived because of erosion. One well-known example is the rock paintings of Astuvansalmi in the Saimaa area of Finland. When Marcelino Sanz de Sautuola first encountered the Magdalenian paintings of the Altamira cave, Cantabria, Spain in 1879, the academics of the time considered them hoaxes. Recent reappraisals and numerous additional discoveries have since demonstrated their authenticity, while at the same time stimulating interest in the artistry of Upper Palaeolithic peoples. Cave paintings, undertaken with only the most rudimentary tools, can also furnish valuable insight into the culture and beliefs of that era.

The Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin represents a very different style, with the human figure the main focus, often seen in large groups, with battles, dancing and hunting all represented, as well as other activities and details such as clothing. The figures are generally rather sketchily depicted in thin paint, with the relationships between the groups of humans and animals more carefully depicted than individual figures. Other less numerous groups of rock art, many engraved rather than painted, show similar characteristics. The Iberian examples are believed to date from a long period perhaps covering the Upper Paleolithic, Mesolithic and early Neolithic.

Prehistoric Celtic art comes from much of Iron Age Europe and survives mainly in the form of high-status metalwork skillfully decorated with complex, elegant and mostly abstract designs, often using curving and spiral forms. There are human heads and some fully represented animals, but full-length human figures at any size are so rare that their absence may represent a religious taboo. As the Romans conquered Celtic territories, it almost entirely vanishes, but the style continued in limited use in the British Isles, and with the coming of Christianity revived there in the Insular style of the Early Middle Ages.

==Ancient==
===Minoan===

The Minoan civilization of Crete is regarded as the oldest civilization in Europe. Minoan art is marked by imaginative images and exceptional workmanship. Sinclair Hood described an &quot;essential quality of the finest Minoan art, the ability to create an atmosphere of movement and life although following a set of highly formal conventions&quot;. It forms part of the wider grouping of Aegean art, and in later periods came for a time to have a dominant influence over Cycladic art. Wood and textiles have decomposed, so most surviving examples of Minoan art are pottery, intricately-carved Minoan seals, .palace frescos which include landscapes), small sculptures in various materials, jewellery, and metalwork. 

The relationship of Minoan art to that of other contemporary cultures and later Ancient Greek art has been much discussed. It clearly dominated Mycenaean art and Cycladic art of the same periods, even after Crete was occupied by the Mycenaeans, but only some aspects of the tradition survived the Greek Dark Ages after the collapse of Mycenaean Greece.

Minoan art has a variety of subject-matter, much of it appearing across different media, although only some styles of pottery include figurative scenes. Bull-leaping appears in painting and several types of sculpture, and is thought to have had a religious significance; bull&#x27;s heads are also a popular subject in terracotta and other sculptural materials. There are no figures that appear to be portraits of individuals, or are clearly royal, and the identities of religious figures is often tentative, with scholars uncertain whether they are deities, clergy or devotees. Equally, whether painted rooms were &quot;shrines&quot; or secular is far from clear; one room in Akrotiri has been argued to be a bedroom, with remains of a bed, or a shrine.

Animals, including an unusual variety of marine fauna, are often depicted; the &quot;Marine Style&quot; is a type of painted palace pottery from MM III and LM IA that paints sea creatures including octopus spreading all over the vessel, and probably originated from similar frescoed scenes; sometimes these appear in other media. Scenes of hunting and warfare, and horses and riders, are mostly found in later periods, in works perhaps made by Cretans for a Mycenaean market, or Mycenaean overlords of Crete.

While Minoan figures, whether human or animal, have a great sense of life and movement, they are often not very accurate, and the species is sometimes impossible to identify; by comparison with Ancient Egyptian art they are often more vivid, but less naturalistic. In comparison with the art of other ancient cultures there is a high proportion of female figures, though the idea that Minoans had only goddesses and no gods is now discounted. Most human figures are in profile or in a version of the Egyptian convention with the head and legs in profile, and the torso seen frontally; but the Minoan figures exaggerate features such as slim male waists and large female breasts. 

=== Classical Greek and Hellenistic ===

Ancient Greece had great painters, great sculptors, and great architects. The Parthenon is an example of their architecture that has lasted to modern days. Greek marble sculpture is often described as the highest form of Classical art. Painting on the pottery of Ancient Greece and ceramics gives a particularly informative glimpse into the way society in Ancient Greece functioned. Black-figure vase painting and Red-figure vase painting gives many surviving examples of what Greek painting was. Some famous Greek painters on wooden panels who are mentioned in texts are Apelles, Zeuxis and Parrhasius, however no examples of Ancient Greek panel painting survive, only written descriptions by their contemporaries or by later Romans. Zeuxis lived in 5–6 BC and was said to be the first to use sfumato. According to Pliny the Elder, the realism of his paintings was such that birds tried to eat the painted grapes. Apelles is described as the greatest painter of Antiquity for perfect technique in drawing, brilliant color and modeling.

=== Roman ===

Roman art was influenced by Greece and can in part be taken as a descendant of ancient Greek painting and sculpture, but was also strongly influenced by the more local Etruscan art of Italy. Roman sculpture, is primarily portraiture derived from the upper classes of society as well as depictions of the gods. However, Roman painting does have important unique characteristics. Among surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings, many from villas in Campania, in Southern Italy, especially at Pompeii and Herculaneum. Such painting can be grouped into four main &quot;styles&quot; or periods and may contain the first examples of trompe-l&#x27;œil, pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape.

Almost all of the surviving painted portraits from the Ancient world are a large number of coffin-portraits of bust form found in the Late Antique cemetery of Al-Fayum. They give an idea of the quality that the finest ancient work must have had. A very small number of miniatures from Late Antique illustrated books also survive, and a rather larger number of copies of them from the early medieval period. Early Christian art grew out of Roman popular, and later Imperial, art and adapted its iconography from these sources.

==Medieval==

Most surviving art from the medieval period was religious in focus, often funded by the Church, powerful ecclesiastical individuals such as bishops, communal groups such as abbeys, or wealthy secular patrons. Many had specific liturgical functions—processional crosses and altarpieces, for example.

One of the central questions about medieval art concerns its lack of realism. A great deal of knowledge of perspective in art and understanding of the human figure was lost with the fall of Rome. But realism was not the primary concern of medieval artists. They were simply trying to send a religious message, a task which demands clear iconic images instead of precisely rendered ones.

Time Period: 6th century to 15th century

===Early Medieval art===
Migration period art is a general term for the art of the &quot;barbarian&quot; peoples who moved into formerly Roman territories. Celtic art in the 7th and 8th centuries saw a fusion with Germanic traditions through contact with the Anglo-Saxons creating what is called the Hiberno-Saxon style or Insular art, which was to be highly influential on the rest of the Middle Ages. Merovingian art describes the art of the Franks before about 800, when Carolingian art combined insular influences with a self-conscious classical revival, developing into Ottonian art. Anglo-Saxon art is the art of England after the Insular period. Illuminated manuscripts contain nearly all the surviving painting of the period, but architecture, metalwork and small carved work in wood or ivory were also important media.


===Byzantine===

Byzantine art overlaps with or merges with what we call Early Christian art until the iconoclasm period of 730-843 when the vast majority of artwork with figures was destroyed; so little remains that today any discovery sheds new understanding. After 843 until 1453 there is a clear Byzantine art tradition. It is often the finest art of the Middle Ages in terms of quality of material and workmanship, with production centered on Constantinople. Byzantine art&#x27;s crowning achievement were the monumental frescos and mosaics inside domed churches, most of which have not survived due to natural disasters and the appropriation of churches to mosques.

===Romanesque===

Romanesque art refers to the period from about 1000 to the rise of Gothic art in the 12th century. This was a period of increasing prosperity, and the first to see a coherent style used across Europe, from Scandinavia to Sicily. Romanesque art is vigorous and direct, was originally brightly coloured, and is often very sophisticated. Stained glass and enamel on metalwork became important media, and larger sculptures in the round developed, although high relief was the principal technique. Its architecture is dominated by thick walls, and round-headed windows and arches, with much carved decoration.


===Gothic===

Gothic art is a variable term depending on the craft, place and time. The term originated with Gothic architecture in 1140, but Gothic painting did not appear until around 1200 (this date has many qualifications), when it diverged from Romanesque style. Gothic sculpture was born in France in 1144 with the renovation of the Abbey Church of S. Denis and spread throughout Europe, by the 13th century it had become the international style, replacing Romanesque. International Gothic describes Gothic art from about 1360 to 1430, after which Gothic art merges into Renaissance art at different times in different places. During this period forms such as painting, in fresco and on panel, become newly important, and the end of the period includes new media such as prints. 

==Renaissance==
The Renaissance is characterized by a focus on the arts of Ancient Greece and Rome, which led to many changes in both the technical aspects of painting and sculpture, as well as to their subject matter. It began in Italy, a country rich in Roman heritage as well as material prosperity to fund artists. During the Renaissance, painters began to enhance the realism of their work by using new techniques in perspective, thus representing three dimensions more authentically. Artists also began to use new techniques in the manipulation of light and darkness, such as the tone contrast evident in many of Titian&#x27;s portraits and the development of sfumato and chiaroscuro by Leonardo da Vinci. Sculptors, too, began to rediscover many ancient techniques such as contrapposto. Following with the humanist spirit of the age, art became more secular in subject matter, depicting ancient mythology in addition to Christian themes. This genre of art is often referred to as Renaissance Classicism. In the North, the most important Renaissance innovation was the widespread use of oil paints, which allowed for greater colour and intensity.

===From Gothic to the Renaissance===
During the late 13th century and early 14th century, much of the painting in Italy was Byzantine in character, notably that of Duccio of Siena and Cimabue of Florence, while Pietro Cavallini in Rome was more Gothic in style. During the 13th century, Italian sculptors began to draw inspiration not only from medieval prototypes, but also from ancient works.

In 1290, Giotto began painting in a manner that was less traditional and more based upon observation of nature. His famous cycle at the Scrovegni Chapel, Padua, is seen as the beginnings of a Renaissance style.

Other painters of the 14th century were carried the Gothic style to great elaboration and detail. Notable among these painters are Simone Martini and Gentile da Fabriano.

In the Netherlands, the technique of painting in oils rather than tempera, led itself to a form of elaboration that was not dependent upon the application of gold leaf and embossing, but upon the minute depiction of the natural world. The art of painting textures with great realism evolved at this time. Dutch painters such as Jan van Eyck and Hugo van der Goes were to have great influence on Late Gothic and Early Renaissance painting.

===Early Renaissance===
The ideas of the Renaissance first emerged in the city-state of Florence, Italy. The sculptor Donatello returned to classical techniques such as contrapposto and classical subjects like the unsupported nude—his second sculpture of &quot;David&quot; was the first free-standing bronze nude created in Europe since the Roman Empire. The sculptor and architect Brunelleschi studied the architectural ideas of ancient Roman buildings for inspiration. Masaccio perfected elements like composition, individual expression, and human form to paint frescoes, especially those in the Brancacci Chapel, of surprising elegance, drama, and emotion.

A remarkable number of these major artists worked on different portions of the Florence Cathedral. Brunelleschi&#x27;s dome for the cathedral was one of the first truly revolutionary architectural innovations since the Gothic flying buttress. Donatello created many of its sculptures. Giotto and Lorenzo Ghiberti also contributed to the cathedral.

===High Renaissance===
High Renaissance artists include such figures as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo Buonarroti, and Raffaello Sanzio.

The 15th-century artistic developments in Italy (for example, the interest in perspectival systems, in depicting anatomy, and in classical cultures) matured during the 16th century, accounting for the designations &quot;Early Renaissance&quot; for the 15th century and &quot;High Renaissance&quot; for the 16th century. Although no singular style characterizes the High Renaissance, the art of those most closely associated with this period—Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, and Titian—exhibits an astounding mastery, both technical and aesthetic. High Renaissance artists created works of such authority that generations of later artists relied on these artworks for instruction.
These exemplary artistic creations further elevated the prestige of artists. Artists could claim divine inspiration, thereby raising visual art to a status formerly given only to poetry. Thus, painters, sculptors, and architects came into their own, successfully claiming for their work a high position among the fine arts. In a sense, 16th- century masters created a new profession with its own rights of expression and its own venerable character.

===Northern art up to the Renaissance===
Early Netherlandish painting developed (but did not strictly invent) the technique of oil painting to allow greater control in painting minute detail with realism—Jan van Eyck (1366–1441) was a figure in the movement from illuminated manuscripts to panel paintings.

Hieronymus Bosch (1450?–1516), a Dutch painter, is another important figure in the Northern Renaissance. In his paintings, he used religious themes, but combined them with grotesque fantasies, colorful imagery, and peasant folk legends. His paintings often reflect the confusion and anguish associated with the end of the Middle Ages.

Albrecht Dürer introduced Italian Renaissance style to Germany at the end of the 15th century, and dominated German Renaissance art.

Time Period:
* Italian Renaissance: Late 14th century to Early 16th century
* Northern Renaissance: 16th century

==Mannerism, Baroque, and Rococo==
In European art, Renaissance Classicism spawned two different movements—Mannerism and the Baroque. Mannerism, a reaction against the idealist perfection of Classicism, employed distortion of light and spatial frameworks in order to emphasize the emotional content of a painting and the emotions of the painter. The work of El Greco is a particularly clear example of Mannerism in painting during the late 16th, early 17th centuries. Northern Mannerism took longer to develop, and was largely a movement of the last half of the 16th century. Baroque art took the representationalism of the Renaissance to new heights, emphasizing detail, movement, lighting, and drama in their search for beauty. Perhaps the best known Baroque painters are Caravaggio, Rembrandt, Peter Paul Rubens, and Diego Velázquez.

A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th-century Dutch Golden Age painting, which had very little religious art, and little history painting, instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life, genre paintings of everyday scenes, and landscape painting. While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt&#x27;s art is clear, the label is less use for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists. Flemish Baroque painting shared a part in this trend, while also continuing to produce the traditional categories.

Baroque art is often seen as part of the Counter-Reformation—the artistic element of the revival of spiritual life in the Roman Catholic Church. Additionally, the emphasis that Baroque art placed on grandeur is seen as Absolutist in nature. Religious and political themes were widely explored within the Baroque artistic context, and both paintings and sculptures were characterised by a strong element of drama, emotion and theatricality. Famous Baroque artists include Caravaggio or Rubens. Artemisia Gentileschi was another noteworthy artist, who was inspired by Caravaggio&#x27;s style. Baroque art was particularly ornate and elaborate in nature, often using rich, warm colours with dark undertones. Pomp and grandeur were important elements of the Baroque artistic movement in general, as can be seen when Louis XIV said, &quot;I am grandeur incarnate&quot;; many Baroque artists served kings who tried to realize this goal. Baroque art in many ways was similar to Renaissance art; as a matter of fact, the term was initially used in a derogative manner to describe post-Renaissance art and architecture which was over-elaborate. Baroque art can be seen as a more elaborate and dramatic re-adaptation of late Renaissance art.

By the 18th century, however, Baroque art was falling out of fashion as many deemed it too melodramatic and also gloomy, and it developed into the Rococo, which emerged in France. Rococo art was even more elaborate than the Baroque, but it was less serious and more playful. Whilst the Baroque used rich, strong colours, Rococo used pale, creamier shades. The artistic movement no longer placed an emphasis on politics and religion, focusing instead on lighter themes such as romance, celebration, and appreciation of nature. Rococo art also contrasted the Baroque as it often refused symmetry in favor of asymmetrical designs. Furthermore, it sought inspiration from the artistic forms and ornamentation of Far Eastern Asia, resulting in the rise in favour of porcelain figurines and chinoiserie in general. The 18th-century style flourished for a short while; nevertheless, the Rococo style soon fell out of favor, being seen by many as a gaudy and superficial movement emphasizing aesthetics over meaning. Neoclassicism in many ways developed as a counter movement of the Rococo, the impetus being a sense of disgust directed towards the latter&#x27;s florid qualities.

===Mannerism (16th century)===

===Baroque (early 17th century to mid-early 18th century)===

===Rococo (early to mid-18th century)===

==Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Academism, and Realism==

Throughout the 18th century, a counter movement opposing the Rococo sprang up in different parts of Europe, commonly known as Neoclassicism. It despised the perceived superficiality and frivolity of Rococo art, and desired for a return to the simplicity, order and &#x27;purism&#x27; of classical antiquity, especially ancient Greece and Rome. The movement was in part also influenced by the Renaissance, which itself was strongly influenced by classical art. Neoclassicism was the artistic component of the intellectual movement known as the Enlightenment; the Enlightenment was idealistic, and put its emphasis on objectivity, reason and empirical truth. Neoclassicism had become widespread in Europe throughout the 18th century, especially in the United Kingdom, which saw great works of Neoclassical architecture spring up during this period; Neoclassicism&#x27;s fascination with classical antiquity can be seen in the popularity of the Grand Tour during this decade, where wealthy aristocrats travelled to the ancient ruins of Italy and Greece. Nevertheless, a defining moment for Neoclassicism came during the French Revolution in the late 18th century; in France, Rococo art was replaced with the preferred Neoclassical art, which was seen as more serious than the former movement. In many ways, Neoclassicism can be seen as a political movement as well as an artistic and cultural one. Neoclassical art places an emphasis on order, symmetry and classical simplicity; common themes in Neoclassical art include courage and war, as were commonly explored in ancient Greek and Roman art. Ingres, Canova, and Jacques-Louis David are among the best-known neoclassicists.

Just as Mannerism rejected Classicism, so did Romanticism reject the ideas of the Enlightenment and the aesthetic of the Neoclassicists. Romanticism rejected the highly objective and ordered nature of Neoclassicism, and opted for a more individual and emotional approach to the arts. Romanticism placed an emphasis on nature, especially when aiming to portray the power and beauty of the natural world, and emotions, and sought a highly personal approach to art. Romantic art was about individual feelings, not common themes, such as in Neoclassicism; in such a way, Romantic art often used colours in order to express feelings and emotion. Similarly to Neoclassicism, Romantic art took much of its inspiration from ancient Greek and Roman art and mythology, yet, unlike Neoclassical, this inspiration was primarily used as a way to create symbolism and imagery. Romantic art also takes much of its aesthetic qualities from medievalism and Gothicism, as well as mythology and folklore. Among the greatest Romantic artists were Eugène Delacroix, Francisco Goya, J. M. W. Turner, John Constable, Caspar David Friedrich, Thomas Cole, and William Blake.

Most artists attempted to take a centrist approach which adopted different features of Neoclassicist and Romanticist styles, in order to synthesize them. The different attempts took place within the French Academy, and collectively are called Academic art. Adolphe William Bouguereau is considered a chief example of this stream of art.

In the early 19th century the face of Europe, however, became radically altered by industrialization. Poverty, squalor, and desperation were to be the fate of the new working class created by the &quot;revolution&quot;. In response to these changes going on in society, the movement of Realism emerged. Realism sought to accurately portray the conditions and hardships of the poor in the hopes of changing society. In contrast with Romanticism, which was essentially optimistic about mankind, Realism offered a stark vision of poverty and despair. Similarly, while Romanticism glorified nature, Realism portrayed life in the depths of an urban wasteland. Like Romanticism, Realism was a literary as well as an artistic movement. The great Realist painters include Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, Gustave Courbet, Jean-François Millet, Camille Corot, Honoré Daumier, Édouard Manet, Edgar Degas (both considered as Impressionists), and Thomas Eakins, among others.

The response of architecture to industrialisation, in stark contrast to the other arts, was to veer towards historicism. Although the railway stations built during this period are often considered the truest reflections of its spirit – they are sometimes called &quot;the cathedrals of the age&quot; – the main movements in architecture during the Industrial Age were revivals of styles from the distant past, such as the Gothic Revival. Related movements were the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, who attempted to return art to its state of &quot;purity&quot; prior to Raphael, and the Arts and Crafts Movement, which reacted against the impersonality of mass-produced goods and advocated a return to medieval craftsmanship.

Time Period:
*Neoclassicism: mid-early 18th century to early 19th century
*Romanticism: late 18th century to mid-19th century
*Realism: 19th century

==Modern art==

Out of the naturalist ethic of Realism grew a major artistic movement, Impressionism. The Impressionists pioneered the use of light in painting as they attempted to capture light as seen from the human eye. Edgar Degas,
Édouard Manet, Claude Monet, Camille Pissarro, and Pierre-Auguste Renoir, were all involved in the Impressionist movement. As a direct outgrowth of Impressionism came the development of Post-Impressionism. Paul Cézanne, Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat are the best known Post-Impressionists.

Following the Impressionists and the Post-Impressionists came Fauvism, often considered the first &quot;modern&quot; genre of art. Just as the Impressionists revolutionized light, so did the fauvists rethink color, painting their canvases in bright, wild hues. After the Fauvists, modern art began to develop in all its forms, ranging from Expressionism, concerned with evoking emotion through objective works of art, to Cubism, the art of transposing a four-dimensional reality onto a flat canvas, to Abstract art. These new art forms pushed the limits of traditional notions of &quot;art&quot; and corresponded to the similar rapid changes that were taking place in human society, technology, and thought.

Surrealism is often classified as a form of Modern Art. However, the Surrealists themselves have objected to the study of surrealism as an era in art history, claiming that it oversimplifies the complexity of the movement (which they say is not an artistic movement), misrepresents the relationship of surrealism to aesthetics, and falsely characterizes ongoing surrealism as a finished, historically encapsulated era. Other forms of Modern art (some of which border on Contemporary art) include:
* Abstract expressionism
* Art Deco
* Art Nouveau
* Bauhaus
* Color Field painting
* Conceptual Art
* Constructivism
* Cubism
* Dada
* Der Blaue Reiter
* De Stijl
* Die Brücke
* Body art
* Expressionism
* Fauvism
* Fluxus
* Futurism
* Happening
* Surrealism
* Lettrisme
* Lyrical Abstraction
* Land art
* Minimalism
* Naive art
* Op art
* Performance art
* Photorealism
* Pop art
* Suprematism
* Video art
* Vorticism
Time Period: 
* Impressionism: late 19th Century
* Others: First half of the 20th century

==Contemporary art and Postmodern art==
Modern art foreshadowed several characteristics of what would later be defined as postmodern art; as a matter of fact, several modern art movements can often be classified as both modern and postmodern, such as pop art. Postmodern art, for instance, places a strong emphasis on irony, parody and humour in general; modern art started to develop a more ironic approach to art which would later advance in a postmodern context. Postmodern art sees the blurring between the high and fine arts with low-end and commercial art; modern art started to experiment with this blurring.
Recent developments in art have been characterised by a significant expansion of what can now deemed to be art, in terms of materials, media, activity and concept. Conceptual art in particular has had a wide influence. This started literally as the replacement of concept for a made object, one of the intentions of which was to refute the commodification of art. However, it now usually refers to an artwork where there is an object, but the main claim for the work is made for the thought process that has informed it. The aspect of commercialism has returned to the work.

There has also been an increase in art referring to previous movements and artists, and gaining validity from that reference.

Postmodernism in art, which has grown since the 1960s, differs from Modernism in as much as Modern art movements were primarily focused on their own activities and values, while Postmodernism uses the whole range of previous movements as a reference point. This has by definition generated a relativistic outlook, accompanied by irony and a certain disbelief in values, as each can be seen to be replaced by another. Another result of this has been the growth of commercialism and celebrity. Postmodern art has questioned common rules and guidelines of what is regarded as &#x27;fine art&#x27;, merging low art with the fine arts until none is fully distinguishable. Before the advent of postmodernism, the fine arts were characterised by a form of aesthetic quality, elegance, craftsmanship, finesse and intellectual stimulation which was intended to appeal to the upper or educated classes; this distinguished high art from low art, which, in turn, was seen as tacky, kitsch, easily made and lacking in much or any intellectual stimulation, art which was intended to appeal to the masses. Postmodern art blurred these distinctions, bringing a strong element of kitsch, commercialism and campness into contemporary fine art; what is nowadays seen as fine art may have been seen as low art before postmodernism revolutionised the concept of what high or fine art truly is. In addition, the postmodern nature of contemporary art leaves a lot of space for individualism within the art scene; for instance, postmodern art often takes inspiration from past artistic movements, such as Gothic or Baroque art, and both juxtaposes and recycles styles from these past periods in a different context.

Some surrealists in particular Joan Miró, who called for the &quot;murder of painting&quot; (In numerous interviews dating from the 1930s onwards, Miró expressed contempt for conventional painting methods and his desire to &quot;kill&quot;, &quot;murder&quot;, or &quot;rape&quot; them in favor of more contemporary means of expression). have denounced or attempted to &quot;supersede&quot; painting, and there have also been other anti-painting trends among artistic movements, such as that of Dada and conceptual art. The trend away from painting in the late 20th century has been countered by various movements, for example the continuation of Minimal Art, Lyrical Abstraction, Pop Art, Op Art, New Realism, Photorealism, Neo Geo, Neo-expressionism, New European Painting, Stuckism, Excessivism and various other important and influential painterly directions.

==See also==
*History of art
*History of painting
* &quot;Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects&quot; (16th century book)
* Modernism
* Painting in the Americas before European colonization
*List of time periods

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Chapin, Anne P., &quot;Power, Privilege and Landscape in Minoan Art&quot;, in &quot;Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr&quot;, &quot;Hesperia&quot; (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, , 9780876615331, google books
*Gates, Charles, &quot;Pictorial Imagery in Minoan Wall Painting&quot;, in &quot;Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr&quot;, &quot;Hesperia&quot; (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, , 9780876615331, google books
*Hood, Sinclair, &quot;The Arts in Prehistoric Greece&quot;, 1978, Penguin (Penguin/Yale History of Art), 
* Sandars, Nancy K., &quot;Prehistoric Art in Europe&quot;, Penguin (Pelican, now Yale, History of Art), 1968 (nb 1st edn.; early datings now superseded)

==External links==

* Web Gallery of Art
* Postmodernism
* European artists community 
* Panopticon Virtual Art Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="4" end="17" title="Art of Europe" label="art of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="33" end="44" title="Art of Europe" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="62" end="69" title="history of art" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="73" end="83" title="visual art" label="visual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="87" end="93" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="104" end="119" title="prehistoric art" label="prehistoric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="138" end="155" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="156" end="160" title="rock art" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="165" end="178" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="183" end="193" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="247" end="258" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="267" end="275" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="332" end="351" title="Aegean civilization" label="Aegean civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="480" end="497" title="Ancient Greek art" label="Ancient Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="536" end="540" title="Roman art" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="563" end="575" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="600" end="612" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="617" end="629" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="664" end="680" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="791" end="799" title="Medieval art" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="828" end="839" title="Renaissance art" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="930" end="937" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="979" end="993" title="Neo-Classicism" label="Neo-Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1014" end="1028" title="Post-Modernism" label="Post-Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="1444" end="1452" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1752" end="1761" title="classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1763" end="1772" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1774" end="1782" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="1784" end="1790" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1792" end="1803" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1805" end="1812" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="1814" end="1820" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="1822" end="1834" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="1836" end="1842" title="Modernism" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1844" end="1854" title="Postmodern" label="Postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007522" start="1859" end="1880" title="New European Painting" label="New European Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="2051" end="2060" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2062" end="2071" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2073" end="2083" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2089" end="2097" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="2202" end="2217" title="prehistoric art" label="prehistoric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="2277" end="2292" title="Venus figurines" label="Venus figurines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131397" start="2305" end="2324" title="Venus of Willendorf" label="Venus of Willendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q702658" start="2388" end="2408" title="Löwenmensch figurine" label="Löwenmensch figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116580" start="2482" end="2499" title="Swimming Reindeer" label="Swimming Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q693549" start="2556" end="2567" title="Magdalenian" label="Magdalenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q755548" start="2613" end="2641" title="art of the Upper Paleolithic" label="art of the Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2762" end="2772" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q721657" start="2962" end="2981" title="Gundestrup cauldron" label="Gundestrup cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000127" start="2991" end="3008" title="European Iron Age" label="European Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137682" start="3028" end="3049" title="Trundholm sun chariot" label="Trundholm sun chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q770666" start="3124" end="3140" title="El Castillo Cave" label="El Castillo Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q172125" start="3185" end="3192" title="Lascaux" label="Lascaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q133575" start="3194" end="3210" title="Cave of Altamira" label="Cave of Altamira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087510" start="3212" end="3228" title="Grotte de Cussac" label="Grotte de Cussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758359" start="3230" end="3240" title="Pech Merle" label="Pech Merle"/>
<link wikidata="Q264242" start="3242" end="3255" title="Cave of Niaux" label="Cave of Niaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q374096" start="3257" end="3269" title="Chauvet Cave" label="Chauvet Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q914743" start="3271" end="3284" title="Font-de-Gaume" label="Font-de-Gaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229605" start="3380" end="3394" title="Coliboaia cave" label="Coliboaia cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3400" end="3407" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3456" end="3462" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975533" start="4205" end="4248" title="Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin" label="Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q914395" start="4890" end="4900" title="Celtic art" label="Celtic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000127" start="4920" end="4935" title="Iron Age Europe" label="Iron Age Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="5386" end="5399" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="5458" end="5471" title="Insular style" label="Insular style"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="5529" end="5548" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="5552" end="5557" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994746" start="5680" end="5693" title="Sinclair Hood" label="Sinclair Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282741" start="5914" end="5924" title="Aegean art" label="Aegean art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586345" start="5997" end="6009" title="Cycladic art" label="Cycladic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937490" start="6091" end="6098" title="Minoan pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868926" start="6119" end="6131" title="Minoan seals" label="Minoan seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="6141" end="6147" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="6323" end="6340" title="Ancient Greek art" label="Ancient Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="6387" end="6400" title="Mycenaean art" label="Mycenaean art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586345" start="6405" end="6417" title="Cycladic art" label="Cycladic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q210443" start="6540" end="6555" title="Greek Dark Ages" label="Greek Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="6578" end="6594" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6750" end="6762" title="Bull-leaping#Minoan_Crete" label="Bull-leaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937490" start="7438" end="7450" title="Marine Style" label="Marine Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="7551" end="7558" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318394" start="8057" end="8077" title="Ancient Egyptian art" label="Ancient Egyptian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="8585" end="8599" title="Art of Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="8663" end="8672" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q837249" start="8747" end="8763" title="marble sculpture" label="marble sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="8806" end="8815" title="classicism" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="8837" end="8862" title="pottery of Ancient Greece" label="pottery of Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="8867" end="8875" title="Ceramic art" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q629602" start="8968" end="8994" title="Black-figure vase painting" label="Black-figure vase painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q633683" start="8999" end="9023" title="Red-figure vase painting" label="Red-figure vase painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q216822" start="9157" end="9164" title="Apelles" label="Apelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q197044" start="9166" end="9187" title="Zeuxis and Parrhasius" label="Zeuxis and Parrhasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q210788" start="9379" end="9386" title="sfumato" label="sfumato"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="9401" end="9416" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="9548" end="9557" title="classical antiquity" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="9638" end="9647" title="Roman art" label="Roman art"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="9806" end="9818" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362251" start="9829" end="9844" title="Roman sculpture" label="Roman sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="10088" end="10096" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="10131" end="10138" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="10143" end="10154" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="10268" end="10285" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q646420" start="10419" end="10434" title="Fayum mummy portraits" label="coffin-portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="10462" end="10474" title="Late Antique" label="Late Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="10487" end="10495" title="Al-Fayum" label="Al-Fayum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8362" start="10597" end="10607" title="Miniature (illuminated manuscript)" label="miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="10735" end="10754" title="Early Christian art" label="Early Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="10822" end="10833" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10897" end="10905" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10957" end="10963" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="11009" end="11015" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="11042" end="11047" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="11069" end="11075" title="patron" label="patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="11130" end="11137" title="Christian cross" label="crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="11142" end="11152" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="11276" end="11287" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11359" end="11363" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q897054" start="11624" end="11644" title="Migration period art" label="Migration period art"/>
<link wikidata="Q914395" start="11755" end="11765" title="Celtic art" label="Celtic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="11858" end="11870" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="11922" end="11933" title="Insular art" label="Insular art"/>
<link wikidata="Q988346" start="12002" end="12017" title="Merovingian art" label="Merovingian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="12043" end="12049" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q614082" start="12073" end="12088" title="Carolingian art" label="Carolingian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066218" start="12174" end="12186" title="Ottonian art" label="Ottonian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q958255" start="12188" end="12203" title="Anglo-Saxon art" label="Anglo-Saxon art"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="12252" end="12274" title="Illuminated manuscript" label="Illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="12532" end="12542" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="13455" end="13468" title="Stained glass" label="Stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="13473" end="13479" title="Vitreous enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="13572" end="13583" title="high relief" label="high relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="14534" end="14545" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="14589" end="14603" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="14608" end="14612" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="14745" end="14750" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="14936" end="14947" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="14973" end="14982" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="15133" end="15139" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210788" start="15180" end="15187" title="sfumato" label="sfumato"/>
<link wikidata="Q219540" start="15192" end="15203" title="chiaroscuro" label="chiaroscuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="15207" end="15224" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="15226" end="15235" title="Sculpture" label="Sculptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q514847" start="15294" end="15306" title="contrapposto" label="contrapposto"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="15327" end="15335" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="15416" end="15425" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="15501" end="15523" title="Renaissance Classicism" label="Renaissance Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="15607" end="15616" title="oil paint" label="oil paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q211884" start="15792" end="15801" title="Byzantine art" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15792" start="15832" end="15838" title="Duccio" label="Duccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15790" start="15852" end="15859" title="Cimabue" label="Cimabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q316009" start="15879" end="15895" title="Pietro Cavallini" label="Pietro Cavallini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15899" end="15903" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="15913" end="15919" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049" start="15941" end="15953" title="13th century" label="13th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="16073" end="16079" title="Giotto di Bondone" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q963954" start="16200" end="16216" title="Scrovegni Chapel" label="Scrovegni Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="16218" end="16223" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="16256" end="16273" title="Renaissance art" label="Renaissance style"/>
<link wikidata="Q221043" start="16407" end="16421" title="Simone Martini" label="Simone Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q312393" start="16426" end="16445" title="Gentile da Fabriano" label="Gentile da Fabriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="16455" end="16466" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="16497" end="16500" title="oil paint" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q175166" start="16514" end="16521" title="tempera" label="tempera"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="16776" end="16788" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215251" start="16793" end="16810" title="Hugo van der Goes" label="Hugo van der Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="16976" end="16984" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16986" end="16991" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="17006" end="17015" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q514847" start="17057" end="17069" title="contrapposto" label="contrapposto"/>
<link wikidata="Q735085" start="17149" end="17154" title="David (Donatello, bronze)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="17270" end="17282" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="17359" end="17367" title="Tommaso Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996075" start="17486" end="17502" title="Brancacci Chapel" label="Brancacci Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="17628" end="17646" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="17845" end="17861" title="Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Lorenzo Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="17921" end="17937" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="17970" end="17987" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="17989" end="18012" title="Michelangelo Buonarroti" label="Michelangelo Buonarroti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="18018" end="18034" title="Raffaello Sanzio" label="Raffaello Sanzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q443153" start="19218" end="19246" title="Early Netherlandish painting" label="Early Netherlandish painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="19304" end="19316" title="oil painting" label="oil painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="19381" end="19393" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="19440" end="19462" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439" start="19467" end="19481" title="panel painting" label="panel painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="19485" end="19501" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Hieronymus Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="19518" end="19523" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q610877" start="19568" end="19588" title="Northern Renaissance" label="Northern Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="19821" end="19835" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455000" start="19930" end="19948" title="German Renaissance" label="German Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="20176" end="20185" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="20194" end="20201" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q301" start="20427" end="20435" title="El Greco" label="El Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="20471" end="20480" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818926" start="20537" end="20555" title="Northern Mannerism" label="Northern Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="20843" end="20853" title="Michelangelo Merisi" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="20855" end="20864" title="Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="20866" end="20883" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="20889" end="20904" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="20991" end="21016" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="Dutch Golden Age painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="21066" end="21082" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="21152" end="21162" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q214127" start="21164" end="21178" title="genre painting" label="genre painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="21204" end="21222" title="landscape painting" label="landscape painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="21309" end="21316" title="Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994273" start="21347" end="21371" title="Flemish Baroque painting" label="Flemish Baroque painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="21504" end="21523" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21585" end="21606" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="21682" end="21692" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="Absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="21934" end="21944" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="21948" end="21954" title="Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q212657" start="21956" end="21977" title="Artemisia Gentileschi" label="Artemisia Gentileschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="22275" end="22284" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="22843" end="22849" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="23404" end="23420" title="Far East" label="Far Eastern Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="23457" end="23466" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q863679" start="23481" end="23492" title="chinoiserie" label="chinoiserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="23705" end="23718" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="24188" end="24201" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="24601" end="24618" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="24812" end="24826" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="25004" end="25014" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="25179" end="25196" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23380" start="25655" end="25661" title="Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres" label="Ingres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547" start="25663" end="25669" title="Antonio Canova" label="Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="25675" end="25694" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="25783" end="25794" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="26661" end="26669" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="26677" end="26683" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="26713" end="26721" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="26764" end="26780" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432" start="26782" end="26796" title="Francisco Goya" label="Francisco Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="26798" end="26813" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="26815" end="26829" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884" start="26831" end="26853" title="Caspar David Friedrich" label="Caspar David Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q334001" start="26855" end="26866" title="Thomas Cole" label="Thomas Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="26872" end="26885" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189458" start="27131" end="27143" title="Academic art" label="Academic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q483992" start="27145" end="27171" title="Adolphe William Bouguereau" label="Adolphe William Bouguereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="27309" end="27326" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="27393" end="27406" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="27512" end="27519" title="realism (arts)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="27899" end="27906" title="Realism (arts)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="27965" end="27972" title="Realism (visual arts)" label="Realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207447" start="27990" end="28018" title="Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin" label="Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="28020" end="28035" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="28037" end="28057" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Jean-François Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="28059" end="28072" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187506" start="28074" end="28088" title="Honoré Daumier" label="Honoré Daumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="28090" end="28103" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="28105" end="28116" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="28137" end="28150" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214905" start="28158" end="28171" title="Thomas Eakins" label="Thomas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="28610" end="28624" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="28653" end="28679" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="28753" end="28760" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="28770" end="28794" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="28924" end="28937" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="28985" end="28996" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="29037" end="29044" title="Realism (arts)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="29147" end="29160" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="29283" end="29294" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="29296" end="29309" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="29311" end="29323" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="29325" end="29341" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="29347" end="29368" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="29482" end="29500" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="29502" end="29514" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="29516" end="29532" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="29534" end="29546" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="29548" end="29562" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="29641" end="29660" title="Post-Impressionists" label="Post-Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="29666" end="29673" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="29812" end="29817" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="29885" end="29895" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="29944" end="29957" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="30025" end="30031" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413630" start="30058" end="30074" title="Fourth dimension in art" label="four-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="30106" end="30118" title="Abstract art" label="Abstract art"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="30313" end="30323" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="30629" end="30639" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="30783" end="30799" title="Contemporary art" label="Contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="30812" end="30834" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="30837" end="30845" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="30848" end="30859" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="30862" end="30869" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164982" start="30872" end="30892" title="Color Field painting" label="Color Field painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="30895" end="30909" title="Conceptual Art" label="Conceptual Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="30912" end="30926" title="Constructivism (art)" label="Constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="30929" end="30935" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="30938" end="30942" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="30945" end="30961" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207445" start="30964" end="30972" title="De Stijl" label="De Stijl"/>
<link wikidata="Q152778" start="30975" end="30985" title="Die Brücke" label="Die Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q678649" start="30988" end="30996" title="Body art" label="Body art"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="30999" end="31012" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="31015" end="31022" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="31025" end="31031" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="31034" end="31042" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="31045" end="31054" title="Happening" label="Happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="31057" end="31067" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q768100" start="31070" end="31079" title="Lettrisme" label="Lettrisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147263" start="31082" end="31101" title="Lyrical Abstraction" label="Lyrical Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q326478" start="31104" end="31112" title="Land art" label="Land art"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="31115" end="31125" title="Minimalism" label="Minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="31128" end="31137" title="Naive art" label="Naive art"/>
<link wikidata="Q182331" start="31140" end="31146" title="Op art" label="Op art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="31149" end="31164" title="Performance art" label="Performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="31167" end="31179" title="Photorealism" label="Photorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="31182" end="31189" title="Pop art" label="Pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q191970" start="31192" end="31203" title="Suprematism" label="Suprematism"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="31206" end="31215" title="Video art" label="Video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q915841" start="31218" end="31227" title="Vorticism" label="Vorticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="31570" end="31577" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="32099" end="32113" title="Conceptual art" label="Conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="32638" end="32651" title="Postmodernism" label="Postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="32706" end="32715" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="33217" end="33225" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630264" start="33241" end="33248" title="low culture" label="low art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="33504" end="33509" title="upper class" label="upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="33608" end="33614" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="33827" end="33835" title="camp (style)" label="campness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="34336" end="34346" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="34362" end="34371" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="34826" end="34830" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="34835" end="34849" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="34978" end="34989" title="Minimal Art" label="Minimal Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147263" start="34991" end="35010" title="Lyrical Abstraction" label="Lyrical Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="35012" end="35019" title="Pop Art" label="Pop Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q182331" start="35021" end="35027" title="Op Art" label="Op Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q276308" start="35029" end="35040" title="New Realism" label="New Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="35042" end="35054" title="Photorealism" label="Photorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66317259" start="35056" end="35063" title="Neo-minimalism" label="Neo Geo"/>
<link wikidata="Q589655" start="35065" end="35082" title="Neo-expressionism" label="Neo-expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007522" start="35084" end="35105" title="New European Painting" label="New European Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351977" start="35107" end="35115" title="Stuckism" label="Stuckism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047669" start="35117" end="35128" title="Excessivism" label="Excessivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="35210" end="35224" title="History of art" label="History of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772393" start="35226" end="35245" title="History of painting" label="History of painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="35254" end="35317" title="Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects" label="Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="35346" end="35355" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533292" start="35358" end="35411" title="Painting in the Americas before European colonization" label="Painting in the Americas before European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004260" start="35413" end="35433" title="List of time periods" label="List of time periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994746" start="35910" end="35924" title="Sinclair Hood" label="Hood, Sinclair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334843" wikidata="Q6499408" url="?curid=334843" title="Laura Scales">
<text>Laura Woolsey Lord Scales (November 13, 1879 – June 12, 1990) was an American educator, college dean and supercentenarian who served as the Dean of Students of Smith College from 1922 to 1944.

==Biography==
Scales was the daughter of John King Lord (1848–1926), a historian who served as acting president of Dartmouth College in 1892 and 1893; her two brothers became a professor of anatomy and a publisher. She graduated from Smith College in 1901 and in 1908 married Robert Leighton Scales (1880–1912), a lawyer and former English instructor at Dartmouth who coauthored the debate book &quot;Argumentation and Debate&quot;. In 1913, after Scales&#x27; death, she became an instructor at Boston&#x27;s Museum of Fine Arts, before resigning in 1920 to become dean of women at the Carnegie Institute of Technology. She then returned to Smith, where she served as dean of students for 22 years (1922–1944). In order to create a sense of community spirit, Scales instituted a policy that all students live on the campus.

Scales died in 1990 aged 110 years and 211 days, one of the oldest people in the world at the time. The Massachusetts legislature issued a resolution in honor of her 110th birthday in 1989. Her papers are archived at Smith College.

==Awards and honors==
Smith gave Scales an honorary doctorate of humane letters in 1931, and Dartmouth College awarded her an honorary doctorate in literature eight years later. In 1936, Smith College named a newly built dormitory the Laura Scales House; notable residents have included Gloria Steinem.

== Selected publications ==
*

==References==
==External links==
*Laura Scales Papers, 1879–1990, Smith College archives
*Laura Scales photographed in the house named in her honor, by Alfred Eisenstaedt for &quot;Life&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6499408" start="0" end="25" title="Laura Scales" label="Laura Woolsey Lord Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="96" end="100" title="dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="160" end="173" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="235" end="249" title="John King Lord" label="John King Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="309" end="326" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="428" end="441" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="470" end="492" title="Robert Leighton Scales" label="Robert Leighton Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789756" start="595" end="619" title="Argumentation and Debate" label="Argumentation and Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49133" start="704" end="723" title="Museum of Fine Arts, Boston" label="Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="781" end="813" title="Carnegie Institute of Technology" label="Carnegie Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200828" start="1040" end="1067" title="supercentenarian" label="aged 110 years and 211 days"/>
<link wikidata="Q254917" start="1069" end="1093" title="oldest people" label="one of the oldest people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="1124" end="1149" title="Massachusetts legislature" label="Massachusetts legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="1318" end="1332" title="humane letters" label="humane letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="1346" end="1363" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="1540" end="1554" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q62081" start="1741" end="1759" title="Alfred Eisenstaedt" label="Alfred Eisenstaedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="1764" end="1780" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334845" wikidata="Q156790" url="?curid=334845" title="Passiflora edulis">
<text>Passiflora edulis, commonly known as passion fruit, is a vine species of passion flower native to the region of southern Brazil through Paraguay to northern Argentina. It is cultivated commercially in tropical and subtropical areas for its sweet, seedy fruit. 

The fruit is a pepo, a type of botanical berry, round to oval, either yellow or dark purple at maturity, with a soft to firm, juicy interior filled with numerous seeds. The fruit is both eaten and juiced, with the juice often added to other fruit juices to enhance aroma.

==Etymology==
The passion fruit is so called because it is one of the many species of passion flower, the English translation of the Latin genus name, &quot;Passiflora&quot;. Around 1700, the name was given by missionaries in Brazil as an educational aid while trying to convert the indigenous inhabitants to Christianity; its name was &quot;flor das cinco chagas&quot; or &quot;flower of the five wounds&quot; to illustrate the crucifixion of Christ, with other plant components also named after an emblem in the Passion of Jesus.

==Description==
&quot;Passiflora edulis&quot; is a perennial vine; tendrils are borne in leaf axils, and have a red or purple hue when young. There are two main varieties: a purple-fruited type, &quot;P. edulis&quot; f. &quot;edulis&quot;, and the yellow-fruited &quot;P. edulis&quot; f. &quot;flavicarpa&quot;.

Usually the vine produces a single flower 5–7.5 cm wide at each node. The flower has 5 oblong, green sepals and 5 white petals. The sepals and petals are 4–6mm in length and form a fringe. The base of the flower is a rich purple with 5 stamens, an ovary, and a branched style. The styles bend backward and the stigmas, which are located on top of the styles, have a very distinct head.

The fruit produced is a pepo and entirely fleshy (making it botanically a berry) and is spherical to ovoid. The outside color of the pepo ranges from dark purple with fine white specks to light yellow. The fruit is 4–7.5 cm in diameter; purple fruits are smaller, weighing around 35 grams, while yellow fruits are closer to 80 grams. The smooth, leathery rind is 9–13 mm thick, including a thick layer of pith. Within the pepo, there are typically 250 brown seeds, each 2.4 mm in length. Each seed is surrounded by a membranous sac filled with pulpy juice. The flavor of the juice is slightly acidic and musky. The passion fruit&#x27;s flavor can be compared to the guava fruit.

===Varieties===

Several distinct varieties of passion fruit with clearly differing exterior appearances exist. The bright yellow &quot;flavicarpa&quot; variety, also known as yellow or golden passion fruit, can grow up to the size of a grapefruit, has a smooth, glossy, light, and airy rind, and has been used as a rootstock for purple passion fruit in Australia. The dark purple &quot;edulis&quot; variety is smaller than a lemon, though it is less acidic than yellow passion fruit, and has a richer aroma and flavour.

==Uses==
Passionfruit has a variety of uses related to its favored taste as whole fruit and juice.

* In Australia and New Zealand, it is available commercially both fresh and tinned. It is added to fruit salads, and fresh fruit pulp or passion fruit sauce is commonly used in desserts, including as a topping for pavlova (a regional meringue cake) and ice cream, a flavouring for cheesecake, and in the icing of vanilla slices. A passion-fruit–flavored soft drink called Passiona has also been manufactured in Australia since the 1920s. It can be used in some alcoholic cocktails.
* In Brazil, the term applies to passion fruit (, or &quot;sour&quot;) and granadillo (, or &quot;sweet&quot;). Passion fruit mousse is a common dessert and passion fruit pulp is used to decorate the tops of cakes. Passion fruit juice, ice pops, and soft drinks are also consumed. When making a &quot;caipirinha&quot;, passion fruit may be used instead of lime.
* In Cambodia the red and yellow passion fruit grown in the Mondulkiri Province are used to produce wine and liquor.
* In Colombia and Costa Rica, it is used for juices and desserts.
* In the Dominican Republic, where it is locally called &quot;chinola&quot;, it is used to make juice and fruit preserves. Passion fruit-flavored syrup is used on shaved ice, and the fruit is also eaten raw, sprinkled with sugar.
* In East Africa, passion fruit is used to make juice, and is commonly eaten as a whole fruit.
* In Hawaii, where it is known as , fresh passion fruit pulp is eaten. Lilikoi-flavored syrup is used as a topping for shave ice, soft drinks, a glaze, and to marinate meat and vegetables. It is used as a flavoring for malasadas, cheesecakes, cookies, dessert bars, ice cream and mochi. Passion fruit is also used in jam or jelly, as well as a fruit curd known as &quot;lilikoi butter&quot;.
* In India, the government of Andhra Pradesh started growing passion fruit vines in the Chintapalli (Vizag) forests to make fruit available within the region. The fruit is eaten raw, sprinkled with sugar, and is used to make juice.
* In Indonesia, where it is known as &quot;markisa&quot;, both &quot;edulis&quot; and &quot;flavicarpa&quot; varieties are cultivated and consumed differently. The former is normally eaten as is, while the latter is more commonly strained to obtain its juice, which is cooked with sugar to make passion fruit syrup used in drinks and desserts.
* In Mexico, passion fruit is used to make juice or is eaten raw with chili powder and lime.
* In Paraguay, passion fruit is used principally for its juice, to prepare desserts such as passion fruit mousse, cheesecake, ice cream, and to flavor yogurts and cocktails.
* In Peru, passion fruit has long been a staple in homemade ice pops called &quot;marciano&quot; or &quot;chupetes&quot;. Passion fruit is also used in several desserts, especially mousses and cheesecakes. Passion fruit juice is also drunk on its own and is used in ceviche variations and in cocktails, including the &quot;Maracuyá sour&quot;, a variation of the &quot;Pisco sour&quot;. , or &quot;sweet&quot; can be eaten raw.
* In the Philippines, passion fruit is commonly sold in public markets and in public schools. Some vendors sell the fruit with a straw to enable sucking out the seeds and juices inside.
* In Portugal, especially the Azores and Madeira, passion fruit is used as a base for a variety of liqueurs and mousses.
* In Puerto Rico, where the fruit is known as &quot;parcha&quot;, it is used in juices, ice cream or pastries.
* In South Africa, passion fruit, known locally as Granadilla (the yellow variety as Guavadilla), is used to flavor yogurt, soft drinks, such as Schweppes&#x27; &quot;Sparkling Granadilla&quot;, and numerous cordial drinks (in cordial flavors it is referred to as passion fruit). It is often eaten raw or used as a topping for cakes and tarts. Granadilla juice is commonly available in restaurants. The yellow variety is used for juice processing, while the purple variety is sold in fresh fruit markets.
* In Sri Lanka, passion fruit juice, along with faluda, is a common refreshment. Passion fruit cordial is manufactured both at home as well as industrially by mixing the pulp with sugar.
* In Suriname, where it is known as , there are three varieties. The red and orange varieties are sold by markets and eaten as a fruit because of their natural sweet flavor. The sour yellow variety, widely grown in the coastal region, is used to make jam and juices with added sugar, either uncooked for instant use or cooked into a thick syrup for storage in the fridge. The juice is also used to flavor cocktails.

===Nutrition===
Raw passion fruit is 73% water, 22% carbohydrates, 2% protein and 0.7% fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw passion fruit supplies 97 calories and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin C (33% DV) and a moderate source (10–19% DV) of riboflavin and potassium (table). No other micronutrients are in significant content.

==Phytochemicals==
Several varieties of passion fruit are rich in polyphenol content. Yellow varieties of the fruit were found to contain prunasin and other cyanogenic glycosides in the peel and juice.

==Cultivation==
Passion fruit is widely grown in tropical and semitropical regions of the world. In the United States, it is cultivated in Florida, Hawaii, and California. They generally have to be protected from frost, although certain cultivars have survived light frosts after heavy pruning of affected areas.

===Pollination===
The flower of the yellow-fruited form of the passion fruit plant is self-sterile, while that of the purple-fruited form is self-compatible. In California, it is reported that pollination of flowers is most effective when done by the carpenter bee. There are three types of yellow passion fruit flowers, classified by curvature of style. To help assure the presence of carpenter bees, some gardeners place decaying logs near the vines, which provide shelter for the bees.

===Diseases===
====Viruses====
Passion fruit woodiness virus is one of the most well-known viruses to the passion fruit. It belongs to the &quot;Potyvirus&quot; group and can attack a plant at any age from nursery to mature plants. Some features include yellow leaves that display distortion in the leaf length and shape. As well as affecting the leaf, this virus influences fruit shape and size. Affected fruits become stone-like and much smaller than normal, with many fruits becoming scabbed and cracked. The virus is spread by sap-sucking insects such as aphids and mites. Woodiness can also spread through vegetation propagation such as infected scions or contaminated tools. There is no chemical control for this virus once the plant is infected, but the use of clean planting material can reduce its dissemination.

One of the most serious viruses pertaining to vegetation is the cucumber mosaic virus. In the passion fruit, this virus appears with yellow mottling on leaves starting at random points on the vine and diminishing in intensity towards the tip. Expanding leaves typically become twisted, curl downward, and develop a &quot;shoestring&quot; appearance as a result of a restriction of the leaf surface. It is mobile and can spread easily through interactions with other plants such as brushing between leaves. This virus is naturally transmitted through aphids and can also be transmitted mechanically through seedlings. Varietal resistance is the primary management tool, and eliminating weeds and infected perennial ornamentals that may harbor the virus is critical. Once the plant has been infected, there is no possible management or control for the virus.

====Phytoplasma====
Overshooting is the term used when &quot;Phytoplasma&quot;, a specialized bacterium, attacks the phloem of a plant. &quot;Phytoplasma&quot; infection is characterized by chlorotic small leaves, shortening of internodes, excessive lateral shoots and abnormal flowers. Although there have been reports of this disease within the passion fruit plant, many infected plants are affected without visible signs of disease. Although &quot;Phytoplasma&quot; can be spread through grafting, it can be inhibited by periodic inspection of plant nurseries and areas that have had past infections. Overshooting responds to treatment with tetracycline, a common broad-spectrum antibiotic.

====Bacteria====
Bacterial leaf spot, which causes vein clearing, forms bright yellow colonies causing infection and leaf wilt and, eventually, deterioration of fruit pulp, especially of young fruits. Under favorable conditions for the bacteria, infection occurs through natural openings or wounds from other pathogens that affect leaf inter-cellular spaces. Fertilizers or a copper chloride and mancozeb mixture can control the intensity of the disease, but are not a cure.

The bacterial grease-spot of the passion fruit is caused by Pseudomonas syringae. It appears with olive-green to brown greasy-looking spots or brown, sunken circular lesions. On a later stage, a hard crust can cover the lesions showing a chlorotic halo. Affecting mainly the stomata, the grease-spot thrives in high temperatures and high relative humidity. To avoid infection, measures that may be adopted include planting seeds from healthy plants and using existing healthy areas. Fungicide controls can aid in preventing further infection.

====Fungal diseases====
Collar rot disease is caused by the fungus &quot;Fusarium solani&quot;. It is characterized by necrotic lesions at the collar region, browning of the stem at soil level, and dark discoloration of the stem. The rotting stem interferes with food and water transport within the plant, leading to withering of the plant until death. Infection occurs mostly through contaminated soil and infected plants which cause the plants to survive for only a few weeks. There are no chemical controls. Management includes planting seedlings in unaffected areas and using clean tools.

The fungus called fusarium wilt commonly occurs in adult plants and is caused by &quot;Fusarium oxysporum&quot;. The pathogen has ability to survive for long periods, penetrating roots, invading the xylem, and preventing the transport of water and nutrients to other organs of the plant. Once infected, this disease causes leaves to yellow and browning of the vascular system until they wilt and die. It occurs in any type of soil infecting all plants. Management of crops includes planting clean seedlings, uprooting and burning infected plants, and using sterilized tools.

The anthracnose, a canker caused by &quot;Colletotrichum gloeosporiodes&quot;, is a pathogen of the passion fruit creating dark and sunken lesions of the trunk. By attacking mature passion fruit trees, these lesions cause intense defoliation and fruit rot. Many leaves die due to the foliar lesions and the skin of fruits becomes papery. Under warm and humid conditions, this disease can worsen, causing red and orange spores eventually killing the plant. Infection is carried out through the residues of the passion flower, infected seeds, seedlings, and cuttings. Managing this disease involves a combination of using pathogen-free seedlings, eliminating infected areas, and improving ventilation and light conditions. Copper-based fungicides on injured areas can prevent the spread of disease.

==In culture==
Passion fruit flower is the national flower of Paraguay. In 2006, singer-songwriter Paula Fuga released the popular song &quot;, the Hawaiian language word for passion fruit; the song is featured on an album also named after the fruit. Hip-hop artist Drake released the hit song &quot;Passionfruit&quot; in 2017.

==See also==
* Banana passionfruit
* &quot;Passiflora incarnata&quot;
* &quot;Passiflora quadrangularis&quot;

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Grow Passionfruit Vine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="37" end="50" title="Passiflora edulis" label="passion fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="57" end="61" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161185" start="73" end="87" title="passion flower" label="passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="121" end="127" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="136" end="144" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="157" end="166" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="201" end="209" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="214" end="225" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224510" start="236" end="258" title="Passion fruit (fruit)" label="its sweet, seedy fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="277" end="281" title="Pepo (botany)" label="pepo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="293" end="308" title="Berry (botany)" label="botanical berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="610" end="617" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q161185" start="621" end="635" title="passion flower" label="passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152448" start="745" end="757" title="Spanish missions in South America" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="761" end="767" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="844" end="856" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390934" start="928" end="939" title="Five Holy Wounds" label="five wounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="964" end="975" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="1049" end="1065" title="Passion of Jesus" label="Passion of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="1119" end="1128" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1162" end="1167" title="axils" label="axils"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="1445" end="1449" title="Node (plant)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="1482" end="1487" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="1501" end="1506" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="1617" end="1623" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="1629" end="1634" title="Ovary (botany)" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546595" start="1651" end="1656" title="Style (botany)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="1691" end="1697" title="stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="1842" end="1847" title="berry (botany)" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192576" start="2173" end="2177" title="pith" label="pith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="2434" end="2439" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q41350" start="2685" end="2695" title="grapefruit" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17216" start="2764" end="2773" title="rootstock" label="rootstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="2874" end="2879" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3075" end="3084" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3089" end="3100" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="3247" end="3254" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419824" start="3284" end="3291" title="Pavlova (food)" label="pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q276276" start="3304" end="3312" title="meringue" label="meringue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="3323" end="3332" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q215348" start="3351" end="3361" title="cheesecake" label="cheesecake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491" start="3383" end="3397" title="Mille-feuille" label="vanilla slices"/>
<link wikidata="Q19573609" start="3442" end="3450" title="Passiona" label="Passiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3557" end="3563" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q917921" start="3627" end="3637" title="Passiflora ligularis" label="granadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10332768" start="3664" end="3684" title="Passion fruit mousse" label="Passion fruit mousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q625152" start="3853" end="3863" title="caipirinha" label="caipirinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="3908" end="3912" title="Lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3919" end="3927" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="3974" end="3993" title="Mondulkiri Province" label="Mondulkiri Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4036" end="4044" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="4049" end="4059" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="4106" end="4124" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="4203" end="4218" title="fruit preserves" label="fruit preserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="4243" end="4248" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491078" start="4260" end="4270" title="shaved ice" label="shaved ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="4332" end="4343" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="4427" end="4433" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108258" start="4541" end="4550" title="shave ice" label="shave ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192031" start="4567" end="4572" title="Glaze (ice)" label="glaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281551" start="4641" end="4649" title="malasada" label="malasada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4674" end="4686" title="lemon bar#hawaii" label="dessert bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q470519" start="4702" end="4707" title="mochi" label="mochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799855" start="4766" end="4776" title="fruit curd" label="fruit curd"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4819" end="4824" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="4844" end="4858" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101332" start="4902" end="4913" title="Chintapalli, Vizianagaram" label="Chintapalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q200016" start="4915" end="4920" title="Visakhapatnam" label="Vizag"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="5051" end="5060" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5395" end="5401" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072946" start="5460" end="5472" title="chili powder" label="chili powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="5488" end="5496" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="5662" end="5666" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057953" start="5923" end="5930" title="ceviche" label="ceviche"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="5949" end="5957" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q673012" start="6026" end="6036" title="Pisco sour" label="Pisco sour"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6094" end="6105" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="6276" end="6284" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="6301" end="6307" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="6312" end="6319" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="6370" end="6377" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="6397" end="6408" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6508" end="6520" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="6619" end="6625" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="6627" end="6637" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q838651" start="6648" end="6657" title="Schweppes" label="Schweppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190923" start="6711" end="6725" title="Squash (drink)" label="cordial drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="7013" end="7022" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918079" start="7056" end="7062" title="faluda" label="faluda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190923" start="7103" end="7110" title="Squash (drink)" label="cordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="7200" end="7208" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="7664" end="7677" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7682" end="7689" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="7699" end="7702" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="7769" end="7776" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="7819" end="7830" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="7839" end="7848" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q130365" start="7895" end="7905" title="riboflavin" label="riboflavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234712" start="7910" end="7919" title="potassium in biology" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="7938" end="7951" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="8048" end="8058" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253027" start="8120" end="8128" title="prunasin" label="prunasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="8139" end="8160" title="cyanogenic glycosides" label="cyanogenic glycosides"/>
<link wikidata="Q171187" start="8168" end="8172" title="peel (fruit)" label="peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="8234" end="8242" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="8247" end="8259" title="subtropics" label="semitropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8289" end="8302" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="8324" end="8331" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="8333" end="8339" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="8345" end="8355" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="8383" end="8403" title="Hard frost" label="protected from frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120121" start="8585" end="8597" title="self-sterile" label="self-sterile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120121" start="8640" end="8655" title="self-compatible" label="self-compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="8692" end="8703" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165550" start="8750" end="8763" title="carpenter bee" label="carpenter bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142778" start="9020" end="9049" title="Passion fruit woodiness virus" label="Passion fruit woodiness virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400142" start="9134" end="9143" title="Potyvirus" label="Potyvirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518692" start="9876" end="9897" title="cucumber mosaic virus" label="cucumber mosaic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132782" start="10731" end="10742" title="Phytoplasma" label="Phytoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="10764" end="10773" title="bacterium" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="10787" end="10793" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075317" start="10860" end="10869" title="chlorotic" label="chlorotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="10898" end="10908" title="internode (botany)" label="internodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q220869" start="10928" end="10933" title="Shoot (botany)" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q222958" start="11161" end="11169" title="grafting" label="grafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193045" start="11314" end="11326" title="tetracycline" label="tetracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971815" start="11337" end="11351" title="broad-spectrum" label="broad-spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="11352" end="11362" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839991" start="11382" end="11401" title="Bacterial leaf spot" label="Bacterial leaf spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="11416" end="11420" title="vein (botany)" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q409132" start="11761" end="11769" title="mancozeb" label="mancozeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q311202" start="11901" end="11921" title="Pseudomonas syringae" label="Pseudomonas syringae"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="12116" end="12123" title="stomata" label="stomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="12324" end="12333" title="Fungicide" label="Fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975345" start="12409" end="12419" title="Collar rot" label="Collar rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509914" start="12458" end="12473" title="Fusarium solani" label="Fusarium solani"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="12504" end="12512" title="necrotic" label="necrotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475267" start="12997" end="13010" title="fusarium wilt" label="fusarium wilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q139958" start="13066" end="13084" title="Fusarium oxysporum" label="Fusarium oxysporum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="13178" end="13183" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q811596" start="13559" end="13570" title="anthracnose" label="anthracnose"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="13709" end="13714" title="trunk (botany)" label="trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q123246832" start="14396" end="14411" title="national flower" label="national flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="14415" end="14423" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714766" start="14452" end="14462" title="Paula Fuga" label="Paula Fuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="14501" end="14518" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="14619" end="14624" title="Drake (musician)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q29043310" start="14653" end="14665" title="Passionfruit (song)" label="Passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q415622" start="14697" end="14716" title="Banana passionfruit" label="Banana passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="14725" end="14745" title="Passiflora incarnata" label="Passiflora incarnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q159105" start="14760" end="14785" title="Passiflora quadrangularis" label="Passiflora quadrangularis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334847" wikidata="Q1062748" url="?curid=334847" title="Shakya">
<text>Shakya (Pāḷi: ; ) was an ancient clan of the northeastern region of South Asia, whose existence is attested during the Iron Age. The Shakyas were organised into a  (an aristocratic oligarchic republic), also known as the Shakya Republic. The Shakyas were on the periphery, both geographically and culturally, of the eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain in the Greater Magadha cultural region.

==Location==

The Shakyas lived in the Terai – an area south of the foothills of the Himalayas and north of the Indo-Gangetic Plain with their neighbors to the west and south being the kingdom of Kosala, their neighbors to the east across the Rohni River being the related Koliya tribe, while on the northeast they bordered on the Mallakas of Kushinagar. To the north, the territory of the Shakyas stretched into the Himalayas until the forested regions of the mountains, which formed their northern border.

The capital of the Shakyas was the city of Kapilavastu.

==Etymology==
The name of the Shakyas is attested primarily in the Pali forms and , and the Sanskrit form .

The Shakyas&#x27; name was derived from the Sanskrit root () ( (), more rarely () or ()) meaning &quot;to be able,&quot; &quot;worthy,&quot; &quot;possible,&quot; or &quot;practicable.&quot;

The name of the Shakyas was also derived from the name of the or tree, which Bryan Levman has identified with either the teak or sāla tree, which is ultimately related to word (), meaning &#x27;branch,’ and was connected to the Shakyas&#x27; practice of worshipping the or tree.


==History==
===Origin===
The Shakyas were an eastern sub-Himalayan ethnic group on the periphery, both geographically and culturally, of the eastern Gangetic plain in the Greater Magadha cultural region. The Shakyas were of &#x27;mixed origin&#x27; () of Indo-Aryan and Munda descent, with the former group forming a minority according to Bryan Levman. The Shakyas&#x27; legends link their ancestry to Okkāka (Ikshvāku) whose name, according to Levman, is of Munda origin. According to Edward Thompson, they were likely partly of Mongolian descent, while in the view of E. J. Thomas, they were mainly of Kol or Munda origin. The Shakyas were closely related to their eastern neighbours, the Koliya tribe, with whom they intermarried.

====Alternative origin hypothesis====
Scholars such as Michael Witzel and Christopher I. Beckwith have equated the Shakyas with Central Asian nomads who were called Scythians by the Greeks, s by the Achaemenid Persians, and by the Indo-Aryans. These scholars have suggested that the people of the Buddha were Saka soldiers who arrived in South Asia in the army of Darius the Great during the Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley, and saw in Scytho-Saka nomadism the origin of the wandering asceticism of the Buddha.

Scholars criticize the Scythian hypothesis due to a lack of evidence, with Bryan Levman maintaining that the Shakyas were native to the north-east Gangetic plain and unrelated to the Iranic Sakas.

===Statehood===
By the sixth century BCE, the Shakyas, the Koliyas, Moriyas, and Mallakas lived between the territories of the Kauśalyas to the west and the Licchavikas and Vaidehas to the east, thus separating the Vajjika League from the Kosala kingdom. By that time, the Shakya republic had become a vassal state of the larger Kingdom of Kosala.

During the fifth century itself, one of the members of the ruling aristocratic oligarchy of the Shakyas was Suddhodana. Suddhodana was married to the princess Māyā, who was the daughter of a Koliya noble, and the son of Suddhodana and Māyā was Siddhartha Gautama, the historical Buddha and founder of Buddhism.

During the life of the Buddha, an armed feud opposed the Shakyas and the Koliyas concerning the waters of the river Rohiṇī, which formed the boundary between the two states and whose water was needed by both of them to irrigate their crops. The intervention of the Buddha finally put an end to these hostilities.

After the death of the Buddha, the Shakyas claimed a share of his relics from the Mallakas of Kusinārā on the grounds that he had been a Shakya.

===Conquest by Kosala===

Shortly after the Buddha&#x27;s death, the Kauśalya king Viḍūḍabha, who had overthrown his father Pasenadi, invaded the Shakya and Koliya republics, seeking to conquer their territories because they had once been part of Kosala. Viḍūḍabha finally triumphed over the Shakyas and Koliyas and annexed their state after a long war with massive loss of lives on both sides. Details of this war were exaggerated by later Buddhist accounts, which claimed that Viḍūḍabha exterminated the Shakyas in retaliation for having given in marriage to his father the slave girl who became Viḍūḍabha&#x27;s mother. In actuality, Viḍūḍabha&#x27;s invasion of Shakya might instead have had similar motivations to the conquest of the Vajjika League by Viḍūḍabha&#x27;s relative, the Māgadhī king Ajātasattu, who, because he was the son of a Vajjika princess, was therefore interested in the territory of his mother&#x27;s homeland. The result of the Kauśalya invasion was that the Shakyas and Koliyas merely lost political importance after being annexed into Viḍūḍabha&#x27;s kingdom. The Shakyas nevertheless soon disappeared as an ethnic group after their annexation, having become absorbed into the population of Kosala, with only a few displaced families maintaining the Shakya identity later. The Koliyas likewise disappeared as a polity and as a tribe soon after their annexation.

The massive life losses incurred by Kosala during its conquest of Shakya and Koliya weakened it significantly enough that it was itself soon annexed by its eastern neighbour, the kingdom of Magadha, and its king Viḍūḍabha was defeated and killed by the Māgadhī king Ajātasattu.

===Legacy===

====In Buddhism====
The Buddha was given the epithet of the &quot;Sage of the Shakyas,&quot; in Pali and in Sanskrit, by his followers.

The functioning of the proceedings in the Trāyastriṃśa heaven ruled by Sakka, lord of the devas in Buddhist cosmology, are modelled on those of the Shakya santhāgāra or general assembly hall.

====Descent claims====
Tharu people of Tarai region of India and Nepal claim descent from Sakya. Significant population of Newars of Kathmandu valley in Nepal use the surname Shakya and also claim to be the descendants of the Shakya clan with titles such as Śākyavamsa (of the Shakya lineage) having been used in the past.

According to &quot;Hmannan Yazawin&quot;, first published in 1823, the legendary king Abhiyaza, who founded the Tagaung Kingdom and the Burmese monarchy belonged to the same Shakya clan of the Buddha. He migrated to present-day Burma after the annexation of the Shakya kingdom by Kosala. The earlier Burmese accounts stated that he was a descendant of Pyusawhti, son of a solar spirit and a dragon princess.

==Culture and society==
===Ethnicity===
The Shakyas lived in what scholars presently call the Greater Magadha cultural area, which was located in the eastern Gangetic plain to the east of the confluence of the Gaṅgā and Yamunā rivers. Like the other eastern groups of the Greater Magadha region, the Shakyas were (&quot;of mixed origin&quot;), and therefore did not subscribe to the  social organisation consisting of s, s, s, and . While non-Indo-Aryan indigenous clans were given the status of s, that is of slaves or servants, indigenous clans who collaborated with the Indo-Aryan clans were the status of s. The Buddhist suttas are ambiguous on the status of the Buddha, sometimes calling him a kshatriya, but mostly ignoring the varna system. Additionally, the populations of Greater Magadha did not subscribe to the supremacy of the s of the peoples of , and s were regarded as higher in the societies of Greater Magadha.

Vedic literature therefore considered the populations of Greater Magadha as existing outside of the limits of , with the  grouping the Vaidehas, Māgadhīs, Licchavikas, and Mallakas, who were the neighbours of the Shakyas, as being &quot;non-Aryan&quot; and born from mixed caste marriages, and the s requiring visitors to these lands to perform purificatory sacrifices as expiation.

This negative view of the peoples of the Greater Magadha region by the Vedic peoples extended to the Shakyas, as recorded in the , according to which the s described the Shakyas as &quot;fierce, rough-spoken, touchy and violent,&quot; and accused them of not honouring, respecting, esteeming, revering or paying homage to the s owing to their &quot;menial origin.&quot;

===Language===
The Shakyans were at least bilingual, under the linguistic influence of Munda languages, as attested by many of their villages having Mundari names, and the name of the founder of their clan, which has been recorded in the Sanskrit form and the Pali form , being of Munda origin.

===Social organisation===
====Class system====
The society of the Shakyas and Koliyas was a stratified one which did not subscribe to the  social organisation consisting of s, s, s, and s, but instead consisted of an aristocratic class of s and a slave or servant class of s, themselves comprising at least an aristocracy, as well as land-owners, attendants, labourers, and serfs.

Landholders held the title of s, literally meaning &quot;enjoyers (of the right to own land),&quot; and used in the sense of &quot;headmen.&quot;

The lower classes of Shakya society consisted of servants, in Pāli called s () and s (), who performed the labour in the farms.

====Administrative structure====
The Sakyas were organised into a  (an aristocratic oligarchic republic) similarly to the Licchavikas.

====The assembly====
The heads of the Sakya  clans of the formed an Assembly, and they held the title of s. The position of was hereditary, and after a &#x27;s death was passed to his eldest son, who while he was living held the title of (&quot;Viceroy&quot;).

The political system of the Sakyas was identical to that of the Koliyas, and like the Koliyas and the other s, the Assembly met in a santhāgāra, the main of which was located at Kapilavatthu, although at least one other Sakya santhāgāra also existed at Cātuma. The judicial and legislative functions of the Assembly of the Sakyas were not distinctly separated, and it met to discuss important issues concerning public affairs, such as war, peace, and alliances. The Sakya Assembly deliberated on important issues, and it had a simple voting system through either raising hands or the use of wooden chips.

====The council====
Similarly to the other s, the Sakya Assembly met rarely and it instead had an inner and smaller Council which met more often to administer the republic in the name of the Assembly. The members of the council, titled s, formed a college which was directly in charge of public affairs of the republic.

====The (Consul)====
The head of the Sakya republic was an elected chief, which was a position of first among equals similar to Roman consuls and Greek archons, and whose incumbent had the title of . The was in charge of administering the republic with the help of the council.

=====Functioning of the assembly=====
When sessions of the Assembly were held, the s gathered in the santhāgāra; while four s were posted in the four corners or sides of the hall so as to clearly and easily hear the speeches made by the s; and the consul took his appointed seat and put forward the matters to be discussed once the Assembly was ready.

During the session, the members of the Assembly expressed their views, which the four s would record. The Assembly was then adjourned, after which the recorders compared their notes, and all the s came back and waited for the recorders&#x27; decision.

===Lifestyle===
====Aristocratic marriage customs====
Another reflection of non-Indo-Aryan cultural practices of the Shakyas was the practice of sibling marriages among their ruling clans, which was forbidden among peoples, and was a practice of social demarcation and of maintaining power within a smaller sub-group of the Shakya clan, and was therefore not permitted among the lower classes of the Shakya.

====Religion====
Since they lived in the Greater Magadha cultural area, the Shakyas followed non-Vedic religious customs which drastically differed from the Brahmanical tradition, and even by the time of the Buddha, Brahmanism and the s had not acquired religious or cultural preponderance in the Greater Magadha area to which Shakya belonged.

It was in this non-Vedic cultural environment that  movements existed, with one of them, Buddhism, having been founded by the Shakya Siddhartha Gautama, the historical Buddha.

=====Sun worship=====
The Shakyas worshipped the Sun-god, whom they considered their ancestor, hence why the Shakya clan claimed to be of the ( in Sanskrit) , and of the Sūryavaṃśa (&quot;Solar dynasty&quot;).

=====Origin myth=====
The Shakya clan claimed descent from the Sun-god via his descendant, named (in Pāli) and (in Sanskrit), and whose eight twin sons and daughters who were married to each other had founded the capital city of the Shakyas and were the tribe&#x27;s ancestors. This was an origin myth of the ruling status of the families of the Shakya clan, who had the right to be represented in the , were often related to each other, and possessed adjacent areas of land, thus establishing kinship, which itself helped form rights of landownership, and, therefore, of political authority.

This myth was also a foundation myth of the city which, as the residence of the ruling families of the clan, the city, which was the centre of political and economic activity, was associated with that clan&#x27;s  (territory), and was equated with the whole itself.

The myth of the Shakyas&#x27; ancestors being four pairs of married twin siblings was a myth which traced the origins of the ruling Shakya families to a common ancestor, and was also a myth of an early human utopia where humans were born as couples.

=====Tree worship=====
The important role of the Sāl tree in the life of the Buddha according to the Buddhist texts, as well as his representation as a Bodhi tree and his Enlightenment occurring under one such tree, suggest that the Shakyas practised tree worship, a custom likely derived from Munda religious customs of worshipping sacred groves, and the important role in their traditions of the Sāl tree, whose flowering marks the beginning of their New Year and Flower Feast festivals: the Santal tribe worship the Sāl tree and gather to make communal decisions under them Sāl trees.

The importance of the tree spirits called s and s in Pali (s and s in Sanskrit) in early Buddhist texts is an attestation of the worship of these beings done at s. The worship of s and s, which was of pre-Indo-Aryan autochthonous origin, was prevalent in the Greater Magadha region.

=====Serpent worship=====
The  king Mucalinda, who in Buddhist mythology protected the Buddha during a storm under a mucalinda tree, was a both snake- and a tree-deity, thus alluding to the practice of serpent worship among the Shakyas, which originated from among the pre-Indo-Aryan Tibeto-Burman populations of northern South Asia.

=====Funerary customs=====
The cremation rituals of the Shakyas which were performed for the funeral of the Buddha as described by Buddhist texts involved wrapping his body in 500 layers of cloth, placing it in an iron vat full of oil as a mark of honour, and then covering it with another iron pot before being cremated. These rites originated from the pre-Indo-Aryan autochthonous populations of the eastern Gangetic plains, as were the practices such as honouring the Buddha&#x27;s body with singing, dancing, and music, as well as placing his bones in a golden urn, the veneration of these remains and their burial in a round  which possessed a central mast, flags, pennants, and parasols at a public crossroads, which were rituals that were performed by the pre-Indo-Aryan populations for their greater rulers.

== See also ==

* Shakya (surname)
* Family tree of Sinhalese monarchs

==References==
==Sources==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="0" end="6" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="8" end="12" title="Pali" label="Pāḷi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="33" end="37" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="68" end="78" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056845" start="119" end="127" title="Iron Age in India" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11296108" start="163" end="163" title="Gaṇasaṅgha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="168" end="180" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="181" end="191" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="192" end="200" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="221" end="236" title="Shakya" label="Shakya Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="324" end="343" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="351" end="366" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="424" end="429" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="470" end="479" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="497" end="516" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="581" end="587" title="Kosala" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695367" start="628" end="639" title="Rohni River" label="Rohni River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="658" end="664" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="716" end="724" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="728" end="738" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610827" start="937" end="948" title="Kapilavastu (ancient city)" label="Kapilavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="1018" end="1022" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1043" end="1051" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="1373" end="1377" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="1381" end="1385" title="Shorea robusta" label="sāla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1506" end="1517" title="#Tree worship" label="worshipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="1704" end="1719" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="1788" end="1798" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313436" start="1803" end="1816" title="Munda peoples" label="Munda descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="2224" end="2230" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q78324" start="2323" end="2337" title="Michael Witzel" label="Michael Witzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q967263" start="2342" end="2365" title="Christopher I. Beckwith" label="Christopher I. Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="2433" end="2442" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="2458" end="2458" title="Saka" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="2632" end="2648" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001607" start="2660" end="2699" title="Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley" label="Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q72339091" start="2712" end="2732" title="Scytho-Siberian world" label="Scytho-Saka nomadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="2935" end="2943" title="Ganges" label="Gangetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="3045" end="3051" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q112648928" start="3054" end="3060" title="Moriya (tribe)" label="Moriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="3067" end="3075" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="3113" end="3122" title="Kosala" label="Kauśalyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="3143" end="3154" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359147" start="3159" end="3167" title="Videha" label="Vaidehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q605199" start="3201" end="3215" title="Vajjika League" label="Vajjika League"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="3315" end="3332" title="Kosala" label="Kingdom of Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q226488" start="3443" end="3453" title="Śuddhodana" label="Suddhodana"/>
<link wikidata="Q877831" start="3494" end="3498" title="Maya (mother of the Buddha)" label="Māyā"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="3579" end="3597" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Siddhartha Gautama"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3636" end="3644" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="4055" end="4063" title="Kusinārā" label="Kusinārā"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="4176" end="4184" title="Kosala" label="Kauśalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267648" start="4190" end="4199" title="Virudhaka" label="Viḍūḍabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055324" start="4231" end="4239" title="Pasenadi" label="Pasenadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="4354" end="4360" title="Kosala" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q605199" start="4846" end="4860" title="Vajjika League" label="Vajjika League"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="4895" end="4902" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Māgadhī"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="4908" end="4918" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajātasattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="5690" end="5697" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267648" start="5712" end="5721" title="Viḍūḍabha" label="Viḍūḍabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="5766" end="5776" title="Ajātasattu" label="Ajātasattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360289" start="5972" end="5984" title="Trāyastriṃśa" label="Trāyastriṃśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444745" start="6001" end="6006" title="Śakra (Buddhism)" label="Sakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="6020" end="6025" title="deva (Buddhism)" label="devas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="6029" end="6047" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="Buddhist cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420141" start="6085" end="6095" title="santhāgāra" label="santhāgāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="6146" end="6158" title="Tharu people" label="Tharu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="6246" end="6252" title="Newar people" label="Newars"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="6256" end="6272" title="Kathmandu valley" label="Kathmandu valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873617" start="6466" end="6481" title="Hmannan Yazawin" label="Hmannan Yazawin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667486" start="6533" end="6541" title="Abhiyaza" label="Abhiyaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675176" start="6559" end="6574" title="Tagaung Kingdom" label="Tagaung Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263962" start="6799" end="6808" title="Pyusawhti" label="Pyusawhti"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="6950" end="6965" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="7239" end="7239" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="7274" end="7274" title="Brahmin" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="7277" end="7277" title="Kshatriya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q185970" start="7280" end="7280" title="Vaishya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q905360" start="7287" end="7287" title="Shudra" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2428240" start="7715" end="7715" title="Āryāvarta" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="7842" end="7857" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="7906" end="7906" title="Manusmriti" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3359147" start="7920" end="7928" title="Videha" label="Vaidehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="7930" end="7938" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Māgadhīs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="7940" end="7951" title="Licchavis of Vaishali" label="Licchavikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="7957" end="7965" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q118414942" start="8083" end="8083" title="Baudhayana sutras" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="8627" end="8642" title="Munda languages" label="Munda languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313436" start="8821" end="8833" title="Munda peoples" label="Munda origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="8974" end="8974" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="9009" end="9009" title="Brahmin" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="9012" end="9012" title="Kshatriya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q185970" start="9015" end="9015" title="Vaishya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q905360" start="9022" end="9022" title="Shudra" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q11296108" start="9560" end="9560" title="Gaṇasaṅgha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="9565" end="9577" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="9578" end="9588" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="9589" end="9597" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="9616" end="9627" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="9674" end="9674" title="kshatriya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7420141" start="10025" end="10035" title="santhāgāra" label="santhāgāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="10917" end="10935" title="Primus inter pares" label="first among equals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="10947" end="10952" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="10953" end="10960" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="10965" end="10970" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="10971" end="10977" title="archon" label="archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="12154" end="12169" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="12270" end="12281" title="Brahmanism" label="Brahmanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="12509" end="12509" title="Śramaṇa" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12547" end="12555" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="12626" end="12632" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="12684" end="12691" title="Surya" label="Sun-god"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332544" start="12792" end="12792" title="gotra" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3765113" start="12805" end="12815" title="Solar dynasty" label="Sūryavaṃśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="12947" end="12951" title="Pali" label="Pāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="12961" end="12969" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039325" start="13653" end="13653" title="Janapada" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="14007" end="14015" title="Shorea robusta" label="Sāl tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071706" start="14110" end="14120" title="Ficus religiosa" label="Bodhi tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260346" start="14452" end="14458" title="Santal people" label="Santal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011093" start="14589" end="14596" title="Yaksha" label="s and s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065670" start="14708" end="14708" title="cetiya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="14861" end="14861" title="nāga" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2569885" start="14867" end="14876" title="Mucalinda" label="Mucalinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="15115" end="15128" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="15796" end="15796" title="stupa" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q37550618" start="16001" end="16017" title="Shakya (surname)" label="Shakya (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124740" start="16020" end="16053" title="Family tree of Sinhalese monarchs" label="Family tree of Sinhalese monarchs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334848" wikidata="Q161185" url="?curid=334848" title="Passiflora">
<text>Passiflora, known also as the passion flowers or passion vines, is a genus of about 550 species of flowering plants, the type genus of the family Passifloraceae.

==Description==
They are mostly tendril-bearing vines, with some being shrubs or trees. They can be woody or herbaceous.

Passion flowers produce regular and usually showy flowers with a distinctive corona. There can be as many as eight concentric coronal series, as in the case of &quot;P. xiikzodz&quot;. and Passiflora alata. The hallmark of the genus is the androgynophore, a central column to which the stamens and pistil are attached, which can be very long in some species such as Passiflora coactilis. The flower is pentamerous (except for a few Southeast Asian species) and ripens into an indehiscent fruit with numerous seeds.

The fruit ranges from long and across, depending upon the species or cultivar.

=== Chemistry ===

Many species of &quot;Passiflora&quot; have been found to contain beta-carboline harmala alkaloids, some of which are MAO inhibitors. The flower and fruit have only traces of these chemicals, but the leaves and the roots often contain more. The most common of these alkaloids is harman, but harmaline, harmalol, harmine, and harmol are also present. The species known to bear such alkaloids include: &quot;P. actinia&quot;, &quot;P. alata&quot; (winged-stem passion flower), &quot;P. alba&quot;, &quot;P. bryonioides&quot; (cupped passion flower), &quot;P. caerulea&quot; (blue passion flower), &quot;P. capsularis&quot;, &quot;P. decaisneana&quot;, &quot;P. edulis&quot; (passion fruit), &quot;P. eichleriana&quot;, &quot;P. foetida&quot; (stinking passion flower), &quot;P. incarnata&quot; (maypop), &quot;P. quadrangularis&quot; (giant granadilla), &quot;P. suberosa&quot;, &quot;P. subpeltata&quot; and &quot;P. warmingii&quot;.

Other compounds found in passion flowers are coumarins (e.g. scopoletin and umbelliferone), maltol, phytosterols (e.g. lutenin) and cyanogenic glycosides (e.g. gynocardin) which render some species, i.e. &quot;P. adenopoda&quot;, somewhat poisonous. Many flavonoids and their glycosides have been found in &quot;Passiflora&quot;, including apigenin, benzoflavone, homoorientin, , isoshaftoside, isovitexin (or saponaretin), kaempferol, lucenin, luteolin, , passiflorine (named after the genus), quercetin, rutin, saponarin, shaftoside, vicenin and vitexin. Maypop, blue passion flower (&quot;P. caerulea&quot;), and perhaps others contain the flavone chrysin. Also documented to occur at least in some &quot;Passiflora&quot; in quantity are the hydrocarbon nonacosane and the anthocyanidin pelargonidin-3-diglycoside.

The genus is rich in organic acids including formic, butyric, linoleic, linolenic, malic, myristic, oleic and palmitic acids as well as phenolic compounds, and the amino acid . Esters like ethyl butyrate, ethyl caproate, &quot;n&quot;-hexyl butyrate and &quot;n&quot;-hexyl caproate give the fruits their flavor and appetizing smell. Sugars, contained mainly in the fruit, are most significantly , and raffinose. Among enzymes, &quot;Passiflora&quot; was found to be rich in catalase, pectin methylesterase and phenolase.

==Taxonomy==
&quot;Passiflora&quot; is the most species rich genus of both the family Passifloraceae and the tribe Passifloreae. With over 550 species, an extensive hierarchy of infrageneric ranks is required to represent the relationships of the species. The infrageneric classification of &quot;Passiflora&quot; not only uses the widely used ranks of subgenus, section and series, but also the rank of supersection.

The New World species of &quot;Passiflora&quot; were first divided among 22 subgenera by Killip (1938) in the first monograph of the genus. More recent work has reduced these to 4, which are commonly accepted today (in order from most basally to most recently branching):
* &quot;Astrophea&quot; (Americas, ~60 species), trees and shrubs with simple, unlobed leaves
* &quot;Passiflora&quot; (Americas, ~250 species), woody vines with large flowers and elaborate corolla
* &quot;Deidamioides&quot; (Americas, 13 species), woody or herbaceous vines
* &quot;Decaloba&quot; (Americas, Asia and Australasia, ~230 species), herbaceous vines with palmately veined leaves

Some studies have shown that the segregate Old World genera &quot;Hollrungia&quot; and &quot;Tetrapathaea&quot; are nested within &quot;Passiflora&quot;, and form a fifth subgenus (&quot;Tetrapathaea&quot;). Other studies support the current four subgenus classification.

Relationships below the subgenus level are not known with certainty and are an active area of research. The Old World species form two clades – supersection &quot;Disemma&quot; (part of subgenus &quot;Decaloba&quot;) and subgenus &quot;Tetrapathaea&quot;. The former is composed of 21 species divided into sections &quot;Disemma&quot; (three Australian species), &quot;Holrungiella&quot; (one New Guinean species) and &quot;Octandranthus&quot; (seventeen south and east Asian species).

The remaining (New World) species of subgenus &quot;Decaloba&quot; are divided into seven supersections. Supersection &quot;Pterosperma&quot; includes four species from Central America and southern Mexico. Supersection &quot;Hahniopathanthus&quot; includes five species from Central America, Mexico and northernmost South America. Supersection &quot;Cicea&quot; includes nineteen species, with apetalous flowers. Supersection &quot;Bryonioides&quot; includes twenty-one species, with a distribution centered on Mexico. Supersection &quot;Auriculata&quot; includes eight species from South America, one of which is also found in Central America. Supersection &quot;Multiflora&quot; includes nineteen species. Supersection &quot;Decaloba&quot; includes 123 species.

== Distribution ==
&quot;Passiflora&quot; has a largely neotropic distribution, unlike other genera in the family Passifloraceae, which includes more Old World species (such as the genus &quot;Adenia&quot;). The vast majority of &quot;Passiflora&quot; are found in Mexico, Central America, the United States and South America, although there are additional representatives in Southeast Asia and Oceania. New species continue to be identified: for example, &quot;P. xishuangbannaensis&quot; and &quot;P. pardifolia&quot; have only been known to the scientific community since 2005 and 2006, respectively.

Some species of &quot;Passiflora&quot; have been naturalized beyond their native ranges. For example, the blue passion flower (&quot;P. caerulea&quot;) now grows wild in Spain. The purple passionfruit (&quot;P. edulis&quot;) and its yellow relative &quot;flavicarpa&quot; have been introduced in many tropical regions as commercial crops.

==Ecology==
Passion flowers have floral structures adapted for biotic pollination. Pollinators of &quot;Passiflora&quot; include bumblebees, carpenter bees (e.g., &quot;Xylocopa sonorina&quot;), wasps, bats, and hummingbirds (especially hermits such as &quot;Phaethornis&quot;); some others are additionally capable of self-pollination. &quot;Passiflora&quot; often exhibit high levels of pollinator specificity, which has led to frequent coevolution across the genus. The sword-billed hummingbird (&quot;Ensifera ensifera&quot;) is a notable example: it, with its immensely elongated bill, is the sole pollinator of 37 species of high Andean &quot;Passiflora&quot; in the supersection &quot;Tacsonia&quot;.

The leaves are used for feeding by the larvae of a number of species of Lepidoptera. Famously, they are exclusively targeted by many butterfly species of the tribe Heliconiini. The many defensive adaptations visible on &quot;Passiflora&quot; include diverse leaf shapes (which help disguise their identity), colored nubs (which mimic butterfly eggs and can deter Heliconians from ovipositing on a seemingly crowded leaf), extrafloral nectaries, trichomes, variegation, and chemical defenses. These, combined with adaptations on the part of the butterflies, were important in the foundation of coevolutionary theory.

Recent studies have shown that passiflora both grow faster and protect themselves better in high-nitrogen soils. In low-nitrogen environments, passiflora focus on growth rather than defense and are more vulnerable to herbivores.

The following lepidoptera larvae are known to feed on &quot;Passiflora&quot;:
* Longwing butterflies (Heliconiinae)
** Cydno longwing (&quot;Heliconius cydno&quot;), one of few Heliconians to feed on multiple species of &quot;Passiflora&quot;
** Gulf fritillary (&quot;Agraulis vanillae&quot;), which feeds on several species of &quot;Passiflora&quot;, such as &quot;Passiflora lutea&quot;, &quot;Passiflora affinis&quot;, stinking passion flower (&quot;P. foetida&quot;), and Maypop (&quot;P. incarnata&quot;)
** American Sara longwing (&quot;Heliconius sara&quot;)
** Red postman (&quot;Heliconius erato&quot;)
** Asian leopard lacewing (&quot;Cethosia cyane&quot;)
** Postman butterfly (&quot;Heliconius melpomene&quot;) prefer &quot;P. menispermifolia&quot; and &quot;P. oerstedii&quot;
** Zebra longwing (&quot;Heliconius charithonia&quot;) feed on yellow passion flower, two-flowered passion flower (&quot;P. biflora&quot;), and corky-stemmed passion flower (&quot;P. suberosa&quot;).
** Banded orange (&quot;Dryadula phaetusa&quot;) feed on &quot;P. tetrastylis&quot;.
** Julia butterfly (&quot;Dryas iulia&quot;) feed on yellow passion flower and &quot;P. affinis&quot;.
* Swift moth &quot;Cibyra serta&quot;
* Tawny Coster (&quot;Acraea terpsicore&quot;) feed on &quot;Passiflora edulis&quot;, &quot;Passiflora foetida&quot; and &quot;Passiflora subpeltata&quot; 

The generally high pollinator and parasite specificity in &quot;Passiflora&quot; may have led to the tremendous morphological variation in the genus. It is thought to have among the highest foliar diversity among all plant genera, with leaf shapes ranging from unlobed to five-lobed frequently found on the same plant. Coevolution can be a major driver of speciation, and may be responsible for the radiation of certain clades of &quot;Passiflora&quot; such as &quot;Tacsonia&quot;.

The bracts of the stinking passion flower are covered by hairs which exude a sticky fluid. Many small insects get stuck to this and get digested to nutrient-rich goo by proteases and acid phosphatases. Since the insects usually killed are rarely major pests, this passion flower seems to be a protocarnivorous plant.

Banana passion flower or &quot;banana poka&quot; (&quot;P. tarminiana&quot;), originally from Central Brazil, is an invasive weed, especially on the islands of Hawaii. It is commonly spread by feral pigs eating the fruits. It overgrows and smothers stands of endemic vegetation, mainly on roadsides. Blue passion flower (&quot;P. caerulea&quot;) is an invasive species in Spain and considered likely to threaten ecosystems there.

On the other hand, some species are endangered due to unsustainable logging and other forms of habitat destruction. For example, the Chilean passion flower (&quot;P. pinnatistipula&quot;) is a rare vine growing in the Tropical Andes southwards from Venezuela between in altitude, and in Coastal Central Chile, where it only occurs in a few tens of square kilometres of fog forest by the sea, near Zapallar. &quot;P. pinnatistipula&quot; has a round fruit, unusual in &quot;Tacsonia&quot; group species like banana passion flower and &quot;P. mixta&quot;, with their elongated tubes and brightly red to rose-colored petals.

Notable and sometimes economically significant pathogens of &quot;Passiflora&quot; are several sac fungi of the genus &quot;Septoria&quot; (including &quot;S. passiflorae&quot;), the undescribed proteobacterium called &quot;Pseudomonas tomato&quot; (pv. &quot;passiflorae&quot;), the &quot;Potyvirus&quot; &quot;passionfruit woodiness virus&quot;, and the &quot;Carlavirus&quot; &quot;Passiflora latent virus&quot;.

== Adverse effects ==
Passion flower is not recommended during pregnancy because it may induce contractions. Consuming passion flower products may cause drowsiness, nausea, dizziness, abnormal heart rhythms, asthma, or rhinitis.

== Uses ==

===Ornamental===
A number of species of &quot;Passiflora&quot; are cultivated outside their natural range for both their flowers and fruit. Hundreds of hybrids have been named; hybridizing is currently being done extensively for flowers, foliage and fruit. The following hybrids and cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit:
*&#x27;Amethyst&#x27;
*&quot;P.&quot; × &quot;exoniensis&quot; (Exeter passion flower)
*&quot;P.&quot; × &quot;violacea&quot;

During the Victorian era the flower (which in all but a few species lasts only one day) was very popular, and many hybrids were created using the winged-stem passion flower (&quot;P. alata&quot;), the blue passion flower (&quot;P. caerulea&quot;) and other tropical species.

Many cool-growing &quot;Passiflora&quot; from the Andes Mountains can be grown successfully for their beautiful flowers and fruit in cooler Mediterranean climates, such as the Monterey Bay and San Francisco in California and along the western coast of the U.S. into Canada. One blue passion flower or hybrid even grew to large size at Malmö Central Station in Sweden.

Passion flowers have been a subject of studies investigating extranuclear inheritance; paternal inheritance of chloroplast DNA has been documented in this genus. The plastome of the two-flowered passion flower (&quot;P. biflora&quot;) has been sequenced.

===Fruit===

Most species have round or elongated edible fruit.

* The passion fruit or (&quot;P. edulis&quot;) is cultivated extensively in the Caribbean, South America, south Florida and South Africa for its fruit, which is used as a source of juice. A small pink fruit that wrinkles easily and a larger shiny yellow to orange fruit are traded under this name. The latter is usually considered just a variety of &quot;flavicarpa&quot;, but seems to be more distinct.
* Sweet granadilla (&quot;P. ligularis&quot;) is another widely grown species. In large parts of Africa it is the plant called &quot;passionfruit&quot;: confusingly, in South African English the latter species is more often called &quot;granadilla&quot; (without an adjective). Its fruit is somewhat intermediate between the two sold as &quot;P. edulis&quot;.
* Maypop (&quot;P. incarnata&quot;), a common species in the southeastern US. This is a subtropical representative of this mostly tropical family. However, unlike the more tropical cousins, this particular species is hardy enough to withstand the cold down to before its roots die (it is native as far north as Pennsylvania and has been cultivated as far north as Boston and Chicago.) The fruit is sweet, yellowish, and roughly the size of a chicken&#x27;s egg; it enjoys some popularity as a native plant with edible fruit and few pests.
* Giant granadilla (giant tumbo or &quot;badea&quot;, &quot;P. quadrangularis&quot;), water lemon (&quot;P.laurifolia&quot;) and sweet calabash (&quot;P. maliformis&quot;) are &quot;Passiflora&quot; species locally famed for their fruit, but not widely known elsewhere .
* The blue passionflower (&quot;Passiflora caerulea&quot;) produces bright orange fruit with numerous seeds. While the fruit is edible, it is often described as being bland in comparison to other edible passionfruit, or with a flavour vaguely similar to blackberries.
* Wild maracuja are the fruit of &quot;P. vesicaria&quot;, which are popular in Southeast Asia.
* Banana passionfruits are the very elongated fruits of &quot;P. tripartita&quot; var. &quot;mollissima&quot; and &quot;P. tarminiana&quot;. These are locally eaten, but their invasive properties make them a poor choice to grow outside of their native range.

===Ayahuasca analog===
A native source of beta-Carbolines (e.g., passion flower in North America) is mixed with &quot;Desmanthus illinoensis&quot; (Illinois bundleflower) root bark to produce a hallucinogenic drink called prairiehuasca, which is an analog of the shamanic brew ayahuasca.

===Traditional medicine and dietary supplement===

&quot;Passiflora incarnata&quot; (maypop) leaves and roots have a long history of use as a traditional medicine by Native Americans in North America and were adapted by European colonists. The fresh or dried leaves of maypop are used to make a tea that is used as a sedative. Passionflower as dried powder or an extract is used as a dietary supplement. There is insufficient clinical evidence for using passionflower to treat any medical condition.

Passionflower is classified as generally recognized as safe for use as a food ingredient in the U.S.

== In culture ==

The &quot;passion&quot; in &quot;passion flower&quot; purportedly refers to the passion of Jesus in Christian theology; the word &quot;passion&quot; comes from the Latin , meaning &#x27;suffering&#x27;. In the 15th and 16th centuries, Spanish Christian missionaries adopted the unique physical structures of this plant, particularly the numbers of its various flower parts, as symbols of the last days of Jesus and especially his crucifixion:

* The pointed tips of the leaves were taken to represent the Holy Lance.
* The tendrils represent the whips used in the flagellation of Christ.
* The ten petals and sepals represent the ten faithful apostles (excluding St. Peter, who denied Jesus three times, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him).
* The flower&#x27;s radial filaments, which can number more than a hundred and vary from flower to flower, represent the crown of thorns.
* The chalice-shaped ovary with its receptacle represents the Holy Grail.
* The three stigmas represent three nails and the five anthers below them five hammers or five wounds (four by the nails and one by the lance).
* The blue and white colors of many species&#x27; flowers represent Heaven and Purity.
* In addition, the flower is open for three days, symbolising the three years of Jesus&#x27; ministry.

The flower has been given names related to this symbolism throughout Europe since the 15th century. In Spain, it is known as (&#x27;thorn of Christ&#x27;). Older Germanic names include (&#x27;Christ&#x27;s crown&#x27;), (&#x27;Christ&#x27;s bouquet&#x27;), (&#x27;crown of thorns&#x27;), (&#x27;Jesus&#x27; passion&#x27;), (&#x27;passion&#x27;) or (&#x27;Mother of God&#x27;s star&#x27;).

Outside the Roman Catholic heartland, the regularly shaped flowers have reminded people of the face of a clock. In Israel they are known as &quot;clock-flower&quot; () and in Greece as &quot;clock plant&quot; (); in Japan too, they are known as . In Hawaiian, they are called ; is a string used for tying fabric together, such as a shoelace, and means &#x27;to spring forth leave&#x27;.

In India, it is known as Krishnakamala because of its relation to the Epic Mahabharata. The 100 peripheral petals represent the 100 Kauravas, while the 5 yellow petals in between stand for the Pandavas. The sensitive, but firm green bulb on top is Draupadi, or Krishna.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* List of culinary fruits

==References==
==External links==
* 
* The Passiflora Society International
* Killip, The American Species of Passifloraceae, Fieldiana, Bot. 19 (1938)
* Passiflora online
* Passiflora edulis 
* Passiflora Picture Gallery
* Chilean Passiflora pictures
* A list of Heliconius Butterflies and the Passiflora species their larvae consume</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161185" start="30" end="45" title="Passiflora" label="passion flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161185" start="49" end="62" title="Passiflora" label="passion vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="69" end="74" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="88" end="95" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="99" end="114" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="121" end="131" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="139" end="145" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q157164" start="146" end="160" title="Passifloraceae" label="Passifloraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q165859" start="195" end="210" title="tendril" label="tendril-bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="211" end="215" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="234" end="239" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="244" end="248" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="263" end="267" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="272" end="282" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="335" end="341" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="362" end="368" title="Perianth#Corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492750" start="451" end="462" title="Passiflora xiikzodz" label="P. xiikzodz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914497" start="474" end="490" title="Passiflora alata" label="Passiflora alata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="525" end="539" title="androgynophore" label="androgynophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="571" end="578" title="stamens" label="stamens"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="583" end="589" title="pistil" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493244" start="651" end="671" title="Passiflora coactilis" label="Passiflora coactilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395661" start="687" end="698" title="merosity" label="pentamerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="717" end="732" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="761" end="778" title="berry (botany)" label="indehiscent fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="870" end="878" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q414226" start="966" end="980" title="beta-carboline" label="beta-carboline"/>
<link wikidata="Q135149" start="981" end="997" title="harmala alkaloid" label="harmala alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="1018" end="1032" title="Monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="MAO inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q135149" start="1179" end="1185" title="Harmala alkaloid" label="harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q135270" start="1191" end="1200" title="harmaline" label="harmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138221" start="1202" end="1210" title="harmalol" label="harmalol"/>
<link wikidata="Q128381" start="1212" end="1219" title="harmine" label="harmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15411005" start="1225" end="1231" title="harmol" label="harmol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497435" start="1306" end="1316" title="Passiflora actinia" label="P. actinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914497" start="1330" end="1338" title="Passiflora alata" label="P. alata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1381" end="1388" title="Passiflora alba" label="P. alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492116" start="1402" end="1416" title="Passiflora bryonioides" label="P. bryonioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="1454" end="1465" title="Passiflora caerulea" label="P. caerulea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437553" start="1501" end="1514" title="Passiflora capsularis" label="P. capsularis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1528" end="1542" title="Passiflora decaisneana" label="P. decaisneana"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="1556" end="1565" title="Passiflora edulis" label="P. edulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1595" end="1609" title="Passiflora eichleriana" label="P. eichleriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766333" start="1623" end="1633" title="Passiflora foetida" label="P. foetida"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="1673" end="1685" title="Passiflora incarnata" label="P. incarnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q159105" start="1708" end="1725" title="Passiflora quadrangularis" label="P. quadrangularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068761" start="1758" end="1769" title="Passiflora suberosa" label="P. suberosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669089" start="1783" end="1796" title="Passiflora subpeltata" label="P. subpeltata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1813" end="1825" title="Passiflora warmingii" label="P. warmingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751050" start="1879" end="1888" title="coumarins" label="coumarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472366" start="1895" end="1905" title="scopoletin" label="scopoletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q416196" start="1910" end="1923" title="umbelliferone" label="umbelliferone"/>
<link wikidata="Q420648" start="1926" end="1932" title="maltol" label="maltol"/>
<link wikidata="Q412457" start="1934" end="1945" title="phytosterol" label="phytosterol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1953" end="1960" title="lutenin" label="lutenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="1966" end="1987" title="cyanogenic glycosides" label="cyanogenic glycosides"/>
<link wikidata="Q104396878" start="1994" end="2004" title="gynocardin" label="gynocardin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2044" end="2056" title="Passiflora adenopoda" label="P. adenopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="2089" end="2098" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="2110" end="2119" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q424567" start="2174" end="2182" title="apigenin" label="apigenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897188" start="2184" end="2196" title="beta-Naphthoflavone" label="benzoflavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155592" start="2198" end="2210" title="homoorientin" label="homoorientin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2214" end="2227" title="isoshaftoside" label="isoshaftoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155636" start="2229" end="2239" title="isovitexin" label="isovitexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155636" start="2244" end="2255" title="saponaretin" label="saponaretin"/>
<link wikidata="Q393336" start="2258" end="2268" title="kaempferol" label="kaempferol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2270" end="2277" title="lucenin" label="lucenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415011" start="2279" end="2287" title="luteolin" label="luteolin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2291" end="2303" title="passiflorine" label="passiflorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409478" start="2329" end="2338" title="quercetin" label="quercetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407857" start="2340" end="2345" title="rutin" label="rutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63408652" start="2347" end="2356" title="saponarin" label="saponarin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2358" end="2368" title="shaftoside" label="shaftoside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2370" end="2377" title="vicenin" label="vicenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q259075" start="2382" end="2389" title="vitexin" label="vitexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="2399" end="2418" title="blue passion flower" label="blue passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742033" start="2477" end="2484" title="flavone" label="flavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q973741" start="2485" end="2492" title="chrysin" label="chrysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="2579" end="2590" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151038" start="2591" end="2601" title="nonacosane" label="nonacosane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073242" start="2610" end="2623" title="anthocyanidin" label="anthocyanidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522451" start="2624" end="2636" title="pelargonidin" label="pelargonidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="2674" end="2686" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="2698" end="2704" title="Formic acid" label="formic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="2706" end="2713" title="Butyric acid" label="butyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q407426" start="2715" end="2723" title="Linoleic acid" label="linoleic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256502" start="2725" end="2734" title="α-Linolenic acid" label="linolenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="2736" end="2741" title="Malic acid" label="malic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422658" start="2743" end="2751" title="Myristic acid" label="myristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207688" start="2753" end="2758" title="oleic acid" label="oleic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209727" start="2763" end="2776" title="palmitic acid" label="palmitic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739926" start="2789" end="2797" title="natural phenol" label="phenolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="2817" end="2827" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2830" end="2835" title="Ester" label="Ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q412270" start="2842" end="2856" title="ethyl butyrate" label="ethyl butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q905406" start="2858" end="2872" title="ethyl caproate" label="ethyl caproate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2888" end="2902" title="hexyl butyrate" label="hexyl butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2921" end="2935" title="hexyl caproate" label="hexyl caproate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="2987" end="2992" title="Sugar" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q410005" start="3055" end="3064" title="raffinose" label="raffinose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3072" end="3078" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="3128" end="3136" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069402" start="3138" end="3159" title="Pectinesterase" label="pectin methylesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q904493" start="3164" end="3173" title="phenolase" label="phenolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21382448" start="3875" end="3884" title="Passiflora subg. Astrophea" label="Astrophea"/>
<link wikidata="Q504930" start="4057" end="4064" title="corolla (botany)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="4303" end="4312" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q161185" start="4326" end="4336" title="Hollrungia" label="Hollrungia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142637" start="4353" end="4365" title="Tetrapathaea" label="Tetrapathaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="5189" end="5204" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5312" end="5318" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="5336" end="5349" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="5841" end="5850" title="neotropic" label="neotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157164" start="5899" end="5913" title="Passifloraceae" label="Passifloraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q138287" start="5978" end="5984" title="Adenia" label="Adenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="6161" end="6175" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="6180" end="6187" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956163" start="6247" end="6268" title="Passiflora xishuangbannaensis" label="P. xishuangbannaensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448208" start="6285" end="6298" title="Passiflora pardifolia" label="P. pardifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="6496" end="6515" title="blue passion flower" label="blue passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="6571" end="6590" title="Passiflora edulis" label="purple passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6793" end="6811" title="Pollination#Biotic" label="biotic pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407" start="6859" end="6868" title="bumblebee" label="bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482645" start="6899" end="6916" title="Xylocopa sonorina" label="Xylocopa sonorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="6925" end="6929" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="6932" end="6935" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="6942" end="6953" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q741604" start="6967" end="6974" title="hermit (hummingbird)" label="hermits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089119" start="6989" end="7000" title="Phaethornis" label="Phaethornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503359" start="7049" end="7065" title="self-pollination" label="self-pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q385548" start="7203" end="7227" title="sword-billed hummingbird" label="sword-billed hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="7366" end="7372" title="Andes" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="7478" end="7483" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="7511" end="7522" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110519" start="7603" end="7614" title="Heliconiini" label="Heliconiini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7861" end="7882" title="Nectar#Extrafloral nectaries" label="extrafloral nectaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="7884" end="7892" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7895" end="7906" title="Variegation#Defensive masquerade" label="variegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="8032" end="8053" title="coevolution" label="coevolutionary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="8375" end="8386" title="butterflies" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q855355" start="8388" end="8400" title="Heliconiinae" label="Heliconiinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711578" start="8405" end="8419" title="Heliconius cydno" label="Cydno longwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130279113" start="8532" end="8547" title="Gulf fritillary" label="Gulf fritillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511038" start="8653" end="8669" title="Passiflora lutea" label="Passiflora lutea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="8763" end="8769" title="Maypop" label="Maypop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603544" start="8809" end="8822" title="Sara longwing" label="Sara longwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427227" start="8875" end="8891" title="Heliconius erato" label="Heliconius erato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951757" start="8908" end="8924" title="leopard lacewing" label="leopard lacewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697054" start="8957" end="8974" title="Postman butterfly" label="Postman butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9023" end="9041" title="Passiflora menispermifolia" label="P. menispermifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9058" end="9070" title="Passiflora oerstedii" label="P. oerstedii"/>
<link wikidata="Q169449" start="9080" end="9094" title="Zebra longwing" label="Zebra longwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155054" start="9163" end="9190" title="two-flowered passion flower" label="two-flowered passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068761" start="9221" end="9249" title="corky-stemmed passion flower" label="corky-stemmed passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756047" start="9280" end="9293" title="Banded orange" label="Banded orange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9340" end="9354" title="Passiflora tetrastylis" label="P. tetrastylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768694" start="9365" end="9380" title="Julia butterfly" label="Julia butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9447" end="9457" title="Passiflora affinis" label="P. affinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q580250" start="9467" end="9477" title="Swift moth" label="Swift moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119305" start="9484" end="9496" title="Cibyra serta" label="Cibyra serta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823467" start="9505" end="9517" title="Acraea terpsicore" label="Tawny Coster"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="9564" end="9581" title="Passiflora edulis" label="Passiflora edulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766333" start="9595" end="9613" title="Passiflora foetida" label="Passiflora foetida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669089" start="9630" end="9651" title="Passiflora subpeltata" label="Passiflora subpeltata"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="9850" end="9856" title="leaf" label="foliar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="9979" end="9990" title="Coevolution" label="Coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="10148" end="10153" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766333" start="10162" end="10185" title="stinking passion flower" label="stinking passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="10292" end="10300" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="10313" end="10321" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q418243" start="10327" end="10343" title="acid phosphatase" label="acid phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="10396" end="10401" title="Pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608392" start="10437" end="10459" title="protocarnivorous plant" label="protocarnivorous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q415622" start="10462" end="10483" title="Banana passion flower" label="Banana passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="10564" end="10570" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="10578" end="10586" title="invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="10587" end="10591" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="10622" end="10628" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="10655" end="10660" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="10661" end="10664" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="10721" end="10728" title="endemic (ecology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="10762" end="10781" title="Blue passion flower" label="Blue passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="10929" end="10939" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="10961" end="10968" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="10988" end="11007" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142635" start="11056" end="11073" title="Passiflora pinnatistipula" label="P. pinnatistipula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="11120" end="11125" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="11142" end="11151" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448217" start="11432" end="11440" title="Passiflora mixta" label="P. mixta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="11564" end="11572" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="11612" end="11621" title="sac fungi" label="sac fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q310475" start="11641" end="11649" title="Septoria" label="Septoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11673" end="11687" title="Septoria passiflorae" label="S. passiflorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12962137" start="11712" end="11727" title="proteobacterium" label="proteobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255126" start="11741" end="11759" title="Pseudomonas tomato" label="Pseudomonas tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972414" start="11767" end="11770" title="Pathovar" label="pv."/>
<link wikidata="Q3400142" start="11807" end="11816" title="Potyvirus" label="Potyvirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142778" start="11829" end="11857" title="passionfruit woodiness virus" label="passionfruit woodiness virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939048" start="11879" end="11889" title="Carlavirus" label="Carlavirus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11902" end="11925" title="Passiflora latent virus" label="Passiflora latent virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="12099" end="12105" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q72711" start="12127" end="12139" title="heart rhythm" label="heart rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="12142" end="12148" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q114085" start="12153" end="12161" title="rhinitis" label="rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="12485" end="12512" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="12520" end="12541" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21370310" start="12566" end="12605" title="Passiflora × exoniensis" label="&amp;quot;P.&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;exoniensis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10715890" start="12631" end="12668" title="Passiflora × violacea" label="&amp;quot;P.&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;violacea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="12681" end="12694" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914497" start="12816" end="12842" title="winged-stem passion flower" label="winged-stem passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="12871" end="12890" title="blue passion flower" label="blue passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="13122" end="13134" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="13139" end="13152" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="13156" end="13166" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13212" end="13218" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q575797" start="13281" end="13302" title="Malmö Central Station" label="Malmö Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13306" end="13312" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566379" start="13376" end="13400" title="extranuclear inheritance" label="extranuclear inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565" start="13402" end="13410" title="paternal" label="paternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="13426" end="13437" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182853" start="13481" end="13489" title="plastome" label="plastome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155054" start="13497" end="13524" title="two-flowered passion flower" label="two-flowered passion flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="13559" end="13568" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="13642" end="13655" title="Passiflora edulis" label="passion fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="13716" end="13725" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="13727" end="13740" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="13748" end="13755" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="13760" end="13772" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="13974" end="13981" title="variety (biology)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q917921" start="14042" end="14058" title="Sweet granadilla" label="Sweet granadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="14137" end="14143" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14209" end="14221" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="14402" end="14408" title="Maypop" label="Maypop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="14711" end="14723" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="14764" end="14770" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="14775" end="14782" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="14932" end="14937" title="pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q159105" start="14941" end="14957" title="Giant granadilla" label="Giant granadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q164659" start="15025" end="15036" title="water lemon" label="water lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448230" start="15068" end="15082" title="sweet calabash" label="sweet calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q161120" start="15216" end="15234" title="Passiflora caerulea" label="blue passionflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="15464" end="15476" title="Blackberry" label="blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21315266" start="15480" end="15493" title="Passiflora vesicaria" label="Wild maracuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="15558" end="15572" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q415622" start="15576" end="15595" title="Banana passionfruit" label="Banana passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897284" start="15630" end="15683" title="Passiflora tripartita" label="&amp;quot;P. tripartita&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;mollissima&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q135365" start="15694" end="15707" title="Passiflora tarminiana" label="P. tarminiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q414226" start="15876" end="15890" title="beta-Carboline" label="beta-Carboline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264596" start="15952" end="15974" title="Desmanthus illinoensis" label="Desmanthus illinoensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="16111" end="16120" title="ayahuasca" label="ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q128939" start="16180" end="16200" title="Passiflora incarnata" label="Passiflora incarnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="16265" end="16285" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="16289" end="16305" title="Indigenous people of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="16343" end="16361" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="16440" end="16448" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="16486" end="16493" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="16507" end="16525" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="16549" end="16566" title="evidence-based medicine" label="clinical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041116" start="16655" end="16683" title="generally recognized as safe" label="generally recognized as safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10675206" start="16697" end="16712" title="food ingredient" label="food ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="16820" end="16840" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="the passion of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="16844" end="16862" title="Christianity" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16908" end="16913" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="17149" end="17154" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="17174" end="17185" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q478195" start="17249" end="17259" title="Holy Lance" label="Holy Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q165859" start="17267" end="17274" title="tendril" label="tendril"/>
<link wikidata="Q152910" start="17290" end="17294" title="whip" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033105" start="17308" end="17330" title="flagellation of Christ" label="flagellation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="17342" end="17347" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="17353" end="17358" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="17387" end="17395" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="17407" end="17416" title="St. Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="17452" end="17466" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17507" end="17523" title="Perianth#Corona" label="radial filaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="17608" end="17623" title="crown of thorns" label="crown of thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="17631" end="17638" title="Chalice (cup)" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="17646" end="17651" title="Ovary (plants)" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q497512" start="17661" end="17671" title="Receptacle (botany)" label="receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="17687" end="17697" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="17711" end="17718" title="gynoecium" label="stigmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37077" start="17735" end="17740" title="Nail (fastener)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="17754" end="17760" title="anther" label="anther"/>
<link wikidata="Q190940" start="17794" end="17800" title="stigmata" label="wounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="17911" end="17917" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="17922" end="17928" title="virtue" label="Purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18137" end="18142" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="18196" end="18204" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="18529" end="18534" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="18539" end="18545" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18640" end="18645" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q559045" start="18756" end="18764" title="shoelace" label="shoelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="18815" end="18820" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18837" end="18850" title="Krishnakamala" label="Krishnakamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="18887" end="18898" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648561" start="18944" end="18952" title="Kauravas" label="Kauravas"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="19005" end="19013" title="Pandavas" label="Pandavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057886" start="19060" end="19068" title="Draupadi" label="Draupadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="19073" end="19080" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q497975" start="19112" end="19135" title="List of culinary fruits" label="List of culinary fruits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334850" wikidata="Q158703" url="?curid=334850" title="Buxus">
<text>Buxus is a genus of about seventy species in the family Buxaceae. Common names include box and boxwood.

The boxes are native to western and southern Europe, southwest, southern and eastern Asia, Africa, Madagascar, northernmost South America, Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, with the majority of species being tropical or subtropical; only the European and some Asian species are frost-tolerant. Centres of diversity occur in Cuba (about 30 species), China (17 species) and Madagascar (9 species).

They are slow-growing evergreen shrubs and small trees, growing to 2–12 m (rarely 15 m) tall. The leaves are opposite, rounded to lanceolate, and leathery; they are small in most species, typically 1.5–5 cm long and 0.3–2.5 cm broad, but up to 11 cm long and 5 cm broad in &quot;B. macrocarpa&quot;. The flowers are small and yellow-green, monoecious with both sexes present on a plant. The fruit is a small capsule 0.5–1.5 cm long (to 3 cm in &quot;B. macrocarpa&quot;), containing several small seeds.

The genus splits into three genetically distinct sections, each section in a different region, with the Eurasian species in one section, the African (except northwest Africa) and Madagascan species in the second, and the American species in the third. The African and American sections are genetically closer to each other than to the Eurasian section.

The genomes of &quot;Buxus austro-yunnanensis&quot; and &quot;Buxus sinica&quot; have been sequenced. 

==Selected species==
===Europe, northwest Africa, Asia===

* &quot;Buxus austro-yunnanensis&quot; (Yunnan box; southwest China)
* &quot;Buxus balearica&quot; (Balearic box; Balearic Islands, southern Spain, northwest Africa)
* &quot;Buxus bodinieri&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus cephalantha&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus cochinchinensis&quot; (Malaysia, Vietnam)
* &quot;Buxus colchica&quot; (Georgian box; western Caucasus; considered also a syn. of &quot;B. sempervirens&quot;)
* &quot;Buxus hainanensis&quot; (Hainan box; China: Hainan)
* &quot;Buxus harlandii&quot; (Harland&#x27;s box; southern China, Vietnam)
* &quot;Buxus hebecarpa&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus henryi&quot; (Henry&#x27;s box; China)
* &quot;Buxus hyrcana&quot; (Caspian box; Alborz, eastern Caucasus; considered also a syn. of &quot;B. sempervirens&quot;)
* &quot;Buxus ichangensis&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus latistyla&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus linearifolia&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus megistophylla&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus microphylla&quot; (Japanese box; Korea, China, Vietnam; long cultivated in Japan)
* &quot;Buxus mollicula&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus myrica&quot; (China, Vietnam)
* &quot;Buxus papillosa&quot; (western Himalaya)
* &quot;Buxus pubiramea&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus rivularis&quot; (Philippines)
* &quot;Buxus rolfei&quot; (Borneo)
* &quot;Buxus rugulosa&quot; (China, eastern Himalaya)
* &quot;Buxus rupicola&quot; (Malaysia)
* &quot;Buxus sempervirens&quot; (common box or European box; western and southern Europe, except far southwest)
* &quot;Buxus sinica&quot; (Chinese box; China, Korea, Japan)
* &quot;Buxus stenophylla&quot; (China)
* &quot;Buxus wallichiana&quot; (Himalayan box; Himalaya)
===Africa, Madagascar===

* &quot;Buxus acuminata&quot; (Africa: Zaire; syn. &quot;Notobuxus acuminata&quot;)
* &quot;Buxus calcarea&quot; (Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus capuronii&quot; (Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus hildebrandtii&quot; (eastern Africa: Somalia, Ethiopia)
* &quot;Buxus humbertii&quot; (Humbert&#x27;s box; Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus itremoensis&quot; (Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus lisowskii&quot; (Congo)
* &quot;Buxus macowanii&quot; (Cape box; eastern and northern South Africa)
* &quot;Buxus macrocarpa&quot; (Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus madagascarica&quot; (Madagascan box; Madagascar, Comoros)
* &quot;Buxus monticola&quot; (Madagascar endemic)
* &quot;Buxus moratii&quot; (Madagascar, Comoros)
* &quot;Buxus natalensis&quot; (Natal box; eastern South Africa; syn. &quot;Notobuxus natalensis&quot;)
* &quot;Buxus nyasica&quot; (Malawi)
* &quot;Buxus obtusifolia&quot; (eastern Africa; syn. &quot;Notobuxus obtusifolia&quot;)
* &quot;Buxus rabenantoandroi&quot; (Madagascar endemic; syn. &quot;B. angustifolia&quot; GE Schatz &amp; Lowry &quot;non&quot; Mill.)
===Americas===

* &quot;Buxus aneura&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus arborea&quot; (Jamaica)
* &quot;Buxus bartletii&quot; (Central America)
* &quot;Buxus brevipes&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus citrifolia&quot; (Venezuela)
* &quot;Buxus crassifolia&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus ekmanii&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus excisa&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus heterophylla&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus imbricata&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus lancifolia&quot; (Mexico)
* &quot;Buxus macrophylla&quot; (Central America)
* &quot;Buxus mexicana&quot; (Mexico)
* &quot;Buxus muelleriana&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus olivacea&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus pilosula&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus portoricensis&quot; (Puerto Rico)
* &quot;Buxus pubescens&quot; (Mexico)
* &quot;Buxus rheedioides&quot; (Cuba)
* &quot;Buxus vahlii&quot; (Vahl&#x27;s box or smooth box; Puerto Rico; syn. &quot;B. laevigata&quot;)
==Selected cultivars==
* &quot;Buxus&quot; &#x27;Green Velvet&#x27; &quot;
* &quot;Buxus microphylla&quot; var. &quot;koreana&quot; &#x27;Winter Gem&#x27;

==Uses==
===Cultivation===
Box plants are commonly grown as hedges and for topiary.

In Britain and mainland Europe, box is subject to damage from caterpillars of
&quot;Cydalima perspectalis&quot; which can devastate a box hedge within a short time. This is a recently introduced species first noticed in Europe in 2007 and in the UK in 2008 but spreading. There were 3 UK reports of infestation in 2011, 20 in 2014 and 150 in the first half of 2015.

===Wood carving===
Owing to its fine grain it is a good wood for fine wood carving, although this is limited by the small sizes available. It is also resistant to splitting and chipping, and thus useful for decorative or storage boxes. 

Traditional Japanese boxwood combs are called &quot;Tsuge Gushi&quot; and have been in production since the Heian Period.

As a timber or wood for carving it is &quot;boxwood&quot; in all varieties of English.

Owing to the relatively high density of the wood, boxwood is often used for chess pieces; unstained boxwood for the white pieces, and stained (&#x27;ebonized&#x27;) boxwood for the black pieces in lieu of ebony.

The extremely fine endgrain of box makes it suitable for woodblock printing and woodcut blocks, for which it was the usual material in Europe. In the 16th century, boxwood was used to create intricate decorative carvings, including intricate rosary prayer beads. As of 2016, the largest collection of these carvings is at the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto.

High quality wooden spoons have usually been carved from box, with beech being the usual cheaper substitute.

===Musical instruments===

Due to its high density, resistance to chipping, and relatively low cost, boxwood has been used to make parts for various stringed instruments since antiquity. It is mostly used to make tailpieces, chin rests and tuning pegs, but may be used for a variety of other parts as well. Other woods used for this purpose are rosewood and ebony.

Boxwood was a common material for the manufacture of recorders in the eighteenth century, and a large number of mid- to high-end instruments made today are produced from one or other species of boxwood. Boxwood was once a popular wood for other woodwind instruments, and was among the traditional woods for Great Highland bagpipes before tastes turned to imported dense tropical woods such as cocuswood, ebony, and African blackwood.

===Historical===

Prior to the development of plastics, boxwood was important to a wide range of fields from engineering to arts, construction to cartography, due to its density and stability making it one of the best available materials for measurement scales and technical drawing rulers. Alternative materials of the era were ivory, paper, and metal. Disadvantages of ivory included that it would slightly shrink over time, the size and shape of blanks was limited by that of the tusk, and supply was limited. Paper was soft, difficult to use, and did not last long. Metal marked the surface it was being used on and increased expense. Ebony was another dense and stable wood prized for drawing instruments but typically only if scales were not necessary; boxwood&#x27;s light color contrasted much better with scales.

Devices made of boxwood included set squares, scale rulers, yardsticks, folding rulers, slide rules, Marquois scales, T-squares, protractors, and a wide range of other measuring, metering, and straight-edge devices and tools, as well as general functional items such as combs, weaving shuttles, etc.

A &quot;boxwood rule&quot; generally refers to a style of folding ruler with brass hinge(s).

General Thomas F. Meagher decorated the hats of the men of the Irish Brigade with boxwood during the American Civil War, as he could find no shamrock.

==See also==
* Bibliography of hedges and topiary
* Boxwood blight
* &quot;Cydalima perspectalis&quot; – box tree moth

==References==
==External links==

* Box / Royal Horticultural Society ()
* American Boxwood Society
* Revision of the genus Buxus in Madagascar (PDF file)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="11" end="16" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156680" start="56" end="64" title="Buxaceae" label="Buxaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="87" end="90" title="Buxus" label="box"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="95" end="102" title="Buxus" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="119" end="125" title="native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="392" end="397" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502751" start="408" end="428" title="Center of diversity" label="Centres of diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="533" end="542" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="543" end="548" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="560" end="564" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="609" end="615" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="641" end="651" title="lanceolate" label="lanceolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="851" end="861" title="plant sexuality" label="monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="902" end="907" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1008" end="1012" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1415" title="Buxus austro-yunnanensis" label="Buxus austro-yunnanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11177620" start="1432" end="1444" title="Buxus sinica" label="Buxus sinica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1541" end="1565" title="Buxus austro-yunnanensis" label="Buxus austro-yunnanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163278" start="1610" end="1625" title="Buxus balearica" label="Buxus balearica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="1647" end="1663" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1707" end="1722" title="Buxus bodinieri" label="Buxus bodinieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1745" end="1762" title="Buxus cephalantha" label="Buxus cephalantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1785" end="1806" title="Buxus cochinchinensis" label="Buxus cochinchinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1814" end="1822" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1824" end="1831" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640109" start="1841" end="1855" title="Buxus colchica" label="Buxus colchica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="1913" end="1917" title="syn." label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1958" end="1975" title="Buxus hainanensis" label="Buxus hainanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10904181" start="2018" end="2033" title="Buxus harlandii" label="Buxus harlandii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2094" end="2109" title="Buxus hebecarpa" label="Buxus hebecarpa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2132" end="2144" title="Buxus henryi" label="Buxus henryi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27344" start="2185" end="2198" title="Buxus hyrcana" label="Buxus hyrcana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="2263" end="2267" title="syn." label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2308" end="2325" title="Buxus ichangensis" label="Buxus ichangensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2348" end="2363" title="Buxus latistyla" label="Buxus latistyla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2386" end="2404" title="Buxus linearifolia" label="Buxus linearifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2427" end="2446" title="Buxus megistophylla" label="Buxus megistophylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q162432" start="2469" end="2486" title="Buxus microphylla" label="Buxus microphylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2550" end="2555" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2565" end="2580" title="Buxus mollicula" label="Buxus mollicula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2603" end="2615" title="Buxus myrica" label="Buxus myrica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2647" end="2662" title="Buxus papillosa" label="Buxus papillosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2696" end="2711" title="Buxus pubiramea" label="Buxus pubiramea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2734" end="2749" title="Buxus rivularis" label="Buxus rivularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2757" end="2768" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2778" end="2790" title="Buxus rolfei" label="Buxus rolfei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2814" end="2828" title="Buxus rugulosa" label="Buxus rugulosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2869" end="2883" title="Buxus rupicola" label="Buxus rupicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q27344" start="2909" end="2927" title="Buxus sempervirens" label="Buxus sempervirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11177620" start="3022" end="3034" title="Buxus sinica" label="Buxus sinica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3084" end="3101" title="Buxus stenophylla" label="Buxus stenophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3124" end="3141" title="Buxus wallichiana" label="Buxus wallichiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3208" end="3223" title="Buxus acuminata" label="Buxus acuminata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3292" end="3306" title="Buxus calcarea" label="Buxus calcarea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3357" title="Buxus capuronii" label="Buxus capuronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929016" start="3393" end="3412" title="Buxus hildebrandtii" label="Buxus hildebrandtii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3463" end="3478" title="Buxus humbertii" label="Buxus humbertii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3534" end="3551" title="Buxus itremoensis" label="Buxus itremoensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3587" end="3602" title="Buxus lisowskii" label="Buxus lisowskii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13034440" start="3625" end="3640" title="Buxus macowanii" label="Buxus macowanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3701" end="3717" title="Buxus macrocarpa" label="Buxus macrocarpa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3753" end="3772" title="Buxus madagascarica" label="Buxus madagascarica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3825" end="3840" title="Buxus monticola" label="Buxus monticola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3876" end="3889" title="Buxus moratii" label="Buxus moratii"/>
<link wikidata="Q58254443" start="3926" end="3942" title="Buxus natalensis" label="Buxus natalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003290" start="4030" end="4043" title="Buxus nyasica" label="Buxus nyasica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003291" start="4067" end="4084" title="Buxus obtusifolia" label="Buxus obtusifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4156" end="4177" title="Buxus rabenantoandroi" label="Buxus rabenantoandroi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4307" end="4319" title="Buxus aneura" label="Buxus aneura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003289" start="4341" end="4354" title="Buxus arborea" label="Buxus arborea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4379" end="4394" title="Buxus bartletii" label="Buxus bartletii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4427" end="4441" title="Buxus brevipes" label="Buxus brevipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003288" start="4463" end="4479" title="Buxus citrifolia" label="Buxus citrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4506" end="4523" title="Buxus crassifolia" label="Buxus crassifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4545" end="4558" title="Buxus ekmanii" label="Buxus ekmanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4580" end="4592" title="Buxus excisa" label="Buxus excisa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4614" end="4632" title="Buxus heterophylla" label="Buxus heterophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4654" end="4669" title="Buxus imbricata" label="Buxus imbricata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4691" end="4707" title="Buxus lancifolia" label="Buxus lancifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4731" end="4748" title="Buxus macrophylla" label="Buxus macrophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4781" end="4795" title="Buxus mexicana" label="Buxus mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4819" end="4836" title="Buxus muelleriana" label="Buxus muelleriana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4858" end="4872" title="Buxus olivacea" label="Buxus olivacea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4894" end="4908" title="Buxus pilosula" label="Buxus pilosula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4930" end="4949" title="Buxus portoricensis" label="Buxus portoricensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4978" end="4993" title="Buxus pubescens" label="Buxus pubescens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5017" end="5034" title="Buxus rheedioides" label="Buxus rheedioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003297" start="5056" end="5068" title="Buxus vahlii" label="Buxus vahlii"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790872" start="5176" end="5225" title="Buxus &amp;#x27;Green Velvet&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;quot;Buxus&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Green Velvet&amp;#x27; &amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5228" end="5305" title="Buxus microphylla var. koreana &amp;#x27;Winter Gem&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;quot;Buxus microphylla&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;koreana&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Winter Gem&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="5367" end="5372" title="hedge" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437791" start="5382" end="5389" title="topiary" label="topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="5454" end="5465" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q175754" start="5476" end="5497" title="Cydalima perspectalis" label="Cydalima perspectalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="5829" end="5841" title="wood carving" label="wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190483" start="5966" end="5976" title="decorative boxes" label="decorative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5980" end="5987" title="box#Storage" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="6105" end="6117" title="Heian Period" label="Heian Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="6252" end="6256" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q208440" start="6284" end="6295" title="chess piece" label="chess piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970433" start="6357" end="6365" title="ebonized" label="ebonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="6413" end="6418" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="6440" end="6448" title="endgrain" label="endgrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="6478" end="6496" title="woodblock printing" label="woodblock printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="6501" end="6508" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803342" start="6663" end="6682" title="Gothic boxwood miniature" label="rosary prayer beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q670250" start="6747" end="6769" title="Art Gallery of Ontario" label="Art Gallery of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="6850" end="6855" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="7042" end="7062" title="stringed instruments" label="stringed instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="7238" end="7246" title="rosewood" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q187851" start="7312" end="7320" title="Recorder (musical instrument)" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="7566" end="7589" title="Great Highland bagpipes" label="Great Highland bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10741417" start="7652" end="7661" title="cocuswood" label="cocuswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="7663" end="7668" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170" start="7674" end="7691" title="African blackwood" label="African blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="7740" end="7747" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257896" start="7948" end="7954" title="scale ruler" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q192521" start="7959" end="7976" title="technical drawing" label="technical drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="8023" end="8028" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q952519" start="8550" end="8560" title="set square" label="set square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925365" start="8577" end="8587" title="Meterstick" label="yardsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q190667" start="8605" end="8615" title="slide rule" label="slide rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281315" start="8618" end="8633" title="Marquois scales" label="Marquois scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="8646" end="8656" title="protractor" label="protractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23834" start="8787" end="8791" title="comb" label="comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q519840" start="8802" end="8810" title="Shuttle (weaving)" label="shuttles"/>
<link wikidata="Q522396" start="8912" end="8937" title="Thomas Francis Meagher" label="General Thomas F. Meagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820375" start="8975" end="8988" title="Irish Brigade (U.S.)" label="Irish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9013" end="9031" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247368" start="9053" end="9061" title="shamrock" label="shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q85746942" start="9079" end="9113" title="Bibliography of hedges and topiary" label="Bibliography of hedges and topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952010" start="9116" end="9130" title="Boxwood blight" label="Boxwood blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q175754" start="9139" end="9160" title="Cydalima perspectalis" label="Cydalima perspectalis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334851" wikidata="Q4665533" url="?curid=334851" title="Abdul Majid Zabuli">
<text>Abdul Majid Zabuli (August 14, 1896 – November 23, 1998) was the founder of Afghanistan&#x27;s banking system. He founded the Ashami company in 1932, which eventually became the Afghan National Bank (Bank-e-Mili Afghan ).

==Early life and education==

Zabuli was born in Ghazni province, Nawa district, Husain Khail village in 1896. He was then educated in Tashkent before spending some time in Berlin. Mohammed Nadir Shah&#x27;s government requested that Zabuli return to Afghanistan to assist with economic affairs of the state.

==Early attempts to establish a national bank==

Until 1930, both public and private trade and banking in Afghanistan occurred through financing provided by money bazaars. When trade was disrupted due to a revolt against Amānullāh Khān, Zabuli suggested the establishment of a national bank. This had been previously suggested by Amanullah and had been rejected on religious grounds. However, Zabuli was given permission by Mohammed Nadir Shah to establish a joint stock company in its place. Even though the company was given a monopoly over imports of sugar, petroleum and motor vehicles as well as exports of cotton, karakul and wool it was not a successful venture.

==Establishment of the Afghan National Bank (Bank-e-Mili Afghan)==

In 1931, Abdul Majid Zabuli was able to use the investment capital he had accrued through the cotton trade with Russia to establish Afghanistan&#x27;s first investment bank. While privately owned, the Bank-e-Meli Afghan was given power over currency regulation and acted as a de facto government organisation. Abdul Majid Zabuli was the major shareholder of the bank until it was nationalized in 1975 by Afghan President Sardar Daud. Until the bank was nationalized in 1975, Zabuli directed the affairs of the Bank from his residence in Nahant, Massachusetts, U.S.A. and appointed all the executives of the bank and the bank owned enterprises.

==Political career==

Zabuli was a supporter of the Weekh Zalmian movement. It called for the youth of Afghanistan to work for the common good of their country without recourse to outside interference, the eradication of bribery and oppression, legal rights for women and the furtherance of the national economy.

In 1948, Abdul Majid Zabuli visited Washington in his role as Minister of National Economy. He requested that the US provide arms and financial assistance to Afghanistan to allay concerns in Afghanistan regarding possible Soviet aggressions following the British withdrawal from India. Both these requests were denied.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4665533" start="0" end="18" title="Abdul Majid Zabuli" label="Abdul Majid Zabuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="76" end="87" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="358" end="366" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="404" end="423" title="Mohammed Nadir Shah" label="Mohammed Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="754" end="768" title="Amānullāh Khān" label="Amānullāh Khān"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="957" end="976" title="Mohammed Nadir Shah" label="Mohammed Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472366" start="1153" end="1160" title="Karakul (hat)" label="karakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1384" end="1390" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979484" start="1969" end="1982" title="Weekh Zalmian" label="Weekh Zalmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2486" end="2493" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2510" end="2515" title="India" label="India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334858" wikidata="Q2981133" url="?curid=334858" title="Flag flying days in Finland">
<text>Flag flying days in Finland are days of the year when the national flag is flown nationwide, either by law or by custom. The flag of Finland is generally flown only on special occasions to celebrate or honour someone or something. On certain days of the year the state officially flies the flag, and recommends all private citizens to do so as well, these are the flag flying days as listed below. Any citizen has a right to fly the flag on their own property if they deem it appropriate, for example in celebration of birthdays or weddings in the family. Midsummer&#x27;s day is additionally celebrated as Flag Day in Finland.

== Legal enforcement ==

By law, the Finnish flag must be flown from public buildings on the following days. It is recommended that private citizens to also fly the flag on these days.

== Customary flag days ==

It has become customary to fly the Finnish flag on the following occasions. These dates are also listed in the Finnish State Calendar compiled by the University of Helsinki, and it is recommended that the flag is flown on these occasions.

==Other recommended flag days in 2025==

== See also ==

* Public holidays in Finland
* National anthem of Finland
* Finnish national symbols
* Household pennant of Finland
* Flag Day (a list of Flag Day holidays in various countries)
*Flag flying days in Norway
*Flag flying days in Sweden

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2981133" start="0" end="27" title="Flag flying days in Finland" label="Flag flying days in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47891" start="58" end="71" title="Flag of Finland" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q47891" start="125" end="140" title="flag of Finland" label="flag of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475159" start="364" end="379" title="flag flying day" label="flag flying day"/>
<link wikidata="Q947905" start="1141" end="1167" title="Public holidays in Finland" label="Public holidays in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162483" start="1170" end="1196" title="Maamme" label="National anthem of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895034" start="1199" end="1223" title="Finnish national symbols" label="Finnish national symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915864" start="1226" end="1254" title="Household pennant" label="Household pennant of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916333" start="1257" end="1265" title="Flag Day" label="Flag Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235949" start="1318" end="1344" title="Flag flying days in Norway" label="Flag flying days in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028629" start="1346" end="1372" title="Flag flying days in Sweden" label="Flag flying days in Sweden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334865" wikidata="Q543347" url="?curid=334865" title="Attack of the 50 Foot Woman">
<text>Attack of the 50 Foot Woman is a 1958 independently made American science fiction horror film directed by Nathan H. Juran (credited as Nathan Hertz) and starring Allison Hayes, William Hudson and Yvette Vickers. It was produced by Bernard Woolner. The screenplay was written by Mark Hanna, and the original music score was composed by Ronald Stein. The film was distributed in the United States by Allied Artists as a double feature with &quot;War of the Satellites&quot;.

The Allied Artists television version runs 75 minutes instead of 66, including a long printed crawl at the beginning and end, repeated sequences, and hold-frames designed to optically lengthen the film&#x27;s running time.

The film&#x27;s storyline concerns the plight of a wealthy heiress whose close encounter with an enormous alien in his round spacecraft causes her to grow into a giantess, complicating her marriage which is already troubled by a philandering husband.

&quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Woman&quot; is a variation on other 1950s science fiction films that featured size-changing humans: &quot;The Amazing Colossal Man&quot; (1957), its sequel &quot;War of the Colossal Beast&quot; (1958), and &quot;The Incredible Shrinking Man&quot; (1957); in this case, a woman is the protagonist. The film&#x27;s popularity and cult status has spawned numerous parodies and homages in popular media.

==Plot==
A television announcer reports sightings of a red fireball around the world. Facetiously, he calculates its path will take it to California. Nancy Archer, a wealthy but highly troubled woman with a history of emotional instability and immoderate drinking, is driving on a road that night in an American desert. A glowing sphere settles on the deserted highway in front of her, causing her to veer off the road. When she gets out to investigate the object, a huge creature exits and reaches for her.

Nancy escapes and runs back to town, but nobody believes her story due to her known drinking problem and a recent stay in a mental institution. Her philandering husband, Harry Archer, is more interested in his latest girlfriend, town floozy Honey Parker. He pretends to be the good husband in the hope that Nancy will &quot;snap&quot; and return to the &quot;booby hatch,&quot; leaving him in control of her $50 million estate.

Nancy bargains with Harry, asking him to search the desert with her for the &quot;flying satellite,&quot; agreeing to a voluntary return to the sanatorium if they find nothing. As night falls, they find the spacecraft and the alien creature emerges, revealed as an enormous male human. Harry fires his pistol at the giant, but the gunfire has no effect. Harry flees, leaving Nancy behind.

She is later discovered on the roof of her pool house in a delirious state and must be sedated by her family physician, Dr. Cushing. The doctor comments on scratches he finds on Nancy&#x27;s neck, and theorizes that she was exposed to radiation. Egged on by his mistress Honey, Harry plans to inject Nancy with a lethal dose of her sedative, but when he sneaks up to her room, he discovers that she has grown to giant size. In a scene paralleling Nancy&#x27;s first alien encounter, only an enormous hand is seen as Harry reacts in horror.

Cushing and Dr. Von Loeb, a specialist brought in by Cushing, are at a loss on how to treat their giant patient. They keep her in a morphine-induced coma and restrain her with chains while waiting for the authorities to arrive. The sheriff and Jess, Nancy&#x27;s faithful butler, track enormous footprints leading away from the estate to the alien sphere. Inside the sphere, they find Nancy&#x27;s diamond necklace (containing the largest diamond in the world) and other large diamonds, each in a clear orb. They speculate that the jewels are being used as a power source for the alien ship. The huge human reappears, and the sheriff and Jess flee.

Meanwhile, Nancy awakens and breaks free of her restraints. She tears off her mansion&#x27;s roof and, clothed in a bikini-like arrangement of bed linens, heads to town to avenge herself on her unfaithful husband. Ripping the roof off the local bar, she spots Honey and drops a ceiling beam on her rival, killing her. Harry panics, grabs Deputy Charlie&#x27;s pistol, and begins shooting, but she picks up Harry and walks away. The gunshots have no apparent effect on her. The sheriff fires a shotgun at her, which causes a nearby power line transformer to blow up, killing her. The doctors find Harry lying dead in her hand.

==Cast==
* Allison Hayes as Nancy Fowler Archer
* William Hudson as Harry Archer
* Yvette Vickers as Honey Parker
* Roy Gordon as Dr. Isaac Cushing
* George Douglas as Sheriff Dubbitt
* Ken Terrell as Jess Stout, Nancy&#x27;s Butler
* Otto Waldis as Dr. Heinrich Von Loeb
* Eileen Stevens as Nurse
* Frank Chase as Deputy Charlie
* Michael Ross as Tony, The Bartender / The Giant Alien

==Critical reception==
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 69% based on 13 reviews, with an average rating of 6.1/10.

Retrospective reviews and scholarship confirm the status of cult classic of the film.

==Remakes and sequels==
With its low budget of around $88,000, &quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Woman&quot; made enough money to prompt discussion of a sequel. According to executive producer and cinematographer Jacques Marquette, the sequel was to be produced at a higher budget and in color. A script was written, but the project never advanced beyond the discussion phase.

In early 1979, Dimension Pictures announced that producer Steve Krantz was developing a 5-million-dollar remake with director Paul Morrissey. It never came to fruition.

In the mid-1980s, filmmaker Jim Wynorski considered doing a remake with Sybil Danning in the title role. Wynorski made it as far as shooting a photo session with Danning dressed as the 50-foot woman. The project never materialized because Wynorski opted instead to film &quot;Not of This Earth&quot; (1988), a remake of Roger Corman&#x27;s 1957 film of the same name.

The film was remade in 1993 by HBO under the same title &quot;Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman&quot;. It was directed by Christopher Guest, with a script by &quot;Thirtysomething&quot; writer Joseph Dougherty. Daryl Hannah produced the film and starred in the title role.

In 1995, Fred Olen Ray produced a parody entitled &quot;Attack of the 60 Foot Centerfold&quot;, starring J.J. North and Tammy Parks. Beyond the basic premise, the plot has little in common with the original film, being concerned with the side effects of a beauty-enhancing formula on two ambitious female models. The film was farcical and made on an extremely low budget. The illusion of size difference was achieved using forced perspective with a limited amount of composite imaging.

The animated film &quot;Monsters vs. Aliens&quot; (2009) also features a giant woman (&quot;Ginormica&quot;). She is specifically identified as being exactly 49&#x27; 11&quot;, in a subtly humorous attempt to avoid copyright infringement.

In late 2011, Roger Corman produced a 3D film titled &quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Cheerleader&quot;, released on August 25, 2012. It was written by Mike MacLean (who also wrote &quot;Sharktopus&quot; for Corman) and was directed by Kevin O&#x27;Neill. The film stars Jena Sims (a former Miss Georgia Teen USA) in the title role as Cassie Stratford and Olivia Alexander, who co-plays Sims&#x27;s rival, Brittany Andrews.

In early February 2024, &quot;Variety&quot; reported that Tim Burton and &quot;Gone Girl&quot; writer Gillian Flynn are developing a remake of &quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Woman&quot; for Warner Bros.

==Home media==
&quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Woman&quot; was released June 26, 2007 by Warner Bros. Home Video on region 1 DVD. It was also available in the Warner Bros. three-disc DVD box set &quot;Cult Camp Classics - Vol. 1: Sci-Fi Thrillers&quot;, which also includes other two cult classic sci-fi thrillers from Allied Artists Pictures, such as &quot;The Giant Behemoth&quot; (1959) and &quot;Queen of Outer Space&quot; (1958). An audio commentary track with co-star Yvette Vickers and Tom Weaver is also included. Although the DVDs are now officially out-of-print, on September 20, 2011, Warner Bros. added the film to its order-on-demand Warner Archive DVD-R collection; the content is the same as on the previous DVD releases. A Blu-ray was released in December 2022 by Warner Archive Collection.

==See also==
* List of American films of 1958
* &quot;The Amazing Colossal Man&quot;
* List of cult films

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Trailer of 
* Joe Dante on &quot;Attack of the 50 Foot Woman&quot; at Trailers From Hell</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="38" end="56" title="independent film" label="independently made"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="66" end="81" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="82" end="93" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q588246" start="106" end="121" title="Nathan H. Juran" label="Nathan H. Juran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356472" start="162" end="175" title="Allison Hayes" label="Allison Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012623" start="177" end="191" title="William Hudson (actor)" label="William Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q443121" start="196" end="210" title="Yvette Vickers" label="Yvette Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033895" start="231" end="246" title="Bernard Woolner" label="Bernard Woolner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767912" start="278" end="288" title="Mark Hanna (screenwriter)" label="Mark Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441559" start="335" end="347" title="Ronald Stein" label="Ronald Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756484" start="398" end="412" title="Allied Artists Pictures Corporation" label="Allied Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="418" end="432" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778622" start="444" end="465" title="War of the Satellites" label="War of the Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="804" end="809" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063341" start="860" end="868" title="giantess" label="giantess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194869" start="1084" end="1108" title="The Amazing Colossal Man" label="The Amazing Colossal Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094579" start="1140" end="1165" title="War of the Colossal Beast" label="War of the Colossal Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q972001" start="1190" end="1218" title="The Incredible Shrinking Man" label="The Incredible Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="1306" end="1317" title="cult film" label="cult status"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="2122" end="2128" title="floozy" label="floozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="3380" end="3388" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356472" start="4536" end="4549" title="Allison Hayes" label="Allison Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012623" start="4575" end="4589" title="William Hudson (actor)" label="William Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q443121" start="4608" end="4622" title="Yvette Vickers" label="Yvette Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282008" start="4675" end="4689" title="George Douglas (actor)" label="George Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388600" start="4711" end="4722" title="Ken Terrell" label="Ken Terrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215511" start="4760" end="4771" title="Otto Waldis" label="Otto Waldis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28078190" start="4825" end="4836" title="Frank Chase (screenwriter)" label="Frank Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="4938" end="4955" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4964" end="4979" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="5136" end="5148" title="Cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277256" start="5550" end="5568" title="Dimension Pictures (1970s company)" label="Dimension Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q383764" start="5661" end="5675" title="Paul Morrissey" label="Paul Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q145422" start="5733" end="5745" title="Jim Wynorski" label="Jim Wynorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q89554" start="5777" end="5790" title="Sybil Danning" label="Sybil Danning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337471" start="5981" end="5998" title="Not of This Earth (1988 film)" label="Not of This Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="6025" end="6037" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516234" start="6045" end="6071" title="Not of This Earth (1957 film)" label="1957 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="6105" end="6108" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q543330" start="6136" end="6162" title="Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman (1993 film)" label="Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="6189" end="6206" title="Christopher Guest" label="Christopher Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247510" start="6231" end="6246" title="Thirtysomething" label="Thirtysomething"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282683" start="6260" end="6276" title="Joseph Dougherty" label="Joseph Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="6278" end="6290" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q713165" start="6350" end="6363" title="Fred Olen Ray" label="Fred Olen Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312939" start="6397" end="6429" title="Attack of the 60 Foot Centerfold" label="Attack of the 60 Foot Centerfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452775" start="6446" end="6456" title="J.J. North" label="J.J. North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264442" start="6764" end="6782" title="forced perspective" label="forced perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121886" start="6808" end="6825" title="Composite image" label="composite imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q681918" start="6852" end="6871" title="Monsters vs. Aliens" label="Monsters vs. Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="7082" end="7094" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="7106" end="7113" title="3D film" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817947" start="7127" end="7160" title="Attack of the 50 Foot Cheerleader" label="Attack of the 50 Foot Cheerleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481512" start="7250" end="7260" title="Sharktopus" label="Sharktopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419866" start="7334" end="7343" title="Jena Sims" label="Jena Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="7518" end="7525" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="7546" end="7556" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920425" start="7567" end="7576" title="Gone Girl (film)" label="Gone Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q311755" start="7590" end="7603" title="Gillian Flynn" label="Gillian Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="7675" end="7687" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="7774" end="7797" title="Warner Bros. Home Video" label="Warner Bros. Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756484" start="8004" end="8027" title="Allied Artists Pictures" label="Allied Artists Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418812" start="8043" end="8061" title="The Giant Behemoth" label="The Giant Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q924274" start="8085" end="8105" title="Queen of Outer Space" label="Queen of Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="8332" end="8346" title="Warner Archive" label="Warner Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206377" start="8347" end="8352" title="DVD-R" label="DVD-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248212" start="8508" end="8538" title="List of American films of 1958" label="List of American films of 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194869" start="8547" end="8571" title="The Amazing Colossal Man" label="The Amazing Colossal Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="8580" end="8598" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832811" start="8709" end="8727" title="Trailers From Hell" label="Trailers From Hell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334866" wikidata="Q6496526" url="?curid=334866" title="List of Latin names of cities">
<text>Users of Neo-Latin have needed to construct Latin city names for contemporary use. For instance, places may not have existed during the Roman period, or may not been given a Latin name, or it may have been forgotten.

==Strategies for constructing Latin names== 
Little is known about how Romans adapted foreign place names to Latin form, but there is evidence of the practices of Bible translators. They reworked some names into Latin or Greek shapes; in one version, &quot;Yerushalem&quot; (tentative reconstruction of a more ancient Hebrew version of the name) becomes &quot;Hierosolyma&quot;, doubtlessly influenced by Greek ἱερος (&quot;hieros&quot;), &quot;holy&quot;. Others were adopted directly, often treating the new place names as indeclinable nouns; here &quot;Yerushalem&quot; is brought over as &quot;Jerusalem&quot;, with the Latin &quot;J&quot; being pronounced as an English &quot;Y&quot; sound and the /sh/ being transliterated to the closest Latin sound, /s/.

Similar strategies are used for places beyond those known to the Roman Empire:
* A classical ending such as -&quot;um&quot; or -&quot;a&quot; is added or substituted on the end of the source word. Hence &quot;Baltimorum&quot; for &quot;Baltimore,&quot; &quot;Albania&quot; for &quot;Albany.&quot;
* The word may already be in Latin or Greek form: &quot;Indianapolis&quot;, &quot;Cincinnati&quot;, &quot;Atlanta&quot;.
* Calques are resorted to if the New World name is based on an Old World name; the various &quot;Paris&quot;es in the United States are likely to become &quot;Lutetia&quot;, and &quot;Novum Eboracum&quot; or &quot;Neo-Eboracum&quot; represents &quot;New York&quot;, because &quot;Eboracum&quot; is the city of York in England.
* The words are adjusted to fit Latin declensions: &quot;Kansas&quot; appears as either &quot;Cansas, Cansatis&quot; or &quot;Cansa, Cansae&quot;; &quot;Chicago&quot;, &quot;Ohio&quot;, and &quot;Idaho&quot; become consonant stems, with genitives &quot;Chicagonis&quot;, &quot;Ohionis&quot;, &quot;Idahonis&quot;, &amp;c., by analogy with many Latin nouns whose nominative form ends in &quot;o&quot;.
* The words are re-interpreted to fit Latin declensions; &quot;Illinois&quot; is treated as a third-declension noun. 
* If the city is named for a specific thing, and especially if its name is a Romance language word or phrase, it may be directly translated into Latin. For example, the Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles is called &quot;Diocesis Angelorum&quot; in Latin, &quot;Diocese of (the) angels&quot;.
* On the other hand, in some dioceses the church chose to simply apply a Latin locational suffix to the existing name; the diocese of Des Moines, Iowa is simply &quot;Dioecesis Desmoinensis&quot;.
* The words are treated as indeclinable, like some Biblical names; &quot;Connecticut&quot; is sometimes treated this way.

In many cases, there is no consensus as to how to treat any given names, and variants exist. A town which is the site of a university or an episcopal see is more likely to have a standard form hallowed by usage. Note that names of cities are usually feminine in gender in Latin, even if they end in &quot;–us&quot;. This rule is not always strictly observed in the New World.

===Note on word endings===

Latin being an inflected language, names in a Latin context may have different word-endings to those shown here, which are given in the nominative case. For instance &quot;Roma&quot; (Rome) may appear as &quot;Romae&quot; meaning &quot;at Rome&quot; (locative), &quot;of Rome&quot; (genitive) or &quot;to/for Rome&quot; (dative), as &quot;Romam&quot; meaning &quot;Rome&quot; as a direct object (accusative), or indeed as &quot;Romā&quot; with a long &quot;a&quot;, probably not indicated in the orthography, meaning &quot;by, with or from Rome&quot; (ablative). Similarly names ending in &quot;-um&quot; or &quot;-us&quot; may occur with &quot;-i&quot; or &quot;-o&quot;, and names ending in &quot;-us&quot; may occur with &quot;-um&quot;. The words &quot;urbs&quot; and &quot;civitas&quot; may occur as &quot;urbis&quot;, &quot;urbi&quot;, or &quot;urbe&quot;, and &quot;civitatis&quot;, &quot;civitati&quot; or &quot;civitate&quot;.

==List of names==

# Latinized form of a Greek name. Naples/Neapolis is a rare exception to the rule of Latinization of foreign city names as it was established by the Greeks and predates Rome by many centuries. There was no need to change it as the name was too deeply entrenched.
# Claudius Ptolemy mentions &quot;Eblana&quot; in his texts and scholars believe this is a name for Dublin. The Latinized name is more common in medieval texts.
# Latinized form of a Hebrew name.
# London was founded directly by the Romans as a fort, approximately where Westminster stands today. Classical texts written by Tacitus generally label this area of the frontier as &quot;Britannia&quot; with others later differentiating &quot;Caledonia&quot; or &quot;Scotia&quot; for Scotland. England didn&#x27;t quite exist as a concept yet as the entire island was largely inhabited by Celts; the Angles were centuries away.
# Latinized form of a name derived from Amerindian languages.
# Cincinnatus was a real figure in Roman history who died in 430 BC. The city in Ohio is named for the Society of the Cincinnati, which in turned is named for him.
# &quot;-polis&quot; is a suffix from Greek; it belongs to the third declension.

==See also==
* Names of European cities in different languages
* List of city name changes

== External links ==
* Dr. J. G. Th. Grässe, &quot;Orbis Latinus: Lexikon lateinischer geographischer Namen des Mittelalters und der Neuzeit&quot;, online at the Bavarian State Library
* Grässe, &quot;Orbis Latinus&quot;, online at Columbia University
* Hofmann: Lexicon Universale
* GCatholic – Curiate Latin names of Catholic jurisdictions (usually the sees: cities)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="9" end="18" title="Neo-Latin" label="Neo-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="136" end="148" title="Rome" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="381" end="398" title="Bible translations" label="Bible translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="439" end="444" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="475" end="485" title="Jerusalem" label="Yerushalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="743" end="755" title="indeclinable" label="indeclinable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="756" end="760" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1401" end="1407" title="Calque" label="Calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q958954" start="1679" end="1687" title="Eboracum" label="Eboracum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="1709" end="1713" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="1963" end="1972" title="genitive case" label="genitives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="2981" end="2991" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="2998" end="3011" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="3120" end="3126" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3278" end="3296" title="Inflection" label="inflected language"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="3399" end="3409" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="3514" end="3522" title="locative" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="3546" end="3554" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="3584" end="3590" title="dative" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="3659" end="3669" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="3815" end="3823" title="ablative" label="ablative"/>
<link wikidata="Q309637" start="5171" end="5182" title="Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus" label="Cincinnatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632484" start="5272" end="5297" title="Society of the Cincinnati" label="Society of the Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785052" start="5396" end="5412" title="third declension" label="third declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075181" start="5430" end="5477" title="Names of European cities in different languages" label="Names of European cities in different languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926780" start="5480" end="5505" title="List of city name changes" label="List of city name changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q95383" start="5530" end="5550" title="Johann Georg Theodor Grässe" label="Dr. J. G. Th. Grässe"/>
<link wikidata="Q745382" start="5558" end="5647" title="Orbis Latinus" label="Orbis Latinus: Lexikon lateinischer geographischer Namen des Mittelalters und der Neuzeit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334872" wikidata="Q441393" url="?curid=334872" title="Ricardo Maduro">
<text>Ricardo Rodolfo Maduro Joest (born April 20, 1946 in Panama) is a Honduran economist and politician who served as 34th President of Honduras from January 27, 2002 to January 27, 2006. A member of the National Party, Maduro was previously chairman of the Central Bank of Honduras. He graduated from The Lawrenceville School (where he was awarded the Lawrenceville Medal, Lawrenceville&#x27;s highest award to alumni) and later Stanford University. Maduro is a member of the Levy-Maduro family whose roots go through Portugal, the Netherlands and the Netherlands Antilles.

==Life and career==
Maduro is of Jewish descent. His first marriage to Miriam Andréu produced three daughters and a son, Ricardo Ernesto, who was kidnapped at age 25 on April 23, 1997. Ricardo Ernesto&#x27;s body was discovered two days later. His death inspired Maduro to aspire to the presidency and gave him the popularity that allowed him to first register and then be elected as a presidential candidate, in spite of a constitutional ban on those not born in Honduras from becoming President. 

== President of Honduras (2002-2006) ==
This constitutional ban created great controversy before the 2001 elections. Having been chosen as the PNH candidate, he was eventually allowed to stand. In his campaign he promised to tackle crime and the Mara Salvatrucha gang (maras). He immediately brought troops out onto the streets of the larger cities to accompany the local police. The PNH-held National Congress passed laws making illicit association a crime, which have seen hundreds of gang members put behind bars.

In October 2002, Maduro married the Spaniard Aguas Santas Ocaña Navarro, whom he met when she was a member of the Spanish Embassy in Honduras. Shortly after he left office, Maduro and Ocaña filed for divorce. She consequently moved to Nicaragua with her adoptive children to direct a non-profit organization devoted to children. Maduro remained in Tegucigalpa. Maduro&#x27;s eldest son, Ricardo Roberto, is a United States citizen and lives in the U.S with his two children.

On 1 May 2005 the plane Maduro was traveling in crashed into the Caribbean Sea off the shore of Tela. Maduro, his daughter Lorena, and the pilot were reportedly not seriously injured and were rescued by local residents. He was taken to a hospital in Comayagua to recover.

On 27 November 2005 Maduro presided over a new set of presidential and general elections. His party lost the presidency to the Liberal Party of Honduras (PLH) and its candidate Manuel Zelaya. Zelaya succeeded Maduro on 27 January 2006.

Maduro currently serves as President of Inversiones la Paz in Tegucigalpa, and is active in the education organization he created in honor of his son, the Fundacion para la Educacion Ricardo Ernesto Maduro Andreu, FEREMA. The organization is set up to give an education to lower income kindergarten students. Maduro believes that kindergarten is an instrumental part in a child’s life to be able to succeed academically.

==Honors==
*Order of Brilliant Jade with Grand Cordon (Republic of China)

==See also==
*History of Honduras
*Politics of Honduras

==External links==
*Biography by CIDOB (in Spanish)
* Biography at the Permanent Mission of the United Nations website.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441393" start="0" end="28" title="Ricardo Maduro" label="Ricardo Rodolfo Maduro Joest"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="53" end="59" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341442" start="119" end="140" title="President of Honduras" label="President of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579466" start="200" end="214" title="National Party of Honduras" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920146" start="254" end="278" title="Central Bank of Honduras" label="Central Bank of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351132" start="298" end="322" title="The Lawrenceville School" label="The Lawrenceville School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="426" end="445" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q127784" start="1318" end="1334" title="Mara Salvatrucha" label="Mara Salvatrucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415847" start="1465" end="1482" title="Congress of Honduras" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="1626" end="1634" title="Spaniard" label="Spaniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694502" start="1635" end="1661" title="Aguas Santas Ocaña Navarro" label="Aguas Santas Ocaña Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027018" start="2162" end="2166" title="Tela" label="Tela"/>
<link wikidata="Q679169" start="2316" end="2325" title="Comayagua" label="Comayagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839545" start="2393" end="2427" title="2005 Honduran general election" label="presidential and general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q538272" start="2466" end="2491" title="Liberal Party of Honduras" label="Liberal Party of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q191060" start="2516" end="2529" title="Manuel Zelaya" label="Manuel Zelaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442688" start="3010" end="3033" title="Order of Brilliant Jade" label="Order of Brilliant Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q687152" start="3087" end="3106" title="History of Honduras" label="History of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154543" start="3108" end="3128" title="Politics of Honduras" label="Politics of Honduras"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334874" wikidata="Q120367" url="?curid=334874" title="Shark Tale">
<text>Shark Tale is a 2004 American animated comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation SKG and distributed by DreamWorks Pictures. The film was directed by Vicky Jenson, Bibo Bergeron, and Rob Letterman, from a screenplay written by Letterman and Michael J. Wilson. The film features the voices of Will Smith, Robert De Niro, Renée Zellweger, Angelina Jolie, Jack Black, Martin Scorsese, and Michael Imperioli. It tells the story of an underachieving fish named Oscar (Smith) who falsely claims to have killed the son of a shark mob boss Don Lino (De Niro) in an attempt to advance his community standing. Oscar teams up with the mobster&#x27;s younger son Lenny (Black) to keep up the facade.

&quot;Shark Tale&quot; premiered at the Venice Film Festival on September 10, 2004, and was theatrically released in the United States on October 1. It made $374.6 million worldwide against its $75 million budget, finishing its theatrical run as the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2004. The film received mixed reviews from critics; advocacy groups criticized the film for its use of Italian-American stereotypes. It was nominated for Best Animated Feature at the 77th Academy Awards.

==Plot==
In the Southside Reef, Oscar is a lonely bluestreak cleaner wrasse who, in his childhood, dreamed of being a tongue-scrubber at the local Whale Wash like his late father Earl. Since working at the wash, Oscar&#x27;s ambitions have grown; he now wishes to be rich and famous, but owes money to his boss and the Whale Wash&#x27;s owner, a pufferfish named Sykes. His best friend, an angelfish named Angie, offers him a pearl that was a gift from her grandmother to pawn and pay his debt. Meanwhile, Don Lino, the boss of a mob gang of sharks, orcas, sailfish, and octopuses, which Sykes works for, dislikes that his younger son Lenny is a vegetarian, and orders his older son, Frankie, to mentor Lenny.

The next day, Oscar brings the money from the pearl to a seahorse race to meet Sykes, but hears that the race is rigged and bets it all on a seahorse named &quot;Lucky Day&quot;. A feisty redhead gold-digging lion fish named Lola sees this and flagrantly seduces Oscar. Sykes is annoyed that Oscar bet the money, but he hopes that Oscar might win. Lucky Day eventually takes the lead, only to trip and lose short of the finish line, revealing that the race was rigged against him. Sykes loses his temper and orders his two Jamaican henchmen jellyfish, Ernie and Bernie, to deal with Oscar. While the two taunt the bound and gagged Oscar by continually stinging him, Frankie notices the scene and urges Lenny to eat Oscar. Lenny instead frees Oscar and tells him to escape. Seeing Oscar still alive moments later, an enraged Frankie charges at Oscar, only to be killed when an anchor from above the surface falls on his neck. Devastated and blaming himself for his brother&#x27;s demise, Lenny leaves.

With no other witnesses, Oscar takes credit for killing Frankie and quickly rises in fame as the &quot;Sharkslayer&quot;. He moves to a glamorous apartment at the &quot;top of the reef&quot; to live in luxury, while Sykes becomes his manager and forgives his debt. Following Frankie&#x27;s funeral, Lino has everyone search for Lenny and the Sharkslayer. Oscar encounters Lenny who, aware of Oscar&#x27;s lie, begs Oscar to let him stay at his place to avoid returning to his father. Angie soon finds out about Oscar&#x27;s lie and threatens to tell everyone, but he and Lenny convince her to keep it a secret. The next day, Oscar and Lenny stage a battle involving Oscar &quot;fighting&quot; off Lenny, thus cementing Oscar&#x27;s notoriety and tricking the sharks into thinking that Lenny has been killed too, infuriating Lino. Lola kisses Oscar on camera, making Angie jealous. That night, as Lenny disguises himself for his new undercover life as a dolphin, Oscar and Angie get into a heated argument, where she admits that she had romantic feelings for Oscar even before he became the Sharkslayer. A remorseful Oscar sadly reflects on his selfishness and dumps Lola, who beats him up in anger.

Oscar visits the Whale Wash with copious amounts of gifts for Angie, only to discover that Lino has kidnapped her in order to stage a meeting, which Lola is also attending in revenge for being dumped. Lino threatens to eat Angie if Oscar does not give up his act and surrender, but Lenny &quot;eats&quot; Angie to save her. He soon regurgitates her, and inadvertently exposes his true shark self to Lino. Enraged by believing that he turned his son against him, Lino chases Oscar through the reef. Oscar flees to the Whale Wash, accidentally trapping Lenny in the machinery before also trapping Lino. Everyone cheers for Oscar, but he finally confesses the truth behind Frankie&#x27;s death while urging Lino to respect Lenny&#x27;s lifestyle, reflecting on the resemblance between his and Lino&#x27;s own neglect of their loved ones. A tearful Lino reconciles with Lenny and accepts his vegetarianism, and states that he and his gang bear the city no ill will. Oscar forsakes all the wealth he has acquired; becomes co-owner of the Whale Wash, now frequented by the gang member; and reconciles with Angie, beginning a romantic relationship with her and living happily in the reef. Meanwhile, Lola arrives at the penthouse to apologize to Oscar, only to encounter his deranged hermit crab friend, Crazy Joe, instead.

==Voice cast==

* Will Smith as Oscar, an insecure yet streetwise and comical bluestreak cleaner wrasse who works for the Whale Wash of Southside Reef and often concocts schemes to become rich, famous, and respected. 
* Robert De Niro as Don Lino, a great white shark who leads a mafia consisting of sharks and other ocean predators, and wants his sons Lenny and Frankie to eventually succeed him and run his business together.
* Renée Zellweger as Angie, an angelfish and Oscar&#x27;s best friend and co-worker at the Whale Wash, who harbors a secret crush on him.
* Jack Black as Lenny, Don Lino&#x27;s second son, a vegetarian, and Frankie&#x27;s younger brother, who becomes good friends with Oscar and Angie.
* Angelina Jolie as Lola, a femme fatale and gold digger lion fish, who is only interested in those who are rich and famous, in whom Oscar develops a romantic interest.
* Martin Scorsese as Sykes, a loan shark pufferfish and Oscar&#x27;s boss at the Whale Wash.
* Ziggy Marley and Doug E. Doug as Ernie and Bernie, two Jamaican jellyfish and Sykes&#x27; enforcers, who torture anyone who crosses their boss with their stingers.
* Michael Imperioli as Frankie, Lenny&#x27;s older brother and Don Lino&#x27;s first son, who is embarrassed by Lenny&#x27;s vegetarian views.
* Vincent Pastore as Luca, a teal octopus and Don Lino&#x27;s &quot;left-hand, right-hand man&quot;, with a tendency to state the obvious. Originally Luca was going to be played by Kevin Pollak as shown in an early promotional card for the film. Pastore was also going to play an orca character named Willie, who does not appear in the film.
* Lenny Venito as Giuseppe, a hammerhead shark and one of Lino&#x27;s messengers.
* Peter Falk as Don Feinberg, an elderly leopard shark who leads another shark crime family inspired by the Jewish mafia.
* Katie Couric as Katie Current, a female sea bass who is the local reporter of the Southside Reef in the US release, the character is based on and modeled after Couric. At the time, Katie Couric co-hosted &quot;Today&quot; in America. In the Australian release, then-local &quot;Today&quot; co-host Tracy Grimshaw dubbed her lines, while Fiona Phillips of the UK&#x27;s GMTV provided the voice for the British release of the film and Cristina Parodi of Italy&#x27;s &quot;Verissimo&quot; provided the Italian version of the character.
* David P. Smith as Crazy Joe, a deranged hermit crab who becomes Oscar&#x27;s &quot;financial advisor&quot;.
* Bobb&#x27;e J. Thompson, Kamali Minter, Emily Lyon Segan as the Shorties, three delinquent young fish and friends of Oscar who love to spray graffiti. Two of them are cowfishes and one is a Pennant coralfish.
* Shelley Morrison as Mrs. Sanchez, an old grumpy weeverfish.
* Sean Bishop as an unnamed green sperm whale who attends the Whale Wash.
* Christina Aguilera and Missy Elliott portray fish and jellyfish versions of themselves at the end of the film, singing &quot;Car Wash&quot;.

Additionally, animator David Soren makes cameos as Horace, a shrimp and former enemy of Don Lino&#x27;s, who escapes being eaten at a shark family meal courtesy of Lenny; a worm on a fishing hook whom Lenny also helps escape; and a starfish.

==Production==
The film was officially announced and began production in April 2002, under the title of &quot;Sharkslayer&quot;, with Vicky Jenson and Bibo Bergeron directing from a screenplay by Michael J. Wilson, as well as Mark Swift and Damian Shannon, who conceived the film&#x27;s story. By September 2003, the film had been retitled &quot;Shark Tale&quot;, to make it sound less violent and more family friendly. Bill Damaschke, the producer of the film, explained the title change: &quot;In the beginning, we set out to make a movie a little more noir, perhaps a little darker than where we&#x27;ve landed.&quot; &quot;Shark Tale&quot; is the first all computer-animated film produced at DreamWorks Animation&#x27;s Glendale facility, which previously animated the studio&#x27;s hand-drawn animated movies, as well as their first computer-animated film to not be produced by Pacific Data Images.

James Gandolfini was initially set to voice the kingpin shark, named Don Lino, but he dropped out, with Robert De Niro taking over the role.

The film was produced concurrently with &quot;Finding Nemo&quot;, another animated film set underwater, which was released a year and a half earlier. DreamWorks Animation&#x27;s CEO, Jeffrey Katzenberg, defended the film, saying that &quot;any similarities are mere coincidence. We&#x27;ve been open with the Pixar people, so we don&#x27;t step on each other&#x27;s toes.&quot;

==Marketing==
Burger King featured ten different &quot;Shark Tale&quot; action figures within its&#x27; kids meals. Over 100 million The Coca-Cola Company products displayed &quot;Shark Tale&quot; on their packaging. Specially-marked pouches of Minute Maid and Hi-C offered consumers a free movie voucher with three proofs of purchase, or directed them to free limited-time &quot;Shark Tale&quot; downloads at howdoyouhangout.com. &quot;Shark Tale&quot; was featured on over 40 million packages of General Mills products, while specially-marked cereal packages came with one of five &quot;Shark Tale&quot; mini video games inside. Great Clips sponsored a national sweepstakes awarding a trip to &quot;Shark Tale&quot;″s world premiere and other prizes, and promoted &quot;Shark Tale&quot; on Kasey Kahne&#x27;s NASCAR race car. Hewlett-Packard, whose computers were used to create the film, sponsored online &quot;Shark Tale&quot; games and activities. Krispy Kreme carried &quot;Shark Tale&quot;-themed doughnuts.

==Release==

&quot;Shark Tale&quot; was initially scheduled for release on November 5, 2004, but was later moved up to October 1. This shift was reportedly made to avoid competition with Pixar&#x27;s &quot;The Incredibles&quot;, which was released on the same weekend. The film had its worldwide premiere on September 10, 2004, in Piazza San Marco in Venice, Italy. Screening as part of the Venice Film Festival, it marked the first time that Piazza San Marco was closed for a premiere of a major feature film. The film was projected on the largest inflatable screen in the world, measuring more than six stories tall and over . It required of air to inflate and more than 50 tons of water for stabilization. The premiere was attended by 6,000 visitors, including Will Smith, Angelina Jolie, Robert De Niro, and Michael Imperioli. Jeffrey Katzenberg, the executive producer of the film, explained that they &quot;wanted to find a unique way to introduce this movie to the world. We needed a big idea. ... More than anything, we are in showbusiness. This is the show part.&quot;

===Home media===
&quot;Shark Tale&quot; was released on VHS and DVD on February 8, 2005. The DVD contained behind-the-scenes featurettes, games and activities, blooper reels, an audition for the whale Gigi, the Car Wash music video featuring Aguilera and Elliott, and a short film &quot;Club Oscar&quot;. The film was released on Game Boy Advance Video on November 17, and on Blu-ray on February 5, 2019.

==Reception==
===Box office===
&quot;Shark Tale&quot; grossed $160.9 million in the United States and Canada and $213.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $374.6 million. It was the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2004.

&quot;Shark Tale&quot; opened at #1 with $47.6 million, which was, at the time, the second-highest opening for a DreamWorks Animation film behind &quot;Shrek 2&quot; ($108 million). It remained the #1 film in the U.S. and Canada for its second and third weekends.

===Critical reception===

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 35% based on 182 reviews, with an average rating of 5.20/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Derivative and full of pop culture in-jokes.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100 based on 36 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars, observing, &quot;Since the target audience for &quot;Shark Tale&quot; is presumably kids and younger teenagers, how many of them have seen the R-rated &quot;Godfather&quot; and will get all the inside jokes? Not a few, I suppose, and some of its characters and dialogue have passed into common knowledge. But it&#x27;s strange that a kid-oriented film would be based on parody of a 1972 gangster movie for adults.&quot; He also opined that younger viewers would have trouble enjoying a film about adult characters with adult problems, such as an elaborate love triangle and a main character wanting to clear his debt with loan sharks, and compared it to more successful fish-focused animated features like Pixar Animation Studios&#x27; &quot;Finding Nemo&quot;, which Ebert felt featured a simpler plot that audiences could more easily identify with. Richard Roeper commented that although the film was not on the same level as &quot;Finding Nemo&quot;, it was a film worth seeing.

Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; was critical of the film&#x27;s lack of originality: &quot;Overfamiliarity extends to the story, jokes and music, most of which reference popular entertainment of about 30 years ago&quot; noting that the script combines &quot;The Godfather&quot; and &quot;Jaws&quot;, with a dash of &quot;Car Wash&quot;. McCarthy calls Smith&#x27;s character &quot;tiresomely familiar&quot;, and Zellweger&#x27;s &quot;entirely uninteresting&quot;, but praises the vocal performance of Martin Scorsese. Kirk Honeycutt of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; said the film was not as good as &quot;Shrek&quot;, but called it &quot;an overly jokey but often quite entertaining spoof that should please families everywhere.&quot;

===Social commentary===

&quot;Shark Tale&quot; was criticized for perpetuating negative stereotypes of Italian-Americans in its antagonists. Politician Bill Pascrell said: &quot;The prevailing message is negative and they have to be held out to dry for it. I&#x27;m a very proud Italian-American. When you stereotype me, it&#x27;s like making fun of my grandparents&quot;. Columbus Citizens Foundation issued a statement condemning the stereotyping of people with Italian names as gangsters. Dona De Sanctis, deputy executive director of the Order Sons of Italy in America, said: &quot;We were very concerned about this type of stereotyping being passed on to another generation of children.&quot; John Mancini, the founder of the Italic Institute of America, protested the movie, stating: &quot;We&#x27;re concerned about what preteens are learning from the outside world. They don&#x27;t associate other groups as criminals, they only know Italians as gangsters. Our goal here is to de-Italianize it.&quot; The protest was coordinated by the Italian American One Voice Coalition of New Jersey. DreamWorks reacted by changing the name of Peter Falk&#x27;s character from Don Brizzi to Don Feinberg. However, Mancini demanded that everything Italian—character names, the mannerisms, the forms of speech—be dropped. 

Lenny, a shark voiced by Jack Black, spends the film coming to terms with his vegetarianism, a trait deeply ostracised by his carnivorous family. Since the film&#x27;s release, many have taken this as an allegory for homophobia and self-acceptance—particularly in the context of Lenny&#x27;s family environment, rife with &quot;alpha male&quot; types who mock his refusal to eat seafood. The American Family Association, a Christian conservative organization, found fault with this aspect, suggesting that it was designed to &quot;brainwash&quot; children into supporting gay rights.

===Accolades===

The film was nominated for Best Animated Feature at the 77th Academy Awards, but lost to Pixar&#x27;s &quot;The Incredibles&quot;, along with &quot;Shrek 2&quot;, another film produced by DreamWorks Animation.
==Soundtrack==

Shark Tale: Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on September 21, 2004. The soundtrack features newly recorded music by various artists, including Christina Aguilera, Mary J. Blige, India.Arie, Bobby Valentino, Sean Paul, Timbaland, The Pussycat Dolls, Ludacris, Missy Elliott, and Justin Timberlake, as well as &quot;Some of My Best Friends Are Sharks&quot;, the film&#x27;s closing theme composed by Hans Zimmer.

Janet Jackson and Beyoncé initially planned to record a duet for the film&#x27;s soundtrack. Jackson&#x27;s frequent collaborator Jimmy Jam, who had recently worked with Beyoncé for &quot;The Fighting Temptations&quot; soundtrack, commented, &quot;Obviously we&#x27;d love to have the involvement of Janet and Beyonce, who we just worked with on &quot;Fighting Temptations&quot;. They&#x27;ve already expressed interest&quot;, adding &quot;There are a lot of opportunities with an animated piece to work with some different people.&quot; Jeffrey Katzenberg, CEO of DreamWorks Animation, had appointed Jackson&#x27;s producers Jam &amp; Lewis to be involved with the soundtrack, though the duo only ended up producing only one song for the film, with Jam saying &quot;We worked for DreamWorks before on the Bryan Adams song for &quot;&quot; and the Boyz II Men tune for &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot;, and Katzenberg is a fan of what we do. He thought we would be perfect to do the music for &quot;Shark Tale.&quot;&quot;

==Video game==

A video game based on the film was released on September 29, 2004, for Microsoft Windows, Xbox, GameCube, PlayStation 2, and Game Boy Advance. Published by Activision, Edge of Reality developed the console versions of the game, while Vicarious Visions developed the Game Boy Advance version, and Amaze Entertainment developed the Microsoft Windows version. The cast from the film didn&#x27;t reprise their roles in the game, except David P. Smith reprising his role as Crazy Joe.

==References==
==External links==
* (Archived from the original)
* at DreamWorks
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="39" end="50" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="63" end="87" title="DreamWorks Animation SKG" label="DreamWorks Animation SKG"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="107" end="126" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011210" start="153" end="165" title="Vicky Jenson" label="Vicky Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590985" start="167" end="180" title="Bibo Bergeron" label="Bibo Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q428815" start="186" end="199" title="Rob Letterman" label="Rob Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30072204" start="244" end="261" title="Michael J. Wilson" label="Michael J. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="295" end="305" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="307" end="321" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q122614" start="323" end="338" title="Renée Zellweger" label="Renée Zellweger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="340" end="354" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="356" end="366" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="368" end="383" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q317358" start="389" end="406" title="Michael Imperioli" label="Michael Imperioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="732" end="752" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="942" end="977" title="2004 in film#Highest-grossing films" label="ninth-highest-grossing film of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q377805" start="1076" end="1104" title="Italian-American stereotypes" label="Italian-American stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="1127" end="1148" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="1156" end="1175" title="77th Academy Awards" label="77th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000165" start="1228" end="1253" title="bluestreak cleaner wrasse" label="bluestreak cleaner wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139861" start="1325" end="1335" title="car wash" label="Whale Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="1524" end="1534" title="Tetraodontidae" label="pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q320913" start="1568" end="1577" title="Pomacanthidae" label="angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="1720" end="1725" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="1728" end="1732" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q127497" start="1735" end="1743" title="sailfish" label="sailfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="1749" end="1756" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1946" end="1959" title="horse racing" label="seahorse race"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="2030" end="2038" title="seahorse" label="seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290445" start="2085" end="2097" title="gold digger" label="gold-digging"/>
<link wikidata="Q475711" start="2098" end="2107" title="lion fish" label="lion fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="2412" end="2419" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="2430" end="2439" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="2765" end="2771" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="5427" end="5437" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000165" start="5487" end="5512" title="bluestreak cleaner wrasse" label="bluestreak cleaner wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="5629" end="5643" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="5659" end="5676" title="great white shark" label="great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="5689" end="5694" title="American Mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122614" start="5839" end="5854" title="Renée Zellweger" label="Renée Zellweger"/>
<link wikidata="Q214145" start="5868" end="5877" title="Pterophyllum" label="angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="5977" end="5987" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="6028" end="6038" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="6125" end="6139" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="6151" end="6163" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290445" start="6168" end="6179" title="gold digger" label="gold digger"/>
<link wikidata="Q475711" start="6180" end="6189" title="lion fish" label="lion fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="6294" end="6309" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="6322" end="6332" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="6333" end="6343" title="Tetraodontidae" label="pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q199418" start="6387" end="6399" title="Ziggy Marley" label="Ziggy Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q713640" start="6404" end="6416" title="Doug E. Doug" label="Doug E. Doug"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="6442" end="6449" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="6451" end="6460" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q317358" start="6553" end="6570" title="Michael Imperioli" label="Michael Imperioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q512986" start="6696" end="6711" title="Vincent Pastore" label="Vincent Pastore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="6728" end="6735" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q351812" start="6875" end="6887" title="Kevin Pollak" label="Kevin Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528786" start="7038" end="7050" title="Lenny Venito" label="Lenny Venito"/>
<link wikidata="Q208490" start="7066" end="7082" title="hammerhead shark" label="hammerhead shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="7120" end="7130" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478899" start="7159" end="7172" title="leopard shark" label="leopard shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q620642" start="7226" end="7238" title="Jewish-American organized crime" label="Jewish mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230739" start="7242" end="7254" title="Katie Couric" label="Katie Couric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248017" start="7282" end="7290" title="sea bass" label="sea bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="7452" end="7457" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812175" start="7520" end="7525" title="Today (1982 TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193610" start="7540" end="7554" title="Tracy Grimshaw" label="Tracy Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063101" start="7579" end="7593" title="Fiona Phillips" label="Fiona Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734852" start="7611" end="7615" title="GMTV" label="GMTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697552" start="7675" end="7690" title="Cristina Parodi" label="Cristina Parodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009995" start="7713" end="7722" title="Verissimo (TV series)" label="Verissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q273291" start="7818" end="7829" title="hermit crab" label="hermit crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q888721" start="7888" end="7911" title="Bobb&amp;#x27;e J. Thompson" label="Bobb&amp;#x27;e J. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="8029" end="8037" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q755011" start="8055" end="8062" title="cowfish" label="cowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063406" start="8078" end="8095" title="Pennant coralfish" label="Pennant coralfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q272594" start="8099" end="8115" title="Shelley Morrison" label="Shelley Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q649808" start="8147" end="8157" title="weeverfish" label="weeverfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="8193" end="8204" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="8235" end="8253" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="8258" end="8271" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050811" start="8360" end="8368" title="Car Wash (song)" label="Car Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239955" start="8400" end="8411" title="David Soren (animator)" label="David Soren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="8438" end="8444" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q47253" start="8550" end="8554" title="worm" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="8609" end="8617" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011210" start="8754" end="8766" title="Vicky Jenson" label="Vicky Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590985" start="8771" end="8784" title="Bibo Bergeron" label="Bibo Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q30072204" start="8816" end="8833" title="Michael J. Wilson" label="Michael J. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q72938156" start="8846" end="8875" title="Mark Swift and Damian Shannon" label="Mark Swift and Damian Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908666" start="9040" end="9054" title="Bill Damaschke" label="Bill Damaschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="9344" end="9352" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q533547" start="9503" end="9522" title="Pacific Data Images" label="Pacific Data Images"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="9525" end="9541" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="9629" end="9643" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q132863" start="9713" end="9725" title="Finding Nemo" label="Finding Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q550426" start="9850" end="9868" title="Jeffrey Katzenberg" label="Jeffrey Katzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="9976" end="9981" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="10060" end="10071" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="10179" end="10200" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206056" start="10291" end="10302" title="Minute Maid" label="Minute Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750150" start="10307" end="10311" title="Hi-C" label="Hi-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="10544" end="10557" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598967" start="10677" end="10688" title="Great Clips" label="Great Clips"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="10838" end="10849" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="10874" end="10889" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192805" start="10999" end="11011" title="Krispy Kreme" label="Krispy Kreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="11249" end="11254" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213326" start="11268" end="11283" title="The Incredibles" label="The Incredibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q217527" start="11393" end="11409" title="Piazza San Marco" label="Piazza San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="11413" end="11419" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="11453" end="11473" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q647933" start="11611" end="11628" title="inflatable movie screen" label="inflatable screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="12197" end="12200" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12205" end="12208" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q25674" start="12471" end="12493" title="Game Boy Advance Video" label="Game Boy Advance Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12517" end="12524" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12749" end="12784" title="2004 in film#Highest-grossing films" label="ninth-highest-grossing film of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="12900" end="12920" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="12939" end="12946" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="13081" end="13096" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="13296" end="13306" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="13453" end="13464" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="13536" end="13547" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="13742" end="13751" title="The Godfather" label="Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="14207" end="14217" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="14291" end="14314" title="Pixar" label="Pixar Animation Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q132863" start="14327" end="14339" title="Finding Nemo" label="Finding Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201882" start="14436" end="14450" title="Richard Roeper" label="Richard Roeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="14591" end="14598" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="14831" end="14844" title="The Godfather (film)" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="14861" end="14865" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q144658" start="14894" end="14902" title="Car Wash (film)" label="Car Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="15116" end="15138" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="15184" end="15189" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q377805" start="15395" end="15436" title="Stereotypes of Italians and Italian Americans" label="negative stereotypes of Italian-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q529090" start="15468" end="15481" title="Bill Pascrell" label="Bill Pascrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040733" start="15689" end="15717" title="Columbus Citizens Foundation" label="Columbus Citizens Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="15858" end="15888" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092618" start="16360" end="16396" title="Italian American One Voice Coalition" label="Italian American One Voice Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="16455" end="16465" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="16658" end="16668" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="16850" end="16860" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="16865" end="16880" title="Pride (LGBTQ culture)" label="self-acceptance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="16961" end="16971" title="alpha male" label="alpha male"/>
<link wikidata="Q464203" start="17025" end="17052" title="American Family Association" label="American Family Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="17262" end="17283" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="17291" end="17310" title="77th Academy Awards" label="77th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="17324" end="17329" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213326" start="17343" end="17358" title="The Incredibles" label="The Incredibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="17383" end="17390" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="17423" end="17443" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="17610" end="17628" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="17630" end="17643" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q258750" start="17645" end="17655" title="India.Arie" label="India.Arie"/>
<link wikidata="Q682511" start="17657" end="17672" title="Bobby Valentino (American musician)" label="Bobby Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q200577" start="17674" end="17683" title="Sean Paul" label="Sean Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="17685" end="17694" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102385" start="17696" end="17714" title="The Pussycat Dolls" label="The Pussycat Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q193676" start="17716" end="17724" title="Ludacris" label="Ludacris"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="17726" end="17739" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="17745" end="17762" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="17865" end="17876" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="17879" end="17892" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="17897" end="17904" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063111" start="18009" end="18018" title="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis" label="Jimmy Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623056" start="18067" end="18091" title="The Fighting Temptations" label="The Fighting Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q550426" start="18417" end="18435" title="Jeffrey Katzenberg" label="Jeffrey Katzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063111" start="18505" end="18520" title="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis" label="Jam &amp;amp; Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="18685" end="18696" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468699" start="18697" end="18701" title="Here I Am (Bryan Adams song)" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="18727" end="18738" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041220" start="18739" end="18743" title="I Will Get There" label="tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="18754" end="18773" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="18989" end="19006" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="19008" end="19012" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="19014" end="19022" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="19024" end="19037" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="19043" end="19059" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="19074" end="19084" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737798" start="19086" end="19101" title="Edge of Reality" label="Edge of Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947354" start="19152" end="19169" title="Vicarious Visions" label="Vicarious Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564980" start="19214" end="19233" title="Amaze Entertainment" label="Amaze Entertainment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334876" wikidata="Q3101823" url="?curid=334876" title="George P. Burdell">
<text>George P. Burdell is a fictitious student officially enrolled at Georgia Tech in 1927 as a practical joke. Since then, he has supposedly received all undergraduate degrees offered by Georgia Tech, served in the military, gotten married, and served on &quot;Mad&quot; Magazine&#x27;s Board of Directors, among other accomplishments. 

At one point, Burdell had led the online poll for &quot;Time&quot;″s 2001 Person of the Year award. He has evolved into an important and notorious campus tradition; all Georgia Tech students learn about him at orientation.

==History==
===Origins ===
George P. Burdell was created by William Edgar &quot;Ed&quot; Smith (BS in Ceramic Engineering) in 1927. Smith conceived the idea for Burdell when he mistakenly received two Georgia Tech enrollment forms. 50 years later, in a 1977 Atlanta newspaper interview, Smith said that he originally intended to enroll his Academy of Richmond County principal, George P. Butler, but instead changed the last name to Burdell, the maiden name of his best friend&#x27;s mother.

After enrolling him, Smith signed Burdell up for all the same classes he had. With the help of friends, Smith would do all schoolwork twice, changing it slightly to avoid professors catching his sham. When he had a test, he would take it twice and then turn it in under both names. By 1930, the school had awarded Burdell a bachelor&#x27;s degree, and a few years later awarded the fictitious student a master&#x27;s degree. The college listed him as an official alumnus, even though his name has remained on the active student rolls. In 1930, the ANAK Society, Georgia Tech&#x27;s oldest secret society, offered Burdell membership.

An early prank using Burdell&#x27;s name came after someone was snubbed by a fraternity he had intended to join. &quot;That irritated [him]. He ordered a truckload of furniture to be delivered C.O.D. to that fraternity. Of course, the order was made by George P. Burdell.&quot;

===World War II ===
During World War II, service members continued the hoax, with Burdell&#x27;s name appearing on various fronts. For example, he was listed on the flight crew of a B-17 bomber, flying 12 missions over Europe with the 8th Air Force in England, until a Georgia Tech graduate became the new operations officer, recognized the name on the flight log, and ended the charade.

===Postwar ===
In 1958, members of the senior class of Agnes Scott College announced the wedding engagement of Burdell and fictional Agnes Scott student Ramona Cartwright in the &quot;Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot;. The 50th wedding anniversary of &quot;Mr. and Mrs. George P. Burdell from Atlanta&quot; was acknowledged on the September 23, 2006 broadcast of &quot;A Prairie Home Companion&quot;. A recording can be found at a time of 1:13:55.

To this day, George P. Burdell is listed as a letterman in the official media guides of two Tech sports: from 1928 to 1930 in football and 1956 to 1958 in basketball. In 1969, Georgia Tech computerized its class registration, believing it had successfully found a way to keep students from registering Burdell for class that semester. As it turned out, hackers registered him for every class at the school that quarter, over 3,000 credit hours. He was subsequently re-enrolled several times, including in 1975 and 1980.

George P. Burdell is listed as Georgia Tech Swimming &amp; Diving&#x27;s team captain of 1988 on their record board, even though there was no team that year after the demolition of the Heisman Gym.

The publishers of &quot;Mad&quot; magazine listed Burdell as a member of its board of directors from 1969 until 1981. In 1991, a check from Kraft Foods bore the signature &quot;George P. Burdell&quot;. When &quot;Time&quot; magazine was attempting to select their Person of the Year for 2001, George Burdell was the leading candidate (holding at least 57 percent of the votes) until the magazine removed him from the running.

WREK, the Georgia Tech student radio station, lists him as a staff member, and he is credited for playing baritone on the 1995 album &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar: A Resurrection&quot;, which was made in Atlanta by musicians from the local alternative rock scene. In 2000, Burdell was named an alternate delegate to the Democratic National Convention from Georgia. Burdell was credited as a member of the choir of the 2006 album &quot;There is a Place&quot;. 

George&#x27;s fictitious son, George P. Burdell Jr., has been a proctor for several classes at Georgia Tech.

=== Modern era ===
With the introduction of Georgia Tech Online Master of Science in Computer Science in 2013, George P. Burdell has been a presence in its social media, with students attempting to stake a claim of his legacy in Reddit. 

On November 27, 2014, George P. Burdell allegedly hacked into the University of Georgia&#x27;s online master calendar to post a new event titled &quot;Get Ass Kicked by GT&quot; during the time of the annual Georgia Tech football game 
. This prank was meant to celebrate the 100-year-old tradition of Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate. While the author of the new calendar event was marked as &quot;George P. Burdell&quot;, undergraduate Computer Engineering student Ryan Pickren was ultimately arrested and indicted for the crime.

During a speech made by US President Barack Obama held at Georgia Tech in the McCamish Pavilion on March 10, 2015, the president jokingly indicated that he was supposed to be introduced by George P. Burdell, but no one could find him.

On June 25, 2019, George P. Burdell&#x27;s name flew engraved on the Prox-1 satellite mission designed and built by the Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering at Georgia Tech. His name is listed along with all the other students who worked on the mission. The satellite was part of the Space Test Program 2 (STP-2) launch on a SpaceX Falcon Heavy Rocket.

==Legacy==

Burdell has been a campus icon at Georgia Tech. Georgia Tech students or alumni have often used the name as an alias when they do not want to disclose their real name. In 2006, there was a store in Georgia Tech&#x27;s student center named Burdell&#x27;s.

==See also==
* List of fictitious people
* Eustace B. Nifkin, fictional student of the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Josiah S. Carberry, fictional professor at Brown University
* Jakob Maria Mierscheid, fictional politician in the German Bundestag
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3101823" start="0" end="17" title="George P. Burdell" label="George P. Burdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="65" end="77" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="91" end="105" title="practical joke" label="practical joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="251" end="282" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot; Magazine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="390" end="394" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="408" end="426" title="Time Magazine Person of the Year" label="Person of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547841" start="488" end="497" title="Georgia Tech traditions" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="654" end="656" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936199" start="660" end="679" title="Ceramic Engineering" label="Ceramic Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="1222" end="1231" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="1514" end="1521" title="alumnus" label="alumnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="1762" end="1772" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365416" start="1878" end="1883" title="collect on delivery" label="C.O.D"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1991" end="2003" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="2146" end="2157" title="B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17 bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="2199" end="2212" title="8th Air Force" label="8th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826926" start="2408" end="2427" title="Agnes Scott College" label="Agnes Scott College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="2537" end="2565" title="Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890517" start="2723" end="2747" title="A Prairie Home Companion" label="A Prairie Home Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="2849" end="2858" title="Letterman (sports)" label="letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="3541" end="3565" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q327751" start="3663" end="3674" title="Kraft Foods" label="Kraft Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3730" end="3755" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="3787" end="3805" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Person of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954977" start="3950" end="3954" title="WREK" label="WREK"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="4089" end="4111" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="4189" end="4205" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389760" start="4474" end="4481" title="Invigilator" label="proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417522" start="4564" end="4621" title="Georgia Tech Online Master of Science in Computer Science" label="Georgia Tech Online Master of Science in Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="4749" end="4755" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="4825" end="4846" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="4967" end="4979" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130430" start="5061" end="5086" title="Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate" label="Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="5322" end="5334" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="5343" end="5355" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492102" start="5363" end="5380" title="McCamish Pavilion" label="McCamish Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="5597" end="5606" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="5687" end="5699" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572525" start="5811" end="5829" title="Space Test Program" label="Space Test Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093627" start="5852" end="5871" title="SpaceX Falcon Heavy" label="SpaceX Falcon Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="6004" end="6009" title="pseudonym" label="alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848162" start="6164" end="6189" title="List of fictitious people" label="List of fictitious people"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345183" start="6192" end="6209" title="Eustace B. Nifkin" label="Eustace B. Nifkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603610" start="6236" end="6286" title="SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry" label="SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290611" start="6289" end="6307" title="Josiah S. Carberry" label="Josiah S. Carberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="6332" end="6348" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q445461" start="6351" end="6373" title="Jakob Maria Mierscheid" label="Jakob Maria Mierscheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="6410" end="6419" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334880" wikidata="Q5111963" url="?curid=334880" title="Christopher Bond">
<text>Christopher Godfrey Bond (1945) is a British actor, playwright and theatre director whose 1970 retelling of the Victorian tale &quot;Sweeney Todd&quot; formed the basis of Stephen Sondheim&#x27;s musical of the same name, with book by Hugh Wheeler. He wrote this while he was resident dramatist at Victoria Theatre, Stoke-on-Trent (1970–71). He was artistic director of the Everyman Theatre, Liverpool (1976–78), director of Liverpool Playhouse (1981–83), and artistic director of Half Moon Theatre (1984–89). He lives in West Cornwall.

==Plays==
*&quot;Mountain Fire&quot;
*&quot;Mutiny&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Simple Simon&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Not So Simple Simon&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Shem&#x27;s Boat&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Downright Hooligan&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Judge Jeffreys&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Tarzan&#x27;s Last Stand&quot; (1973)
*&quot;The Country Wife&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Under New Management&quot; (1975)
*&quot;The Cantril Tales&quot; (1975)
*&quot;The Adventures of Finn McCool&quot; (1976)
*&quot;George&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Good Soldier Scouse&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Scum: Death, Destruction, and Dirty Washing&quot; (1976)
*&quot;The Beggars Opera&quot; (1977)
*&quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Gone To Jesus&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Dracula&quot; (1984)
*&quot;Spend, Spend, Spend&quot; (1985)
*&quot;All the Fun of the Fair&quot; (1986)
*&quot;El Sid&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Mysterie of Maria Marten&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Roll With the Punches&quot; (1996)
*&quot;The Blood of Dracula&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Alice on the Underground&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Hubble Bubble&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Don Quixote Rides Again&quot; (2005)
*&quot;It&#x27;s A Fine Life!&quot; (2006)

*&quot;Romford Rose&quot; (with Jo Collins, 2016)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5111963" start="0" end="24" title="Christopher Bond" label="Christopher Godfrey Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="52" end="62" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387717" start="67" end="83" title="theatre director" label="theatre director"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="112" end="121" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q669485" start="133" end="145" title="Sweeney Todd" label="Sweeney Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="172" end="188" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="" start="196" end="220" title="Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street" label="musical of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171067" start="235" end="247" title="Hugh Wheeler" label="Hugh Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012250" start="298" end="330" title="Victoria Theatre, Stoke-on-Trent" label="Victoria Theatre, Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061525" start="374" end="401" title="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool" label="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242536" start="425" end="444" title="Liverpool Playhouse" label="Liverpool Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641725" start="481" end="498" title="Half Moon Theatre" label="Half Moon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="527" end="535" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="334882" wikidata="Q862912" url="?curid=334882" title="Chamarajanagar district">
<text>Chamarajanagar or Chamarajanagara is the southernmost district in the state of Karnataka, India. It was carved out of the original larger Mysore District in 1998. Chamarajanagar town is the headquarters of this district.

It is the third least populous district in Karnataka (out of 30), after Kodagu and Bangalore Rural.

==History==
Chamarajanagar was earlier known as Sri Arikottara. Chamaraja Wodeyar, the Wodeyar of Mysuru was born here and hence this place was renamed after him. The Vijaya Parsvanath Basadi, a holy Jain shrine was constructed by Punisadandanayaka, the commander of the Hoysala king Gangaraja in the year 1117 AD.

==Geography==
Being the southernmost district of Karnataka, Chamarajanagar district borders the state of Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Specifically, it borders Mysore district of Karnataka to the west and north, Mandya and Ramanagara districts of Karnataka to the north-east, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri districts of Tamil Nadu to the east, Salem to south-east, Erode districts and Nilgiris district of Tamil Nadu to the south, and to the extreme south-west, there is a very small border with Wayanad district of Kerala.

Most of the district lies in the leeward region of the Nilgiris and consists of mainly semi-arid rain-dependent flatlands along with forested hills.

==Economy==
The Karnataka state government has started a Rs.400 crore project on 1`,595 acres of land called Badanaguppe-Kellamballi Industrial Estate which will include sectors like automobile, food processing, textiles, leather, granite and agriculture related industries.

Many industries have set up base in the Badanaguppe-Kellamballi KIADB industrial estate. Notable ones are the KCM Appliances, Aditya Birla-Grasim Paint Plant, Kaynes Technology, Colortone Textiles among others.

==Roads==
Three national highways of India pass through Chamarajanagara district namely NH-766, NH-181, and NH-948. Some state highways of Karnataka pass through this district.

National Highway 948 ( previously NH 209), which starts from Bengaluru in Karnataka state and ends at Coimbatore in Tamil Nadu, passes through the following places namely Kanakapura, Malavalli, Kollegal, Chamarajanagar, Punajanur and enters Tamil Nadu. It further goes to Hasanur, Dhimbam ghat, Thalamalai, Bannari, Satyamangalam, Puliampatti, Annur ends at Coimbatore. Few KSRTC buses run on NH 948. There are many roads from Chamarajanagara district to neighbouring Tamil Nnadu state. One road connects Kollegal to Hasanur via Dhondenling and Germalam. There is a Buddhist monastery at Dhondeling. Another road connects Kollegala to Anthiyur via Hanur, Ramapura, Burgur and Moongilpalya. The road from Kollegala to Mettur goes through Hanur Kowdalli( Cowdalli), Male Mahadeshwara Betta (MM Hills), Palar, Govindapadi, Kaveripuram and Kolathur. The above-mentioned three roads pass through forest teeming with wild animals, including elephants, Indian Bison, leopards and tigers. These roads are isolated and narrow at many stretches without any human habitation or cellular phone signals.

National Highway 181 connects Gundlupete town of Chamarajanagara district with Ooty via Bandipura and Gudalur. National Highway 766 connects Gundlupete with Kalpetta via Mulehole and Sulthan Bathery. The national highways 181 and 766 are closed for private vehicles at night in stretch between Gundlupete and neighbouring states.. Only state government buses are allowed at night in these section of highway.

==Demographics==

According to the 2011 census Chamarajanagar district has a population of 1,020,791, roughly equal to the nation of Cyprus or the US state of Montana. This gives it a ranking of 441st in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was 5.75%. Chamarajanagar has a sex ratio of 989 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 61.43%. 17.14% of the population lives in urban areas. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes make up 25.42% and 11.78% of the population respectively.

The district has a high percentage of Scheduled Castes, with a population of 259,000, making up a quarter of the district&#x27;s population. Having a large percentage of forest cover the district also has a high population of tribals, mostly the Nayakas but also forest tribes like the Soligas, Yeravas, Jenu Kurubas and Betta Kurubas. These tribals have their own languages and their total population is around 120,000, and make up 12% of the district population. Other communities include Lingayats, Muslims and Vokkaligas.

At the time of the 2011 census, 86.10% of the population spoke Kannada, 4.58% Tamil, 4.42% Urdu and 3.29% Telugu as their first language.

=== Crime ===

Since much of the southern area of the district is dense forest, it provided good refuge to the notorious bandit Veerappan, responsible for the death of over a hundred policemen in both states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. He was shot dead in an encounter with the specially formed Special Task Force (STF) on 18 October 2004, in Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu. He had been on the run for over two decades. The presence of illegal quarrying for black stone imposes a great threat to the forests in the region.

==Tourist attractions==
The main tourist attractions are Sri Chamarajeshwara temple in Chamarajanagar, Biligiriranga Hills, K Gudi, Male Mahadeshwara Hills, Gundal dam, Suvarnavati Dam, Hogenakal Falls, Shivasamudram, Bandipur National Park, and Gopalaswamy Hills in Gundlupet.

==Villages==

*Cheluvanahalli

== Notable people ==
*Samsa - first historical playwright in Modern Kannada 
* B. Rachaiah - politician
*B. S. Madhava Rao - mathematical physicist
* Nanjaiah Honganuru - noted folklorist and writer
* Mudnakudu Chinnaswamy - poet
* R. Dhruvanarayana - politician
* C. Puttarangashetty - politician
* S. Mahendar - filmmaker
* Avinash - actor 
* S.M. Siddaiah - lawyer and politician
* Srinivasa Prasad - politician
* veerappan - indian bandit and smuggler

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Maps Of India - Map of Chamarajanagar district</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q862912" start="0" end="33" title="Chamarajanagar district" label="Chamarajanagar or Chamarajanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="79" end="88" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="90" end="95" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q591781" start="138" end="153" title="Mysore District" label="Mysore District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747508" start="163" end="177" title="Chamarajanagar" label="Chamarajanagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385226" start="283" end="285" title="List of districts in Karnataka" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553185" start="294" end="300" title="Kodagu district" label="Kodagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q806464" start="305" end="320" title="Bangalore Rural district" label="Bangalore Rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845073" start="387" end="404" title="Chamaraja Wodeyar I" label="Chamaraja Wodeyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="688" end="697" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="744" end="754" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="759" end="765" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="792" end="798" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="811" end="820" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006277" start="844" end="850" title="Mandya" label="Mandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371953" start="855" end="865" title="Ramanagara" label="Ramanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15152" start="908" end="918" title="Dharmapuri district" label="Dharmapuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15183" start="923" end="934" title="Krishnagiri district" label="Krishnagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15192" start="972" end="977" title="Salem District" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15155" start="993" end="998" title="Erode district" label="Erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q15188" start="1013" end="1030" title="Nilgiris district" label="Nilgiris district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364427" start="1124" end="1131" title="Wayanad" label="Wayanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10094" start="1208" end="1216" title="Nilgiris (mountains)" label="Nilgiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019137" start="2140" end="2150" title="Kanakapura" label="Kanakapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451117" start="2152" end="2161" title="Malavalli" label="Malavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238928" start="2163" end="2171" title="Kollegal" label="Kollegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747508" start="2173" end="2187" title="Chamarajanagar" label="Chamarajanagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122005" start="2276" end="2283" title="Bannari" label="Bannari"/>
<link wikidata="Q242563" start="2285" end="2298" title="Satyamangalam" label="Satyamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q585798" start="2313" end="2318" title="Annur" label="Annur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139469" start="2343" end="2348" title="Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation" label="KSRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238928" start="2474" end="2482" title="Kollegal" label="Kollegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238928" start="2591" end="2599" title="Kollegal" label="Kollegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651394" start="2617" end="2622" title="Hanur" label="Hanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725572" start="2686" end="2692" title="Mettur" label="Mettur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708600" start="3091" end="3101" title="Gundlupete" label="Gundlupete"/>
<link wikidata="Q9888" start="3140" end="3144" title="Ooty" label="Ooty"/>
<link wikidata="Q738187" start="3244" end="3259" title="Sultan Bathery" label="Sulthan Bathery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="3506" end="3517" title="2011 census of India" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q996189" start="3548" end="3558" title="Demographics of India" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="3604" end="3610" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="3630" end="3637" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="3700" end="3703" title="Districts of India" label="640"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433379" start="3753" end="3775" title="Family planning in India" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="3834" end="3843" title="sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q639712" start="3851" end="3858" title="Women in India" label="females"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345045" start="3887" end="3900" title="Literacy in India" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952234" start="4302" end="4309" title="Boya (caste)" label="Nayakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915826" start="4342" end="4349" title="Soliga tribe" label="Soligas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164189" start="4351" end="4357" title="Yerava" label="Yerava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180024" start="4360" end="4371" title="Jenu Kuruba" label="Jenu Kuruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q185370" start="4377" end="4390" title="Kuruba" label="Betta Kurubas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="4646" end="4653" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="4661" end="4666" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="4674" end="4678" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="4689" end="4695" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q555252" start="4850" end="4859" title="Veerappan" label="Veerappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9894" start="5066" end="5076" title="Dharmapuri" label="Dharmapuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747508" start="5335" end="5349" title="Chamarajanagar" label="Chamarajanagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631211" start="5351" end="5370" title="Biligiriranga Hills" label="Biligiriranga Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061451" start="5380" end="5403" title="Male Mahadeshwara Hills" label="Male Mahadeshwara Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172357" start="5417" end="5432" title="Suvarnavati Dam" label="Suvarnavati Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37729" start="5434" end="5449" title="Hogenakal Falls" label="Hogenakal Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q38397" start="5451" end="5464" title="Shivanasamudra Falls" label="Shivasamudram"/>
<link wikidata="Q665110" start="5466" end="5488" title="Bandipur National Park" label="Bandipur National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11924488" start="5494" end="5511" title="Gopalaswamy Hills" label="Gopalaswamy Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257883" start="5542" end="5556" title="Cheluvanahalli" label="Cheluvanahalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q94115802" start="5580" end="5585" title="Samsa (writer)" label="Samsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834168" start="5637" end="5648" title="B. Rachaiah" label="B. Rachaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q20010642" start="5663" end="5680" title="B. S. Madhava Rao" label="B. S. Madhava Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066309" start="5708" end="5726" title="Nanjaiah Honganuru" label="Nanjaiah Honganuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470279" start="5759" end="5780" title="Mudnakudu Chinnaswamy" label="Mudnakudu Chinnaswamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273580" start="5790" end="5807" title="R. Dhruvanarayana" label="R. Dhruvanarayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q120964205" start="5823" end="5842" title="C. Puttarangashetty" label="C. Puttarangashetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771267" start="5858" end="5869" title="S. Mahendar" label="S. Mahendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828869" start="5884" end="5891" title="Avinash Yelandur" label="Avinash"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456900" start="5903" end="5916" title="S.M. Siddaiah" label="S.M. Siddaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572347" start="5943" end="5959" title="Srinivasa Prasad" label="Srinivasa Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q555252" start="5975" end="5984" title="veerappan" label="veerappan"/>
</links>
</doc>
