<doc id="135823" wikidata="Q16562" url="?curid=135823" title="El Paso, Texas">
<text>El Paso (; ; or ) is a city in and the county seat of El Paso County, Texas, United States. The 2020 population of the city from the U.S. Census Bureau was 678,815, making it the 22nd-most populous city in the U.S., the most populous city in West Texas, and the sixth-most populous city in Texas. 
Its metropolitan statistical area covers all of El Paso and Hudspeth counties in Texas, and had a population of 868,859 in 2020.
El Paso stands on the Rio Grande across the Mexico–United States border from Ciudad Juárez, the most populous city in the Mexican state of Chihuahua. On the U.S. side, the El Paso metropolitan area forms part of the larger El Paso–Las Cruces combined statistical area with Las Cruces, New Mexico, which has a population of 1,098,541. These three cities form a combined international metropolitan area sometimes referred to as the &quot;Paso del Norte&quot; or the &quot;Borderplex&quot;. The region of 2.7 million people constitutes the largest bilingual and binational workforce in the Western Hemisphere.

The city is home to three publicly traded companies, and former Western Refining, now Marathon Petroleum, as well as home to the Medical Center of the Americas, the only medical research and care provider complex in West Texas and Southern New Mexico, and the University of Texas at El Paso, the city&#x27;s primary university. The city hosts the annual Sun Bowl college football postseason game, the second-oldest bowl game in the country. El Paso has a strong federal and military presence. William Beaumont Army Medical Center, Biggs Army Airfield, and Fort Bliss are located in the area. Also headquartered in El Paso is the Drug Enforcement Administration domestic field division 7, El Paso Intelligence Center, Joint Task Force North, United States Border Patrol El Paso Sector, and U.S. Border Patrol Special Operations Group.

El Paso is a five-time All-America City Award winner, winning in 1969, 2010, 2018, 2020, and 2021, and &quot;Congressional Quarterly&quot; ranked it in the top-three safest large cities in the United States between 1997 and 2014, including holding the title of the safest city between 2011 and 2014. El Paso is also the second-largest majority-Hispanic city in the United States (after San Antonio), with 81% of its residents being Hispanic.

==History==

===Early years===

The El Paso region has had human settlement for thousands of years, as evidenced by Folsom points from hunter-gatherers found at Hueco Tanks. This suggests 10,000 to 12,000 years of human habitation. The earliest known cultures in the region were maize farmers. When the Spanish arrived, the Manso, Suma, and Jumano tribes populated the area. These were subsequently incorporated into the &quot;mestizo&quot; culture, along with immigrants from central Mexico, captives from Comanchería, and &quot;genízaros&quot; of various ethnic groups. The Mescalero Apache were also present.

The Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition trekked through present-day El Paso and forded the Rio Grande where they visited the land that is present-day New Mexico in 1581–1582. The expedition was led by Francisco Sánchez, called &quot;El Chamuscado&quot;, and Fray Agustín Rodríguez, the first Spaniards known to have walked along the Rio Grande and visited the Pueblo Indians since Francisco Vásquez de Coronado 40 years earlier. Spanish explorer Don Juan de Oñate was born in 1550 in Zacatecas, Zacatecas, Mexico, and was the first New Spain (Mexico) explorer known to have rested and stayed 10 days by the Rio Grande near El Paso, in 1598, celebrating a Thanksgiving Mass there on April 30, 1598. Four survivors of the Narváez expedition, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado, Andrés Dorantes de Carranza, and an enslaved native of Morocco, Estevanico, are thought to have crossed the Rio Grande into present-day Mexico about 75 miles south of El Paso in 1535. El Paso del Norte (present-day Ciudad Juárez) was founded on the south bank of the Río Bravo del Norte (Rio Grande), in 1659 by Fray Garcia de San Francisco. In 1680, the small village of El Paso became the temporary base for Spanish governance of the territory of New Mexico as a result of the Pueblo Revolt, until 1692, when Santa Fe was reconquered and once again became the capital.

The Texas Revolution (1836) was generally not felt in the region, as the American population was small, not more than 10% of the population. However, the region was claimed by Texas as part of the treaty signed with Mexico and numerous attempts were made by Texas to bolster these claims, but the villages that consisted of what is now El Paso and the surrounding area remained essentially a self-governed community with both representatives of the Mexican and Texan governments negotiating for control until Texas irrevocably took control in 1846. During this interregnum, 1836–1848, Americans nonetheless continued to settle the region. As early as the mid-1840s, alongside long extant Hispanic settlements such as the Rancho de Juan María Ponce de León, Anglo-American settlers such as Simeon Hart and Hugh Stephenson had established thriving communities of American settlers owing allegiance to Texas. Stephenson, who had married into the local Hispanic aristocracy, established the Rancho de San José de la Concordia, which became the nucleus of Anglo-American and Hispanic settlement within the limits of modern-day El Paso, in 1844: the Republic of Texas, which claimed the area, wanted a chunk of the Santa Fe trade. During the Mexican–American War, the Battle of El Bracito was fought nearby on Christmas Day, 1846. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo effectively made the settlements on the north bank of the river part of the US, separate from Old El Paso del Norte on the Mexican side. The present New Mexico–Texas boundary placing El Paso on the Texas side was drawn in the Compromise of 1850.

El Paso remained the largest settlement in New Mexico as part of the Republic of Mexico until its cession to the U.S. in 1848, when the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo specified the border was to run north of El Paso De Norte around the Ciudad Juárez Cathedral which became part of the state of Chihuahua.

El Paso County was established in March 1850, with San Elizario as the first county seat. The United States Senate fixed a boundary between Texas and New Mexico at the 32nd parallel, thus largely ignoring history and topography. A military post called the &quot;Post opposite El Paso&quot; (meaning opposite El Paso del Norte, across the Rio Grande) was established in 1849 on Coons&#x27; Rancho beside the settlement of Franklin, which became the nucleus of the future El Paso, Texas; after the army left in 1851, the rancho went into default and was repossessed; in 1852, a post office was established on the rancho bearing the name El Paso as an example of cross-border town naming until El Paso del Norte was renamed Juarez in 1888. After changing hands twice more, the El Paso company was set up in 1859 and bought the property, hiring Anson Mills to survey and lay out the town, thus forming the current street plan of downtown El Paso.

In &quot;Beyond the Mississippi&quot; (1867), Albert D. Richardson, traveling to California via coach, described El Paso as he found it in late 1859: 

The Texan town of El Paso had four hundred inhabitants, chiefly Mexicans. Its businessmen were Americans, but Spanish was the prevailing language. All the features were Mexican: low, flat adobe buildings, shading cottonwoods under which dusky, smoking women and swarthy children sold fruit, vegetables, and bread; habitual gambling universal, from the boys&#x27; game of pitching &quot;quartillas&quot; (three-cent coins) to the great saloons where huge piles of silver dollars were staked at monte. In this little village, a hundred thousand dollars often changed hands in a single night through the potent agencies of Monte and poker. There were only two or three American ladies, and most of the whites kept Mexican mistresses. All goods were brought on wagons from the Gulf of Mexico and sold at an advance of three or four hundred percent on Eastern prices.

From hills overlooking the town, the eye takes in a charming picture—a far-stretching valley, enriched with orchards, vineyards, and cornfields, through which the river traces a shining pathway. Across it appears the flat roofs and cathedral towers of the old Mexican El Paso; still further, dim misty mountains melt into the blue sky.

During the Civil War, Confederate military forces were in the area until it was captured by the Union California Column in August 1862. It was then headquarters for the 5th Regiment California Volunteer Infantry from August 1863 until December 1864.

After the Civil War&#x27;s conclusion, the town&#x27;s population began to grow as white Texans continued to move into the villages and soon became the majority. El Paso itself, incorporated in 1873, encompassed the small area of communities that had developed along the river. In the 1870s, a population of 23 non-Hispanic Whites and 150 Hispanics was reported. With the arrival of the Southern Pacific, Texas and Pacific, and Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe railroads in 1881, the population boomed to 10,000 by the 1890 census, with many Anglo-Americans, recent immigrants, old Hispanic settlers, and recent arrivals from Mexico. The location of El Paso and the arrival of these more wild newcomers caused the city to become a violent and wild boomtown known as the &quot;Six-shooter Capital&quot; because of its lawlessness. Indeed, prostitution and gambling flourished until World War I when the Department of the Army pressured El Paso authorities to crack down on vice (thus &quot;benefitting&quot; vice in neighboring Ciudad Juárez). With the suppression of the vice trade and in consideration of the city&#x27;s geographic position, the city continued into developing as a premier manufacturing, transportation, and retail center of the U.S. Southwest.

===1900–present===


In 1909, the El Paso Chamber of Commerce hosted U.S. President William Howard Taft and Mexican President Porfirio Díaz at a planned summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, a historic first meeting between the Presidents of the two countries, and also the first time an American President crossed the border into Mexico. However, tensions rose on both sides of the border, including threats of assassination; so the Texas Rangers, 4,000 U.S. and Mexican troops, U.S. Secret Service agents, FBI agents, and U.S. marshals were all called in to provide security. Frederick Russell Burnham, a celebrated scout, was put in charge of a 250-strong private security detail hired by John Hays Hammond, who in addition to owning large investments in Mexico, was a close friend of Taft from Yale and a U.S. vice presidential candidate in 1908. On October 16, the day of the summit, Burnham and Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man 
holding a concealed palm pistol standing at the Chamber of Commerce building along the procession route in El Paso. Burnham and Moore captured, disarmed, and arrested the assassin within only a few feet of Taft and Díaz. By 1910, an overwhelming number of people in the city were Americans, creating a settled environment, but this period was short-lived as the Mexican Revolution greatly impacted the city, bringing an influx of refugees—and capital—to the bustling boom town. Spanish-language newspapers, theaters, movie houses, and schools were established, many supported by a thriving Mexican refugee middle class. Large numbers of clerics, intellectuals, and businessmen took refuge in the city, particularly between 1913 and 1915. Ultimately, the violence of the Mexican Revolution followed the large Mexican diaspora, who had fled to El Paso. In 1915 and again in 1916 and 1917, various Mexican revolutionary societies planned, staged, and launched violent attacks against both Texans and their political Mexican opponents in El Paso. This state of affairs eventually led to the vast Plan de San Diego, which resulted in the murder of 21 American citizens. The subsequent reprisals by a local militia soon caused an escalation of violence, wherein an estimated 300 Mexicans and Mexican-Americans lost their lives. These actions affected almost every resident of the entire Rio Grande Valley, resulting in millions of dollars of losses; the result of the Plan of San Diego was long-standing enmity between the two ethnic groups.

Simultaneously, other Texans and Americans gravitated to the city, and by 1920, along with the U.S. Army troops, the population exceeded 100,000, and non-Hispanic Whites once again were in the clear majority. Nonetheless, the city increased the segregation between Mexicans and Mexican-Americans with non-Hispanic Whites. One prominent form of segregation, in the form of immigration controls to prevent disease, allegedly was abused to create nonconsensual pornographic images of women distributed in local bars. These rumors along with the perceived hazard from kerosene baths led to the 1917 Bath riots. As a result of the increased segregation, the Catholic Church attempted to garner the Mexican-American community&#x27;s allegiance through education and political and civic involvement organizations, including the National Catholic Welfare Fund. In 1916, the Census Bureau reported El Paso&#x27;s population as 53% Mexican and 44% Non-Hispanic whites. Mining and other industries gradually developed in the area. The El Paso and Northeastern Railway was chartered in 1897, to help extract the natural resources of surrounding areas, especially in southeastern New Mexico Territory. The 1920s and 1930s had the emergence of major business development in the city, partially enabled by Prohibition-era bootlegging. The military demobilization, and agricultural economic depression, which hit places like El Paso first before the larger Great Depression was felt in the big cities, though, hit the city hard. In turn, as in the rest of the United States, the Depression era overall hit the city hard, and El Paso&#x27;s population declined through the end of World War II, with most of the population losses coming from the non-Hispanic White community. Nonetheless, they remained the majority to the 1940s.

During and following the war, military expansion in the area, as well as oil discoveries in the Permian Basin, helped to engender rapid economic expansion in the mid-1900s. Copper smelting, oil refining, and the proliferation of low-wage industries (particularly garment making) led to the city&#x27;s growth. Additionally, the departure of the region&#x27;s rural population, which was mostly non-Hispanic White, to cities like El Paso, brought a short-term burst of capital and labor, but this was balanced by additional departures of middle-class Americans to other parts of the country that offered new and better-paying jobs. In turn, local businesses looked south to the opportunities afforded by cheap Mexican labor. Furthermore, the period from 1942 to 1956 had the bracero program, which brought cheap Mexican labor into the rural area to replace the losses of the non-Hispanic White population. In turn, seeking better-paying jobs, these migrants also moved to El Paso. By 1965, Hispanics once again were a majority. Meanwhile, the postwar expansion slowed again in the 1960s, but the city continued to grow with the annexation of surrounding neighborhoods and in large part because of its significant economic relationship with Mexico.

The Farah Strike, 1972–1974, occurred in El Paso, Texas. This strike was originated and led by Chicanas, or Mexican-American women, against the Farah Manufacturing Company, due to complaints against the company inadequately compensating workers. &quot;Texas Monthly&quot; described the Farah Strike as the &quot;strike of the century&quot;.

On August 3, 2019, a terrorist shooter espousing white supremacy killed 23 people at a Walmart and injured 22 others.

==Geography==
El Paso is located at the intersection of three states (Chihuahua, New Mexico, and Texas) and two countries (Mexico and the U.S.). It is the only major Texas city in the Mountain Time Zone. Ciudad Juarez was once in the Central Time Zone, but both cities are now on Mountain Time.
El Paso is closer to the capital cities of four other states: Phoenix, Arizona ( away); Santa Fe, New Mexico ( away); Ciudad Chihuahua, Chihuahua, ( away), and Hermosillo, Sonora ( away)—than it is to the capital of its own state, Austin ( away). It is closer to Los Angeles, California ( away) than it is to Orange, Texas ( away), the easternmost town in the same state as this city.

El Paso is located within the Chihuahuan Desert, the easternmost section of the Basin and Range Region. The Franklin Mountains extend into El Paso from the north and nearly divide the city into two sections; the west side forms the beginnings of the Mesilla Valley, and the east side expands into the desert and lower valley. They connect in the central business district at the southern end of the mountain range.

The city&#x27;s elevation is above sea level. North Franklin Mountain is the highest peak in the city at above sea level. The peak can be seen from in all directions. Additionally, this mountain range is home to the famous natural red-clay formation, the Thunderbird, from which the local Coronado High School gets its mascot&#x27;s name. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of .

The Franklin Mountains State Park, one of the largest urban parks in the United States, lies entirely in El Paso, extending from the north and dividing the city into several sections along with Fort Bliss and El Paso International Airport.

The Rio Grande Rift, which passes around the southern end of the Franklin Mountains, is where the Rio Grande flows. The river defines the border between El Paso and Ciudad Juárez to the south and west until the river turns north of the border with Mexico, separating El Paso from Doña Ana County, New Mexico. Mt. Cristo Rey, an example of a pluton, rises within the Rio Grande Rift just to the west of El Paso on the New Mexico side of the Rio Grande. Nearby volcanic features include Kilbourne Hole and Hunt&#x27;s Hole, which are Maar volcanic craters west of the Franklin Mountains.

On November 8, 2023, a 5.3 magnitude Earthquake struck the El Paso region. The epicenter of the earthquake was 22 miles (35 kilometers) southwest of Mentone, according to the USGS

=== Cityscape ===
==== Tallest buildings ====


El Paso&#x27;s second-tallest building, the Wells Fargo Plaza, was built in the early 1970s as State National Plaza. The black-windowed, building is famous for its 13 white horizontal lights (18 lights per row on the east and west sides of the building, and seven bulbs per row on the north and south sides) that were lit at night. The tower did use a design of the United States flag during the July 4 holidays, as well as the American hostage crisis of 1980, and was lit continuously following the September 11 attacks in 2001 until around 2006. During the Christmas holidays, a design of a Christmas tree was used, and at times, the letters &quot;UTEP&quot; were used to support University of Texas at El Paso athletics. The tower is now only lit during the holiday months, or when special events take place in the city.

==== Neighborhoods ====

===== Downtown and central El Paso =====
This part of town contains some of the city&#x27;s oldest and most historic neighborhoods. Located in the heart of the city, it is home to about 44,993 people. Development of the area started in 1827 with the first resident, Juan Maria Ponce de Leon, a wealthy merchant from Paso del Norte (present-day Ciudad Juárez), who built the region&#x27;s first structure establishing Rancho Ponce within the vicinity of S. El Paso Street and Paisano Dr. when the city was barely beginning. Today, central El Paso has grown into the center of the city&#x27;s economy and a thriving urban community. It contains numerous historic sites and landmarks, mostly in the Sunset Heights district. It is close to the El Paso International Airport, the international border, and Fort Bliss. It is part of the El Paso Independent School District.

Dr. James Day, an El Paso historian, said that downtown&#x27;s main business area was originally centered between Second Avenue (now Paisano Drive) and San Francisco Avenue. At a later point, the main business area was centered around Stanton Street and Santa Fe Street. In the late 1800s, most of the White American residents lived to the north of the non-White areas, living in brick residences along Magoffin, Myrtle, and San Antonio Avenues. Hispanic-American residents lived in an area called Chihuahuita (&quot;little Chihuahua&quot;), which was located south of Second Avenue and west of Santa Fe Street. Several African Americans and around 300 Chinese Americans also lived in Chihuahuita. Many of the Chinese Americans participated in the building of railroads in the El Paso area. Another downtown neighborhood is El Segundo Barrio, which is near the Mexico–U.S. border.

===== Northwest El Paso =====
Better known as West El Paso or the West Side, the area includes a portion of the Rio Grande floodplain upstream from downtown, which is known locally as the Upper Valley and is located on the west side of the Franklin Mountains. The Upper Valley is the greenest part of the county due to the Rio Grande. The West Side is home to some of the most affluent neighborhoods within the city, such as the Coronado Hills, Country Club, and Three Hills neighborhoods. It is one of the fastest-growing areas of El Paso. The main high schools in the westside include Canutillo High School, Coronado High School (El Paso, Texas), and Franklin High School (El Paso, Texas).

===== West-central El Paso =====
West-central El Paso is located north of Interstate 10 and west of the Franklin Mountains. The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) and the Cincinnati Entertainment district are located in the heart of the area. Historic districts Kern Place and Sunset Heights are in this part of town.

Kern Place was founded in 1914 by Peter E. Kern, for whom the neighborhood was named. The homes of Kern Place are unique in architecture and some were built by residents themselves. One of the better known homes is the Paul Luckett Home located at 1201 Cincinnati Ave. above Madeline Park, and is made of local rock. It is known as &quot;The Castle&quot; due to its round walls and a crenelated rooftop.

Kern Place is extremely popular with college and university students. The area is known for its glitzy entertainment district, restaurants and coffee shops that cater to both business patrons and university students. After UTEP&#x27;s basketball and football games, UTEP fans pack the Kern Place area for food and entertainment at Cincinnati Street, a small bar district. This bar scene has grown over the years and has attracted thousands to its annual Mardi Gras block party, as well as after sporting events or concerts. Young men and women make up the majority of the crowds who stop in between classes or after work.

Sunset Heights is one of the most historic areas in town, which has existed since the latter part of the 1890s. Many wealthy residents have had their houses and mansions built on this hill. Although some buildings have been renovated to their former glory, many have been neglected and have deteriorated. During the Mexican Revolution widely popular revolutionary leader Pancho Villa owned and resided in this area during the 1910s. During the 1910 Mexican Revolution many Mexicans fled Mexico and settled in Sunset Heights.

===== Northeast El Paso =====
This part of town is located north of central El Paso and east of the Franklin Mountains. Development of the area was extensive during the 1950s and 1960s. It is one of the more ethnically diverse areas in the city due to the concentration of military families. The Northeast has not developed as rapidly as other areas, such as east El Paso and northwest El Paso, but its development is steadily increasing. The population is expected to grow more rapidly as a result of the troop increase at Ft. Bliss in the coming years. The area has also gained recognition throughout the city for the outstanding high-school athletic programs at Andress High School, Parkland High School, Irvin High School, and Chapin High School.

In May 2021 a major developer announced plans for a Master Planned Community in the Northeast modeled after Scarborough&#x27;s Sunfield Master Planned Community in Buda, Texas. The first phase of the development is to include about 2,500 homes, 10-acre park, walking trails, a four-acre resort-like area with a lazy river, kiddy splash pad, pool, grass areas, and a food truck area, the developers reported. Jessica Herrera, director of the city of El Paso Economic and International Development Department, in a statement released by the developers, said Campo del Sol will generate hundreds of millions of dollars in tax revenues, &quot;which will stimulate other growth and development on the north side of town&quot;.

===== East El Paso =====
The area is located north of Interstate 10, east of Airway Blvd., and south of Montana Ave. It is the largest and fastest growing area of town with a population over 200,000. It includes the 79936 ZIP Code, which was considered in 2013 as the most populous in the nation with over 114,000 people.

===== Mission Valley =====
Formerly known as the lower valley, it includes part of Eastside and all lower valley districts. It is the third-largest area of the city, behind east El Paso and central El Paso. Hawkins Road and Interstate 10 border the Mission Valley. This location is considered the oldest area of El Paso, dating back to the late 16th century when present-day Texas was under the rule of New Spain.

In 1680, the Isleta Pueblo tribe revolted against the Spaniards who were pushed south to what is now El Paso. Some Spaniards and tribe members settled here permanently. Soon afterward, three Spanish missions were built; they remain standing, currently functioning as churches: Ysleta Mission-1682 (La Misión de Corpus Christi y de San Antonio de la Ysleta del Sur/Our Lady of Mt. Carmel), Socorro Mission-1759 (Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción del Socorro)-1759, and San Elizario Chapel (Capilla de San Elcear)-1789.

On April 30, 1598, the northward-bound Spanish conquistadors crossed large sand dunes about 27 miles south of present-day downtown El Paso. The expeditionaries and their horses reportedly ran toward the river, and two horses drank themselves to death. Don Juan de Oñate, a New Spain-born conquistador of Spanish parents, was an expedition leader who ordered a big feast north of the Río Grande in what is now San Elizario. This was the first documented and true Thanksgiving in North America. Oñate declared&quot; la Toma&quot; (taking possession), claiming all territory north of the Río Grande for King Philip II of Spain.

Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo (related to the insurgent Isleta Pueblo Tribe) is also located in this valley. The Tigua is one of three Indian tribes in Texas whose sovereignty is recognized by the United States government. Ysleta is spelled with a &quot;Y&quot; because 19th-century script did not differentiate between a capital &quot;Y&quot; and a capital &quot;I&quot;.

Some people in this area and its twin city across the river, Ciudad Juárez, are direct descendants of the Spaniards.

===== Texas and New Mexico suburbs =====
El Paso is surrounded by many cities and communities in both Texas and New Mexico. The most populated suburbs in Texas are Socorro, Horizon City, Fort Bliss, and San Elizario. Other Texas suburbs are Anthony, Canutillo, Sparks, Fabens, and Vinton.

Although Anthony, Santa Teresa, Sunland Park, and Chaparral lie adjacent to El Paso County, they are considered to be part of the Las Cruces, New Mexico metropolitan area by the United States Census Bureau.

=== Climate ===
El Paso has a hot desert climate (Köppen &quot;BWh&quot;) featuring hot summers, with little humidity, and cool to mild, dry winters. Rainfall averages per year, much of which occurs from June through September, and is predominantly caused by the North American Monsoon. During this period, southerly and southeasterly winds carry moisture from the Pacific, the Gulf of California, and the Gulf of Mexico into the region. When this moisture moves into the El Paso area and places to the southwest, orographic lift from the mountains, combined with strong daytime heating, causes thunderstorms, some severe enough to produce flash flooding and hail, across the region.

The sun shines 302 days per year on average in El Paso, 83% of daylight hours, according to the National Weather Service; from this, the city is nicknamed &quot;The Sun City&quot;. Due to its arid, windy climate, El Paso often experiences sand and dust storms during the dry season, particularly during the springtime between March and early May. With an average wind speed often exceeding and gusts that have been measured at over , these wind storms kick up large amounts of sand and dust from the desert, causing loss of visibility.

El Paso and the nearby mountains also receive snow. Weather systems have produced over of snow on several occasions. In the 1982–1983 winter season, three major snowstorms produced record seasonal snowfall. On December 25–26, 1982, of snow fell, producing a white Christmas for the city. This was followed by another on December 30–31, 1982. On April 4–7, 1983, of snow fell on El Paso, bringing the seasonal total to nearly . On December 13–14, 1987, a record storm dumped over of snow on El Paso, and two weeks later (December 25–26), another fell, bringing the monthly total for December 1987 to an all-time record high of of snow.
The average annual snowfall for the city varies widely between different neighborhoods at different elevations, but is at the airport (but with a median of 0, meaning most years see no snow at all). Snow is most rare around Ysleta and the eastern valley area, which usually include large numbers of palm trees; in the higher neighborhoods, palm trees are more vulnerable to snow and cold snaps and are often seen with brown, frost-damaged fronds.

One example of El Paso&#x27;s varying climate at its most extreme was the damaging winter storm of early February 2011, which caused closures of schools, businesses, and City Hall. The snow, which was light, stopped after about a day, but during the ensuing cold episode, municipal utilities went into a crisis. The high temperature on February 2, 2011, was , the lowest daily maximum on record. In addition, the low temperature on February 3 was , breaking the monthly record low set during the cold wave of 1899. Loss of desert vegetation, such as Mexican/California palm trees, oleanders, and iceplants to the cold weather was one of the results. Two local power plants failed, forcing El Paso Electric to institute rolling blackouts over several days, and electric wires were broken, causing localized blackouts. Many water utility pipes froze, causing areas of the city to be without water for several days.

Monthly means range from in December to in July, but high temperatures typically peak in June before the monsoon arrives, while daily low temperatures typically peak in July or early August with the higher humidity the monsoon brings (translating to warmer nights). On average, 42 night lows are at or below freezing, with 118 days of + highs and 28 days of + highs annually; extremely rarely do temperatures stay below the freezing mark all day. The city&#x27;s record high is on June 30, 1994, and its record low is on January 11, 1962; the highest daily minimum was on July 1 and 3, 1994, with weather records for the area maintained by the National Weather Service since 1879.

=== Flooding ===
Although the average annual rainfall is only about 8.8 in (225 mm), many parts of El Paso are subject to occasional flooding during intense summer monsoonal thunderstorms. In late July and early August 2006, up to of rain fell in a week, the flood-control reservoirs overflowed and caused major flooding citywide. The city staff estimated damage to public infrastructure at $21 million, and to private property (residential and commercial) at $77 million. Much of the damage was associated with development in recent decades in arroyos protected by flood-control dams and reservoirs, and the absence of any storm drain utility in the city to handle the flow of rain water.&lt;section begin=&quot;weather box&quot; /&gt;&lt;section end=&quot;weather box&quot; /&gt;
==Demographics==

At the 2010 U.S. census, 649,121 people, 216,694 households, and 131,104 families resided in the city. The 2019 U.S. Census Bureau estimates determined El Paso had a population of 681,728, an increase of 5.2% since the 2010 census. By the 2020 United States census, there were 678,815 people, 230,905 households, and 162,460 families residing in the city.

The population density was in 2010. There were 227,605 housing units at an average density of . Of the 216,894 households in 2010, 37.6% had children under 18 living with them, 48.5% were married couples living together, 20.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.3% were not families. About 21.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 24.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.95 and the average family size was 3.47. The 226,787 households in 2019 averaged of 2.97 people per household.

In the city, the age distribution was 29.1% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 20 to 24, 26.2% from 25 to 44, 22.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.1% who were 65 or older. The median age was 32.5 years according to census statistics from 2010.

As of 2010, the median income for a household in the city was $44,431, and for a family was $50,247. Males had a median income of $28,989 versus $21,540 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,120. About 17.3% of families and 20.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 28.5% of those under age 18 and 18.4% of those age 65 or over. The 2019 census estimates determined the city had an owner-occupied housing rate of 58.9% and median value of owner-occupied housing units at $127,400. The median gross rent from 2015 to 2019 was $837. From 2015 to 2019, the city&#x27;s median monthly homeowner cost with a mortgage was $1,255 and without a mortgage $429. El Paso had a median household income of $47,568 and per capita income of $22,734 in 2019. Roughly 19% of the population lived at or below the poverty line.

===German communities===
By 1996, a German community existed in El Paso, as the German Air Force headquarters for North America is in El Paso. A German school in El Paso serves all grade levels, though as of 1996, most of its students begin attending American schools at the secondary level. The German school is on Fort Bliss.

=== Religion ===
Christianity is the largest religion in the city and its metropolitan statistical area. Nearly 45% of its population claimed affiliation with the Catholic Church in 2020; they are served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso. Protestants form a minority of Christians in the city limits, and the remainder of the non-Christian population were followers of Judaism, Islam, or eastern faiths, including Buddhism or Hinduism. The irreligious made the second largest non-Christian group.

==Economy==

El Paso has a diversified economy focused primarily within international trade, military, government civil service, oil and gas, health care, tourism, and service sectors. The El Paso metro area had a GDP of $29.03 billion in 2017. There was also $92 billion worth of trade in 2012. Over the past 15 years the city has become a significant location for American-based call centers. Cotton, fruit, vegetables, and livestock are also produced in the area. El Paso has added a significant manufacturing sector with items and goods produced that include petroleum, metals, medical devices, plastics, machinery, defense-related goods, and automotive parts. On July 22, 2020, Amazon announced plans to open the first 625,000 square foot fulfillment center in El Paso. Owing to its location on a border, the city is the second-busiest international crossing point in the U.S. behind San Diego.

El Paso is home to one &quot;Fortune &quot;500 company, Western Refining, which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). This makes the city one of six Texas metro areas to have at least one &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 company call it home; the others being Houston, Dallas-Fort Worth, San Antonio, Austin, and Corpus Christi. The second publicly traded company is Helen of Troy Limited, a NASDAQ-listed company that manufactures personal health-care products under many labels, such as OXO, Dr. Scholl&#x27;s, Vidal Sassoon, Pert Plus, Brut, and Sunbeam, and the third is El Paso Electric listed on the NYSE, a public utility engaging in the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity in West Texas and southern New Mexico. The fourth publicly traded company is Western Refining Logistics, also traded in the NYSE. It is a Western Refining subsidiary, which owns, operates, develops, and acquires terminals, storage tanks, pipelines, and other logistics assets.

More than 70 &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies have offices in El Paso, including AT&amp;T, ADP, Boeing, Charles Schwab, Delphi, Dish Network, Eureka, Hoover, Raytheon, USAA and Verizon Wireless. Hispanic Business Magazine included 28 El Paso companies in its list of the 500 largest Hispanic owned businesses in the United States. El Paso&#x27;s 28 companies are second only to Miami&#x27;s 57. The list of the largest Hispanic owned businesses includes companies like Fred Loya Insurance, a Hispanic 500 company and the 18th largest Hispanic business in the nation. Other companies on the list are Dos Lunas Spirits, Dynatec Labs, Spira Footwear, DATAMARK, Inc. and El Taco Tote. El Paso was home to El Paso Corporation formerly known as El Paso Natural Gas Company.

The city also has a large military presence with Fort Bliss, William Beaumont Army Medical Center, and Biggs Army Airfield. The defense industry in El Paso employs over 41,000 and provides a $6 billion annual impact to the city&#x27;s economy. In 2013, Fort Bliss was chosen as the newly configured U.S. Air Force Security Forces Regional Training Center which added 8,000 to 10,000 Air Force personnel annually.

In addition to the military, the federal government has a strong presence in El Paso to manage its status and unique issues as an important border region. Operations headquartered in El Paso include the DEA Domestic Field Division 7, El Paso Intelligence Center, Joint Task Force North, U.S. Border Patrol El Paso Sector, and U.S. Border Patrol Special Operations Group.

Call-center operations employ more than 10,000 people in the area. Automatic Data Processing has an office in West El Paso, employing about 1,100 people with expansion plans to reach 2,200 by 2020.

Tourism is another major industry in El Paso, bringing in $1.5 billion and over 2.3 million visitors annually due to the city&#x27;s sunny weather, natural beauty, rich cultural history, and many outdoor attractions.

Education is also a driving force in El Paso&#x27;s economy. El Paso&#x27;s three large school districts are among the largest employers in the area, employing more than 20,000 people among them. UTEP has an annual budget of nearly $418 million and employs nearly 4,800 people. A 2010 study by the university&#x27;s Institute for Policy and Economic Development stated the university&#x27;s impact on local businesses is $417 million annually.

==Arts and culture==
The culture of El Paso, Texas is influenced heavily by the mixing of American and Mexican cultures, due to the city&#x27;s position on the U.S. Mexico border, its large Chicano population, and its history as part of Hispanic America and Mexico.

===Annual cultural events and festivals===
The Amigo Airsho is one of El Paso&#x27;s premier events, and is ranked as one of the top-10 air shows in the country, filled with air entertainment and ground activities. Acts include the Franklin&#x27;s Flying Circus, where performers walk on the wings of an airborne plane. Ground activities include a jet-powered school bus. After 31 years of being held at Biggs Army Airfield, the show was moved to Dona Ana Airport in 2014.
The KLAQ Great River Raft Race is an annual event celebrated on the second to last Saturday of June. Participants are encouraged to ride the river and float the Rio Grande with family and friends. The organizers encourage the building of unique rafts that get down the river, with prizes and trophies awarded for the most points earned, best-looking crew, and best-decorated raft. The race starts at the Vinton Bridge and ends 3 miles downstream at the Canutillo Bridge.

The Southwestern International PRCA Rodeo is the 17th-oldest rodeo in the nation and El Paso&#x27;s longest-running sporting event. Consistently ranked as one of the top 50 shows in the country by the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association, this charitable event is a true celebration of western culture and heritage.

La Fiesta de las Flores is one of the oldest Hispanic festivals in the Southwest. The three-day fiesta is held each year during the Labor Day weekend and emphasizes El Paso&#x27;s Hispanic heritage and culture. The festival attracts 20,000 to 30,000 visitors from El Paso County, New Mexico, West Texas, and the State of Chihuahua, Mexico. Activities included in the fiesta are crowning of the queen, a Fiesta Parade, Senior Appreciation Dance, Military Appreciation Day, and live entertainment. The fiesta is also well known for the authentic regional cuisine, arts and crafts, games, and services available for the enjoyment of all attendees. Over 80 booths, sponsored by local vendors and nonprofit organizations, create the Hispanic ambience and culture.

The El Paso Balloonfest is an annual event celebrated on Memorial Day weekend and is self described as &quot;3 days of hot air balloons filling the El Paso skies, 3 afternoons of concerts and fun in the sun at Wet N&#x27; Wild Waterworld in Anthony, Texas&quot;. Over 60 balloons take to the air from TFCU launch field, which is adjacent to the water park. After the balloons launch, visitors have a weekend of water rides, swimming, concerts, and grilling. The concert aspect of the event features local bands, starting at noon, and different headlining artists in the afternoon. Overnight camping has been added for 2014.

The El Paso Sun City Pride is the largest annual LGBT event in the region, attracting thousands every June. The event was established in 2007.

===Music festivals===
The annual El Paso Downtown Street Festival is held during the last weekend of June in downtown El Paso near the El Paso Convention Center. It is the oldest musical festival in the city and brings local, regional, and nationally known acts.

The annual Neon Desert Music Festival is a two-day event usually held on the last Saturday and Sunday of May on five stages in downtown El Paso, stretching from San Jacinto Plaza to Cleveland Square. The festival brings over 30 acts from the worlds of indie rock, Latin, and electronic dance music.

The outdoor concert series, started in 1983, is held annually at the Chamizal National Memorial and draws over 60,000 attendees. It features local and international performers with wide-ranging musical genres: Classical, Country, Tejano, rock and others. The evening concerts are showcased every Sunday afternoon and start in early June and end in the middle of August.

The only El Paso musical festival not held downtown, instead it is held at Ascarate Park. The Sun City Music Festival is a two-day event dubbed as the largest electronic dance music festival in Texas.

The Texas Showdown Festival is an annual event celebrating musicians and tattoo artists under one roof. Dubbed as the world&#x27;s largest tattoo and musical festival, the event is held usually the last weekend of July at the El Paso County Coliseum.

===Comedy festivals ===

The ChucoTown Comedy Festival is the first comedy festival established in the El Paso region, bringing together comedy enthusiasts to celebrate in downtown El Paso. Launched in 2024, the festival showcases a diverse lineup of local comedians and headlining acts from across the country. Founded by ChucoTown Comedy, the festival is the culmination of a year-round production of comedy shows, building anticipation and support within the local and regional comedy community.

===Performing arts===
The outdoor musical extravaganza &quot;Viva! El Paso&quot; is performed in the McKelligon Canyon Amphitheatre. It is locally produced and chronicles the 400-year history and cultural evolution of the El Paso region. The show is performed each Friday and Saturday night in June, July, and August. It has entertained local residents and out-of-town visitors for over 35 years.

The El Paso Symphony was established in the 1930s, and is the oldest performing-arts organization in El Paso and the longest continuously running symphony orchestra in Texas. It has received both national and international recognition as a result of its very successful tours of Germany in 1996 and Turkey in 2000, and continues to represent the El Paso region with pride and distinction.
The El Paso Symphony Orchestra Association season is anchored by 12 classical concerts. Special events serve as outreach toward new audiences.

Ballet was largely nonexistent in El Paso until the arrival of Ingeborg Heuser, a professional ballerina from Germany, in the 1950s. Heuser taught ballet at UTEP for 47 years and founded the city&#x27;s first professional ballet company, firstly known as Texas Western Civic Ballet and eventually as &quot;Ballet El Paso&quot;. The company dissipated due to financial trouble in 1997 and Heuser retired from UTEP soon after. The El Paso Youth Ballet was founded in 2009 by Heuser&#x27;s student, Marta Katz, following Heuser&#x27;s departure from the university. With students from the youth ballet, Heuser staged her last &quot;Nutcracker&quot; in 2006. The youth company continues to perform the &quot;Nutcracker&quot; and other preprofessional pieces in and around the El Paso area. The company provides the only platform for young ballet dancers to train and perform at such a level within the city since the folding of Ballet El Paso.

El Paso City Ballet is a current professional ballet company in El Paso, providing local employment for professional dancers in the field of ballet. The company performs a variety of classical and contemporary works choreographed by Artistic Director Lisa Skaf and artists from the US and Latin America. It has been active since 2005, performing yearly productions.

===Theaters===
The Plaza Theatre is a National Historic Building of Significance built in 1930. It features the 2,050-seat Kendall Kidd Performance Hall, and the smaller 200-seat Philanthropy Theatre. It hosts Broadway productions, musical concerts, individual performers, and the annual Plaza Classic Film Festival.

The Abraham Chavez Theatre is a 2,500-seat concert hall adjacent to the Williams Convention Center. Its exterior resembles a &quot;sombrero&quot; and features a three-story glass main entrance. The theatre is named after Maestro Abraham Chavez, who was the longtime conductor of the El Paso Symphony. Inside, the theatre has a lobby and a 40-by-56-ft stage, as well as 14 dressing rooms. The theater&#x27;s seating is in three levels. Also, a meeting room is adjacent to the theater.

Events held at Chavez Theatre include concerts, Broadway shows, graduation ceremonies, performances of the El Paso Symphony Orchestra, and other special events.

McKelligon Canyon is a park, located in the Franklin Mountains, open to hikers and picnickers. In the canyon, McKelligon Canyon Amphitheatre is surrounded on three sides by canyon walls; the 1,500-seat amphitheater is used for concerts and special events, such as &quot;Viva! El Paso&quot;.

The El Paso Playhouse, a community theatre, provides entertainment and educational experiences to a diverse multicultural population through the high-quality production of plays and theatrical events. The playhouse provides a venue for artists, technicians, patrons, and community members to participate in the arts through regularly scheduled season productions and holiday performances. The theater is affiliated with Kids-N-Co, a theater for child actors to children&#x27;s performances .

The University of Texas, El Paso Dinner Theatre located inside the University of Texas, El Paso campus, and was founded in 1983 and is entirely produced, designed and directed by students. The theatre presents 4 fully staged musicals each season and a fully staged student produced musical.

===Area museums===
The Centennial Museum and Chihuahuan Desert Gardens, located on the grounds of UTEP, includes a comprehensive collection of El Paso Brown, Native American pottery, as well as educational exhibits for students.

The El Paso Museum of Archaeology is located on the eastern slope of North Franklin Mountain, west of Gateway South Blvd. on TransMountain Rd. Its grounds include native plants of the American Southwest, as well samples of Native American shelters, in an unspoiled location. The museum includes dioramas for school children that illustrate the culture and geology of the American Southwest, such as Hueco Tanks in El Paso County. One diorama (see image to the right) is of the Cueva de la Olla (cave of the pot) which is located in the Sierra Madre of Chihuahua, an example of the Paquimé culture.

The El Paso Museum of Art is located next to the Plaza Theater adjacent to San Jacinto Plaza, the public square downtown. It contains works of Southwestern artists such as Tom Lea.

Other area museums include:
* El Paso Holocaust Museum and Study Center
* International Museum of Art El Paso
* El Paso Museum of History
* Fort Bliss Museums and Study Center
* Insights El Paso Science Museum
* The Magoffin Homestead, dating from 1875, is now a state historic site.
* The National Border Patrol Museum is located adjacent to the El Paso Museum of Archaeology.
* Railroad and Transportation Museum of El Paso
* The Gene Roddenberry Planetarium
* Lynx Exhibits

===Sites within the city limits===

* Ysleta Mission is recognized as the oldest continuously operated parish in the State of Texas.
* Cathedral of Saint Patrick erected in 1916 is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso.
* Chamizal National Memorial
* El Paso Zoo – a facility housing 220 species.
* Magoffin Home State Historic Site
* Plaza Hotel
* Union Depot
* El Paso High School
* University of Texas at El Paso The university&#x27;s distinctive style is a type of fortress architecture, Dzong, found in the present and former Buddhist mountain kingdoms of the Himalayas, Bhutan and Tibet.

==Sports==

El Paso is home to the Sun Bowl, the second-oldest consecutive college football contest (after the Rose Bowl). Its first game was held in 1935.

On September 18, 2012, the city council voted to approve the demolition of its city hall to make way for Southwest University Park, the new home of the El Paso Chihuahuas Triple-A team (San Diego Padres affiliate); it opened in 2014. The team was purchased by Mountainstar Sports Group of El Paso. City Hall was demolished on April 14, 2013.

The El Paso Marathon takes place annually since 2007. The El Paso Locomotive FC soccer team began playing in 2019 in the USL Championship. They play their home matches at the Southwest University Park.

==Parks and recreation==

El Paso is home to the largest urban park in the nation. The Franklin Mountains State Park, with its more than , is completely located within the city limits. It is considered a small range (23 miles long, wide) that extends from the city north into New Mexico. It is home to the highest peak in the county North Franklin Mountain at 7,192 feet.The park is open year-round for recreation including hiking, mountain biking, picnicking, scenic driving and views of the city. Scenic Drive runs along the mountain range, and is designated as a city park to allow better vandalism control and cleanup, Roads are closed to vehicles on certain Sundays to allow walking, running, cycling, and skating. The road offers views of El Paso, as well as nearby Ciudad Juárez, across the Mexico–United States border.

The Wyler Aerial Tramway is operated by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and is in the Franklin Mountains State Park. The tramway complex covers on the east side of the Franklin Mountains. The gondolas travel along two -diameter steel cables to Ranger Peak, above sea level. The trip takes about four minutes and lifts riders above the boarding area.The tramway was built in 1959 by KTSM radio to aid in the construction of a transmitter tower. Karl O. Wyler managed the project. First opening to the public as the El Paso Aerial Tramway, the facility provided rides from 1960 to 1986, when high liability insurance costs forced the tram to stop public operations. The tram was only used to service the transmitter towers. Wyler donated the tramway for public use in his will. The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department accepted the donation in 1997 and renovated and re-opened the tramway to the public in 2001. The tramway was closed indefinitely on September 18, 2020.

Hueco Tanks State Historic Site is a Texas historic site in the Hueco Tanks area, approximately northeast of downtown El Paso and just west of the Hueco Mountains. The park is popular for recreation such as birdwatching and bouldering, and is culturally and spiritually significant to many Native Americans. This significance is partially manifested in the pictographs (rock paintings) that can be found throughout the region, many of which are thousands of years old. Hueco Tanks is also widely regarded as one of the best areas in the world for bouldering (rock climbing, low enough to attempt without ropes for protection), unique for its rock type, the concentration and quality of the climbing, and after which the Hueco bouldering grades are named. In any given climbing season, which generally lasts from October through March, it is common for climbers from across Europe, Asia, and Australia to visit the park. Since implementation of the Public Use Plan, following a brief closure of the entire park due to the park service&#x27;s inability to manage the growing crowds of international climbers, volunteer or commercial guides are required to access more than 2/3 of the park&#x27;s area. Only North Mountain is accessible without guides, and then only for about 70 people at any given time. The park offers camping and showers for a small fee a day or, as is most popular for climbers, the nearby Hueco Rock Ranch offers camping where climbers can relax and socialize.

Located in downtown El Paso, San Jacinto Plaza is a historical park notable for its alligator statues in the middle of the area. Known as &quot;Alligator Plaza&quot;, it used to have a pond that held live alligators that the community can interact with starting in 1962. They were removed and relocated to the El Paso Zoo in 1974. The area around the park is typically used to hold major events such as &quot;Chalk the Block Arts Festival&quot; and &quot;Winterfest&quot;.

The Chamizal National Memorial is a 54.90-acre (22.22 ha) memorial park that serves primarily as a cultural center and contains art galleries, a theater, and an amphitheatre. A museum detailing the history of the Mexico–U.S. border is located inside the visitor center.

The city is also home to 242 municipal parks.

===Botanical gardens===
* The Chihuahuan Desert Gardens (CDG) display the flora of the Chihuahuan Desert and adjacent regions in the United States and Mexico. The Gardens were formally dedicated in September 1999 and contain over 625 different species of plants, comprising one of the largest captive assemblages of Chihuahuan Desert flora in the world.
* The El Paso Municipal Rose Garden (officially named the All-American Rose Selection (AARS) public garden) is one of over 100 certified gardens within the United States. There are over 1,900 rosebushes with 500 varieties. The wrought-iron fenced garden has wide walkways with handicap accessibility, raised beds, a waterfall, and trees and shrubs. Several new rose varieties are planted each year, and after two years the highest-rated are named and receive the AARS symbol.
* Feather Lake is a wildlife sanctuary based on a wetland built by the City of El Paso in 1969 as a stormwater-retention basin. Since 1976, the El Paso/Trans-Pecos Audubon Society has leased this land from the city and managed it for wildlife. Over 200 different species of birds, especially those associated with water, have been observed at the sanctuary. Fauna residing there include muskrats, spiny softshell turtles, pond sliders, and Trans-Pecos striped whiptail lizards.
* Keystone Heritage Park comprises an Archaic-period archaeological site, wetlands, and a desert botanical garden. The 4,500-year-old site is one of the oldest villages in the United States. The wetlands are home to many birds, and over 200 species have been spotted there on their seasonal migrations. The botanical garden features a variety of native plants, and includes a pavilion and a replica of an Archaic period brush hut. The newest component, The Chihuahuan Desert Experience, is a work in progress that will allow visitors to stroll the length of desert over a recreation of the plant indigenous life.
* Rio Bosque Wetlands is a city park, managed by the Center for Environmental Resource Management of the University of Texas at El Paso, which began restoration efforts in 1998. In the fall and winter, water flows through the park along the route of the river before it was confined within levees in the 1930s. Many animals and birds have returned to the area as the restoration proceeds, and over 200 species of birds have been sighted.

===Golf courses===
The metro area has 16 golf courses including Butterfield Trail Golf Club, the only public premium daily fee Tom Fazio designed golf course in the state of Texas. It was ranked No. 1 in Texas and No. 3 in the Nation on &quot;Golfweek&quot;&#x27;s 2013 Best Municipal Golf Courses. Other golf courses found in the county include:

* Ascarate Golf Course
* Coronado Country Club
* El Paso Country Club
* Horizon City Golf Course
* Lone Star Golf Club
* Painted Dunes Desert Golf Club
* Underwood Golf Complex
==Government==
===City===
The city government is officially nonpartisan. Mayors and city council members are elected for four year terms and may not serve more than two full terms or for more than ten years total in their respective offices. Municipal elections were held in May in odd-numbered years until a voter-approved charter amendment changed this to November in even-numbered years, beginning in 2018.

The city operates under a council–manager form of government. Power is concentrated in the eight-member elected city council and mayor, who hire a manager to carry out its directives and oversee the delivery of public services. The current city manager is Dionne Mack, and the current mayor of El Paso is Renard Johnson, who was elected to the office in 2024. 

The terms of Johnson, Acevedo, Maldonado-Rocha, Boyar Trejo, and Limon will end in January 2029. The terms of Chavez, Canales, Fierro, and Nino will end in January 2027. Canales and Fierro have been on the council since 2023; Acevedo since 2024, and Maldonado-Rocha, Boyar Trejo, and Nino since 2025. Limon previously served from 2013 to 2017, and begins a new term in 2025. Due to the term limits clause of the city charter, Limon will be ineligible to run for another term. All other councilors are eligible for reelection.

===County===

The El Paso County Judge is Ricardo Samaniego, and the County Commissioners are Jackie Arroyo Butler (Precinct 1), David Stout (Precinct 2), Iliana Holguin (Precinct 3), and Sergio Coronado (Precinct 4). The commissioners and the county judge are Democrats.

Stout was first elected to his position in 2014, and was re-elected in 2018 and 2022. Samaniego was first elected in 2018, and was re-elected unopposed in 2022. Holguin was first elected to her position in 2020 and re-elected unopposed in 2024. Coronado was first elected to his position in 2022. Arroyo Butler was first elected to her position in 2024.

===State===

The El Paso metropolitan area is represented in the Texas State House by Democrats Eddie Morales, Mary Gonzalez, Joe Moody, Claudia Ordaz, and Vincent Perez, and in the State Senate by Cesar Blanco (D-El Paso).

The Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the El Paso I District Parole Office in the city. The El Paso II District Parole Office is in an unincorporated area east of Horizon City.

===Federal===

El Paso City and County vote overwhelmingly Democratic, like most of the Texas–Mexico border area and urban Texas.

In the United States House of Representatives, most of El Paso is part of represented by Democrat Veronica Escobar. A small sliver in the eastern part of the city is part of , represented by Republican Tony Gonzales. The current U.S. senators for Texas are Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and John Cornyn (R-Texas).

==Education==

El Paso is home to the University of Texas at El Paso, the largest public university in the region. UTEP was ranked as the 7th best university in Washington Monthly&#x27;s 2013 National University Rankings, just behind Stanford and ahead of Harvard. Also, the university&#x27;s School of Engineering is the nation&#x27;s top producer of Hispanic engineers with M.S. and Ph.D. degrees.

El Paso is also home to Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at El Paso, Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, Texas Tech College of Architecture at El Paso, Brightwood College, Park University, Southwest University, Webster University and the University of Phoenix. Also due to its proximity, many El Paso students attend New Mexico State University where the school offers in-state tuition to El Paso County residents.

The El Paso Community College&#x27;s boundary includes all of El Paso County. There are several technical schools and for profit schools. El Pasoans also have access to the Doña Ana Community College with campuses in Sunland Park, Anthony and Chaparral, New Mexico: This community college is a part of the New Mexico State University system.

El Paso area students attend public schools in four school districts that cover portions of the city limits: El Paso Independent School District, Ysleta Independent School District, Socorro Independent School District and Canutillo Independent School District; there are nine independent school districts in the county. Numerous accredited private preparatory schools also serve El Paso students. These include various pre-high school religious (Christian, Jewish) affiliates and Montessori schools, Cathedral High School, Loretto Academy, Father Yermo High School, Lydia Patterson Institute, Faith Christian Academy, El Paso Jewish Academy, Rose of Sharon Christian Academy, Zion Lutheran Day School and Radford School. The University of El Paso offers the country&#x27;s only bilingual M.F.A. creative writing program.

El Paso is home to bi-national economic development groups; the Hub of Human Innovation and Technology Hub. The industry groups&#x27; tertiary vocational programs, give workforce training in automation, robotics and AI technology.

===Public libraries===
The El Paso Public Library serves the needs of the public in El Paso. It consists of 12 branches, a bookmobile, a mobile computer classroom and a mobile outreach unit (Kidsmobile). It also has multiple outreach services available.

==Media==
===Newspapers===
The main newspapers are the English-language daily &quot;El Paso Times&quot;, founded in 1881; the Spanish-language daily &quot;El Diario de El Paso&quot;, and the online newspaper &quot;El Paso Herald-Post&quot; started in 2015. The original and defunct &quot;El Paso Herald Post&quot; was also founded in 1881 as the &quot;El Paso Herald&quot;, which then merged with the &quot;El Paso Post&quot; in 1931. The paper was shut down in 1997. &quot;El Paso Matters&quot;, a non-profit online newspaper, was founded in 2019.

Weekly and niche magazines:
* &quot;El Paso Inc&quot;
* &quot;El Paso Scene&quot;
* &quot;La Polaka&quot;
* &quot;Jrznoticias&quot;
* &quot;The City Magazine&quot;
* &quot;The Prospector&quot;, published by the University of Texas at El Paso
* &quot;Tejano Tribune&quot;, published by El Paso Community College

===Radio stations===
Radio stations from Las Cruces, New Mexico, and Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua, can also be heard within the El Paso market.

===Television===
El Paso was the largest city in the United States without a PBS television station within the city limits until 1978, when KCOS-TV was founded. El Paso viewers had to watch channel 22, KRWG, from Las Cruces until 1978. In fact, the city had only three English-speaking channels and two Spanish-language channels (channel 2 and channel 5) from Juarez, and cable TV subscribers in the 1970s and 1980s could receive four Los Angeles independent channels: KTLA, KHJ, KTTV and KCOP as well as Spanish-language stations KMEX of Los Angeles and KWEX of San Antonio usually sharing the same cable channel slot. Over time, as more television stations signed on, more cable channels were added and those stations added network affiliations, the Los Angeles and San Antonio stations disappeared from the lineup. The last to be removed was KTLA in the fall of 2006 as a consequence of the WB-UPN merger into The CW, when KVIA-TV launched a digital subchannel with the network&#x27;s programming.

In 2019, KCOS was absorbed and moved to Lubbock as part of Texas Tech Public Media in order to keep the station on air after years of financial struggles. KCOS still focuses on broadcasting to the El Paso community. 

==Infrastructure==
===Healthcare===

El Paso is the medical hub of West Texas and Southern New Mexico, hosting numerous state-of-the-art medical centers. Some of the city&#x27;s top hospitals include University Medical Center, William Beaumont Army Medical Center, Sierra Medical Center, Las Palmas Medical Center, Del Sol Medical Center, Sierra Providence East Medical Center, El Paso Children&#x27;s Hospital, and Providence Memorial Hospital. University Medical Center is the only level I trauma center in the region. William Beaumont Army Medical Center will be replaced by a new state of the art $1.2 billion Fort Bliss Replacement Hospital expected to open in 2020. El Paso&#x27;s newest hospital, The Hospitals of Providence Transmountain Campus opened in Northwest El Paso on January 27, 2017. The 106-bed teaching hospital is a collaboration between Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso and The Hospitals of Providence. The hospitals were strained during the COVID-19 pandemic in Texas, and 10 refrigerated morgue trailers were installed to handle increased mortality.

El Paso is also home to the Medical Center of the Americas, an integrated complex of medical facilities anchored by Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at El Paso, Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, University Medical Center, the El Paso Psychiatric Center and by the El Paso Children&#x27;s Hospital. It is also the site to the Cardwell Collaborative biomedical research building, the Gayle Greve Hunt School of Nursing, and the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences. The Woody L. Hunt School of Dental Medicine is expected to open in 2021 in the MCA area as well.

===Transportation===
El Paso is served by El Paso International Airport and Amtrak via the historic Union Depot.

Several roads and highways connect El Paso, including I-10, US 54 (known locally as &quot;54&quot;, the &quot;North-South Freeway&quot; or officially as the Patriot Freeway), Spur 601 (Liberty Expressway), US 180 and US 62 (Montana Avenue), US Highway 85 (Paisano Drive), Loop 375, Loop 478 (Copia Street-Pershing Drive-Dyer Street), numerous Texas Farm-to-Market roads (a class of state highway commonly abbreviated to FM) and the city&#x27;s original thoroughfare, SH 20, the eastern portion of which is known locally as Alameda Avenue (formerly US 80). SH 20 also includes portions of Texas Avenue in Central El Paso, Mesa Street from Downtown to the West Side, and Doniphan Drive on the West Side. Northeast El Paso is connected to West El Paso by Transmountain Road (Loop 375). The city also shares four international bridges and one railbridge with Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. In 2009, El Paso was home to number 52, number 98, and number 100 of the 100 most congested roads in Texas, which are, respectively: North Zaragoza Road between Sun Fire Boulevard and I-10; Lee Trevino Drive between Montana Avenue and I-10; and I-10 between the Patriot Freeway and Loop 375.

In 2009, 79.8% of El Paso (city) commuters drive to work alone. The 2009 mode share for El Paso (city) commuters are 10.3% for carpooling, 2.4% for transit, 2.5% for walking, and .2% for cycling. In 2016, Walk Score ranked El Paso as the 32nd most walkable of the 50 largest U.S. cities, rating it &quot;car-dependent&quot;. The city of El Paso has a slightly lower than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 7.4 percent of El Paso households lacked a car, and increased to 8.4 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. El Paso averaged 1.82 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.

====Airports====

*El Paso International Airport, a public airport four miles (6 km) northeast of downtown El Paso. It is the largest commercial airport in West Texas, handling 3,260,556 passengers in 2018. The El Paso International Airport serves the El Paso-Las Cruces Combined Statistical area.
*Biggs Army Airfield, a military airbase serving Fort Bliss.

====Railroad====
*Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, serves El Paso at the Union Depot, operating its Sunset Limited/Texas Eagle three times weekly between Los Angeles and New Orleans via San Antonio and Houston and between Los Angeles and Chicago via San Antonio and Fort Worth.
*Freight service is provided by BNSF and Union Pacific.

====Major highways====
* I-10: The primary thoroughfare through the city, connecting the city with other major U.S. cities such as Los Angeles, Phoenix, Tucson, San Antonio, Houston, Baton Rouge, New Orleans, Gulfport and Mobile, with the east end located in Jacksonville. I-10 is also a connector to I-25, which connects with the cities of Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Colorado Springs, Denver, Fort Collins, Cheyenne, Casper, and north to the interchange with I-90, located in Buffalo, Wyoming.
* US 54: Officially called the Patriot Freeway, it is also known as the North-South Freeway. A business route runs along Dyer Street, the former US 54, from the freeway near Fort Bliss to the Texas–New Mexico state line, where it again rejoins the expressway. The original US 54 was a transcontinental route connecting El Paso with Chicago.

* US 62: Santa Fe Street south of Paisano Drive concurrently runs with US 85, Paisano Drive east of Santa Fe Street to Montana Avenue, then Montana Avenue concurrently with US 180.
* US 85: Santa Fe Street south of Paisano Drive concurrently runs with US 62 and Paisano Drive west of Santa Fe Street to I-10.
* US 180: Montana Avenue is a bypass route to the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex to the east, and Flagstaff, Arizona to the west.
* SH 20: Alameda Avenue (formerly US 80), Texas Avenue, Mesa Street and Doniphan Drive
* SH 178: Artcraft Road in Northwest El Paso extends from I-10 west to the New Mexico state line, at which point it becomes NM 136, the Pete V. Domenici International Highway.
* Loop 375: Loop 375 encircles the city of El Paso. Between I-10 and Fort Bliss, including the stretch that crosses the Franklin Mountains via Smuggler&#x27;s Pass, it is Transmountain Road. In the Fort Bliss Military Reservation between northeast and east El Paso, it is officially the Purple Heart Memorial Highway. In East El Paso, the north- and south-bound sections are known as Joe Battle Boulevard, or simply as &quot;the Loop&quot;. South of I-10, in the east and westbound portion, it is known as the Cesar Chavez Border Highway, a four-lane expressway which is located along the Mexican border between Downtown El Paso and the Ysleta area.
* Spur 601: Once known as the Inner Loop, it was officially named the Liberty Expressway by the El Paso City Council in April 2010 at the request of then Fort Bliss commander Maj. Gen. Howard Bromberg. It was fully completed on April 27, 2011; it connects the Patriot Freeway (US 54) and Biggs Army Airfield to the Purple Heart Memorial Highway (Loop 375).
* North Loop Road, as well as Delta Drive between North Loop Road and Alameda Avenue (Texas Highway 20)
* Zaragoza Road, running more or less north from the Ysleta International Bridge to US 62–180 (Montana Avenue), it lies mostly in east El Paso.
* Texas Farm-to-Market Road 3255 runs north from US 54 to the New Mexico state line in Northeast El Paso and bears the city street name Martin Luther King Boulevard.
*Border West Expressway under construction (as of 2018), parallel to I-10 through downtown and the west side.

====Mass transit====

The Sun Metro Mass Transit System operates a system of medium- to large-capacity natural gas-powered buses all around the city of El Paso. In 2011, Sun Metro was named the most outstanding public transit system of the year in all of North America for a mid-size transit system by the American Public Transportation Association.

El Paso County Transit makes trips with small-capacity buses mainly in the eastern El Paso area. South Central Regional Transit District operates two routes from El Paso to Sunland Park, New Mexico and Anthony, New Mexico.

On September 1, 2009, NMDOT Park and Ride began operating commuter bus service to and from Las Cruces, New Mexico.

Historically, El Paso and Ciudad Juarez had a shared streetcar system with a peak electrified route mileage of in 1920. The first electrified line across the Rio Grande, which opened on January 11, 1902, was preceded by a network that relied on animal labor. The system quickly spread into residential and industrial areas of El Paso. In 1913, a interurban line was built to Ysleta. At the close of 1943, the holding company El Paso Electric sold its subsidiary, the El Paso Electric Railway Company and its Mexican counterpart, to one of National City Lines&#x27; subsidiaries. This resulted in the formation of El Paso City Lines, whose domestic streetcar lines were replaced by buses in 1947. The international streetcar line which crossed the border via the Stanton Street Bridge continued to operate until 1973. In 1977, El Paso City Lines and two other bus companies were bought by the municipality and merged to form Sun City Area Transit (SCAT). In 1987, SCAT restyled itself Sun Metro.

====Streetcar====

The El Paso Streetcar is a streetcar system that opened for service on November 9, 2018, and uses a fleet of restored PCC streetcars that had served the city&#x27;s previous system until its closure in 1974. The system covers (round trip) in two loops from Downtown El Paso to University of Texas at El Paso. The system was constructed under the authority of the Camino Real Regional Mobility Authority, but when the major construction was completed, around spring 2018, it was transferred to Sun Metro, for operation and maintenance. , construction of the system was projected to cost $97 million. In 2019, it was reported that the system is losing money and that the number of people using it only reached half its goal in the inaugural year.

====International border crossings====
The first bridge to cross the Rio Grande at El Paso del Norte was built in the time of Nueva España, over 250 years ago, from wood hauled in from Santa Fe. This bridge is honored by the modern Santa Fe Street Bridge, and Santa Fe Street in downtown El Paso.

Several bridges serve the El Paso–Ciudad Juárez area:

*Bridge of the Americas, also known as the Cordova Bridge.
*Good Neighbor International Bridge, also known as the Stanton Street Bridge
*Paso del Norte International Bridge, also known as the Santa Fe Street Bridge.
*Ysleta–Zaragoza International Bridge, also known as the Zaragoza Bridge.

The city collects tolls at its international bridges, except for the Bridge of the Americas, which is free. All bridges are open year-round.

===Water===
The Kay Bailey Hutchison Desalination Plant takes in brackish groundwater from an aquifer that is too salty for human consumption and treats it through reverse osmosis. A joint study by Fort Bliss and El Paso-area city governments found that desalination was a viable method for increasing El Paso&#x27;s water supply by 25%. The plant on Fort Bliss property desalinates the groundwater of the Hueco Bolson for use by El Paso and Fort Bliss.

== Sister Cities ==
* Ciudad Juárez, Mexico
* Las Cruces, New Mexico

==See also==

*List of museums in West Texas
*List of people from El Paso, Texas
*National Register of Historic Places listings in El Paso County, Texas
*El Paso in popular culture

==Notes==
===Footnotes===
===Source notes===
==References==
*
*
*

==External links==
*City of El Paso Website
*Chamber of Commerce Website
* El Paso – The Best Little Music City in Texas, from &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, March 2009.
*&quot;Forty years at El Paso, 1858–1898; recollections of war, politics, adventure, events, narratives, sketches, etc.&quot;, by W. W. Mills, hosted by the Portal to Texas History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="0" end="7" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="39" end="50" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="54" end="75" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="96" end="100" title="2020 United States census" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="133" end="151" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="179" end="214" title="List of United States cities by population" label="22nd-most populous city in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="242" end="252" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106973361" start="262" end="295" title="List of cities in Texas by population" label="sixth-most populous city in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="302" end="331" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q110257" start="358" end="366" title="Hudspeth County, Texas" label="Hudspeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="449" end="459" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="471" end="498" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="504" end="517" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="566" end="575" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="599" end="624" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="El Paso metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823389" start="650" end="694" title="El Paso–Las Cruces, Texas–New Mexico combined statistical area" label="El Paso–Las Cruces combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="700" end="722" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="810" end="827" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351808" start="857" end="883" title="El Paso–Juárez" label="&amp;quot;Paso del Norte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="1014" end="1032" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988215" start="1099" end="1115" title="Western Refining" label="Western Refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q458363" start="1121" end="1139" title="Marathon Petroleum" label="Marathon Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="1295" end="1325" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813537" start="1389" end="1397" title="Sun Bowl" label="Sun Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="1450" end="1459" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711408" start="1528" end="1564" title="William Beaumont Army Medical Center" label="William Beaumont Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="1566" end="1585" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="1591" end="1601" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="1664" end="1695" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351778" start="1723" end="1750" title="El Paso Intelligence Center" label="El Paso Intelligence Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269450" start="1752" end="1774" title="Joint Task Force North" label="Joint Task Force North"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="1776" end="1803" title="United States Border Patrol" label="United States Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727773" start="1893" end="1915" title="All-America City Award" label="All-America City Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993018" start="1979" end="2002" title="Congressional Quarterly" label="Congressional Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600888" start="2186" end="2227" title="List of U.S. cities with large Hispanic populations" label="the second-largest majority-Hispanic city"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2256" end="2267" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="2302" end="2310" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464871" start="2429" end="2441" title="Folsom point" label="Folsom point"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2448" end="2463" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365527" start="2474" end="2485" title="Hueco Tanks" label="Hueco Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2616" end="2623" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751783" start="2637" end="2642" title="Manso Indians" label="Manso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135456" start="2644" end="2648" title="Suma people" label="Suma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359237" start="2654" end="2660" title="Jumano people" label="Jumano"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="2740" end="2747" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q648279" start="2820" end="2831" title="Comanchería" label="Comanchería"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533878" start="2843" end="2851" title="genízaro" label="genízaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56585" start="2889" end="2905" title="Mescalero Apache" label="Mescalero Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q25533" start="2930" end="2965" title="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition" label="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040026" start="3372" end="3389" title="Don Juan de Oñate" label="Don Juan de Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q139242" start="3410" end="3430" title="Zacatecas, Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas, Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="3458" end="3467" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="3533" end="3543" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="3581" end="3598" title="mass (liturgy)" label="Thanksgiving Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277677" start="3646" end="3664" title="Narváez expedition" label="Narváez expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="3666" end="3692" title="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca" label="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839280" start="3694" end="3723" title="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado" label="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q354615" start="3725" end="3752" title="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza" label="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="3780" end="3787" title="Wattasid dynasty" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370004" start="3789" end="3799" title="Estevanico" label="Estevanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="3940" end="3953" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4037" end="4065" title="Fray Garcia de San Francisco" label="Fray Garcia de San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547791" start="4204" end="4217" title="Pueblo Revolt" label="Pueblo Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="4236" end="4244" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="4301" end="4317" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5086" end="5097" title="Simeon Hart" label="Simeon Hart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5102" end="5117" title="Hugh Stephenson (early settler of El Paso, Texas)" label="Hugh Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="5533" end="5553" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870953" start="5559" end="5579" title="Battle of El Bracito" label="Battle of El Bracito"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="5626" end="5653" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="5880" end="5898" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758452" start="6134" end="6157" title="Ciudad Juárez Cathedral" label="Ciudad Juárez Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q970898" start="6255" end="6267" title="San Elizario, Texas" label="San Elizario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188118" start="6864" end="6888" title="cross-border town naming" label="cross-border town naming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770732" start="7045" end="7056" title="Anson Mills" label="Anson Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709998" start="7194" end="7214" title="Albert D. Richardson" label="Albert D. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8512" end="8521" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="8523" end="8534" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152016" start="8603" end="8620" title="California Column" label="California Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641426" start="8670" end="8712" title="5th Regiment California Volunteer Infantry" label="5th Regiment California Volunteer Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="9139" end="9155" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407682" start="9157" end="9174" title="Texas and Pacific Railway" label="Texas and Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="9180" end="9209" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe" label="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="9497" end="9505" title="boomtown" label="boomtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="9651" end="9673" title="Department of the Army" label="Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="10047" end="10074" title="El Paso Chamber" label="El Paso Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="10097" end="10116" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="10139" end="10152" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="10462" end="10475" title="Texas Rangers Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q458036" start="10606" end="10631" title="Frederick Russell Burnham" label="Frederick Russell Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181717" start="10720" end="10737" title="John Hays Hammond" label="John Hays Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810098" start="11003" end="11014" title="Protector Palm Pistol" label="palm pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="11345" end="11363" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200931" start="12075" end="12092" title="Plan de San Diego" label="Plan de San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q231043" start="12964" end="12977" title="Consent" label="nonconsensual"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="12978" end="12990" title="Pornography" label="pornographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="13084" end="13092" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27688862" start="13110" end="13125" title="1917 Bath riots" label="1917 Bath riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351805" start="13544" end="13576" title="El Paso and Northeastern Railway" label="El Paso and Northeastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="13811" end="13826" title="Prohibition era" label="Prohibition-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13961" end="13977" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="14083" end="14097" title="Depression era" label="Depression era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887576" start="14429" end="14442" title="Permian Basin (North America)" label="Permian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="14523" end="14526" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q979772" start="15107" end="15122" title="bracero program" label="bracero program"/>
<link wikidata="Q56867815" start="15581" end="15597" title="Farah strike" label="The Farah Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q66108236" start="15944" end="15961" title="2019 El Paso shooting" label="terrorist shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="15972" end="15987" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="16010" end="16017" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134980" start="16226" end="16244" title="Mountain Time Zone" label="Mountain Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="16246" end="16259" title="Ciudad Juarez" label="Ciudad Juarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="16276" end="16293" title="Central Time Zone (North America)" label="Central Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="16399" end="16415" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="16425" end="16445" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302" start="16455" end="16471" title="Chihuahua City" label="Ciudad Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q189138" start="16497" end="16507" title="Hermosillo" label="Hermosillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="16568" end="16574" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="16600" end="16611" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="16613" end="16623" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q982388" start="16646" end="16659" title="Orange, Texas" label="Orange, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q855658" start="16753" end="16770" title="Chihuahuan Desert" label="Chihuahuan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="16803" end="16825" title="Basin and Range Region" label="Basin and Range Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841975" start="16831" end="16849" title="Franklin Mountains (Texas)" label="Franklin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821328" start="16973" end="16987" title="Mesilla Valley" label="Mesilla Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055443" start="17185" end="17208" title="North Franklin Mountain" label="North Franklin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241269" start="17428" end="17448" title="Coronado High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Coronado High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="17495" end="17522" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491714" start="17560" end="17589" title="Franklin Mountains State Park" label="Franklin Mountains State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000493" start="17591" end="17621" title="List of urban parks by size" label="one of the largest urban parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231062" start="17765" end="17794" title="El Paso International Airport" label="El Paso International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335255" start="17801" end="17816" title="Rio Grande Rift" label="Rio Grande Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q112953" start="18077" end="18104" title="Doña Ana County, New Mexico" label="Doña Ana County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900271" start="18106" end="18120" title="Urbici Soler" label="Mt. Cristo Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="18138" end="18144" title="pluton" label="pluton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406574" start="18282" end="18296" title="Kilbourne Hole" label="Kilbourne Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406574" start="18301" end="18317" title="Hunt&amp;#x27;s Hole" label="Hunt&amp;#x27;s Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q192503" start="18329" end="18349" title="Maar volcanic crater" label="Maar volcanic crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="18421" end="18431" title="Earthquake" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q980971" start="18533" end="18540" title="Mentone, Texas" label="Mentone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="18559" end="18563" title="United States Geological Survey" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="19009" end="19015" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="July 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="19113" end="19133" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641273" start="20159" end="20173" title="Sunset Heights" label="Sunset Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351777" start="20294" end="20329" title="El Paso Independent School District" label="El Paso Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="20634" end="20648" title="White American" label="White American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="20778" end="20795" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42270682" start="20830" end="20841" title="Chihuahuita" label="Chihuahuita"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="20856" end="20865" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q24260874" start="21156" end="21173" title="El Segundo Barrio" label="El Segundo Barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841975" start="21454" end="21472" title="Franklin Mountains (Texas)" label="Franklin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680303" start="21801" end="21822" title="Canutillo High School" label="Canutillo High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241269" start="21824" end="21861" title="Coronado High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Coronado High School (El Paso, Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491545" start="21867" end="21904" title="Franklin High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Franklin High School (El Paso, Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="22031" end="22065" title="The University of Texas at El Paso" label="The University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394139" start="22172" end="22182" title="Kern Place" label="Kern Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641273" start="22187" end="22201" title="Sunset Heights" label="Sunset Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29855681" start="22263" end="22276" title="Peter E. Kern" label="Peter E. Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q35105" start="23088" end="23098" title="Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q884672" start="23099" end="23110" title="block party" label="block party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="23190" end="23198" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="23628" end="23640" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061014" start="23851" end="23866" title="central El Paso" label="central El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328273" start="24142" end="24154" title="east El Paso" label="east El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756141" start="24448" end="24467" title="Andress High School" label="Andress High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138573" start="24469" end="24489" title="Parkland High School (Texas)" label="Parkland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892702" start="24491" end="24508" title="Irvin High School" label="Irvin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036693" start="24514" end="24532" title="Captain John L. Chapin High School" label="Chapin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="25984" end="25993" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059780" start="26273" end="26287" title="Ysleta Mission" label="Ysleta Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859261" start="26385" end="26400" title="Socorro Mission" label="Socorro Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241527" start="26471" end="26490" title="San Elizario Chapel" label="San Elizario Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040026" start="26774" end="26791" title="Don Juan de Oñate" label="Don Juan de Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465424" start="27036" end="27043" title="la Toma" label="la Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="27127" end="27145" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q940453" start="27148" end="27169" title="Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo" label="Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q979579" start="27796" end="27803" title="Socorro, Texas" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q979346" start="27805" end="27817" title="Horizon City, Texas" label="Horizon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q974714" start="27873" end="27880" title="Anthony, Texas" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q981365" start="27882" end="27891" title="Canutillo, Texas" label="Canutillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q145866" start="27893" end="27899" title="Sparks, Texas" label="Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q981916" start="27901" end="27907" title="Fabens, Texas" label="Fabens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708888" start="27913" end="27919" title="Vinton, Texas" label="Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056427" start="27931" end="27938" title="Anthony, New Mexico" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601700" start="27940" end="27952" title="Santa Teresa, New Mexico" label="Santa Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002908" start="27954" end="27966" title="Sunland Park, New Mexico" label="Sunland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388498" start="27972" end="27981" title="Chaparral, New Mexico" label="Chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="28052" end="28074" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="28160" end="28178" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="28180" end="28186" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470090" start="28393" end="28415" title="North American Monsoon" label="North American Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="28508" end="28526" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="28536" end="28550" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="28725" end="28737" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="28911" end="28935" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059777" start="30211" end="30217" title="Ysleta" label="Ysleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="30286" end="30296" title="palm trees" label="palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30931" end="30948" title="Great Blizzard of 1899#Arctic cold" label="cold wave of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q156219" start="31031" end="31039" title="Aizoaceae" label="iceplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="31154" end="31170" title="rolling blackout" label="rolling blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="31993" end="32017" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q373315" start="32576" end="32583" title="Arroyo (watercourse)" label="arroyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="32838" end="32854" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="32943" end="32961" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="33070" end="33095" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="34928" end="34944" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="35164" end="35174" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="35194" end="35206" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="35340" end="35355" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q786105" start="35388" end="35421" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="35423" end="35434" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="35553" end="35560" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35562" end="35567" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="35598" end="35606" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="35610" end="35618" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="35624" end="35635" title="Irreligion" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="35754" end="35773" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="35811" end="35822" title="oil and gas" label="oil and gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="35850" end="35857" title="Service (economics)" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q476796" start="36063" end="36075" title="call centers" label="call centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="36571" end="36580" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="36606" end="36629" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune &amp;quot;500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988215" start="36639" end="36655" title="Western Refining" label="Western Refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="36680" end="36703" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="36845" end="36852" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="36854" end="36871" title="Dallas-Fort Worth" label="Dallas-Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="36873" end="36884" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="36886" end="36892" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="36898" end="36912" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703474" start="36952" end="36973" title="Helen of Troy Limited" label="Helen of Troy Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="36977" end="36983" title="NASDAQ" label="NASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073184" start="37074" end="37077" title="OXO (kitchen utensils brand)" label="OXO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019662" start="37079" end="37096" title="Dr. Scholl&amp;#x27;s" label="Dr. Scholl&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q313550" start="37098" end="37111" title="Vidal Sassoon" label="Vidal Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170787" start="37113" end="37122" title="Pert Plus" label="Pert Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646092" start="37124" end="37128" title="Brut (cologne)" label="Brut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638891" start="37134" end="37141" title="Sunbeam Bread" label="Sunbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351770" start="37160" end="37176" title="El Paso Electric" label="El Paso Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="37199" end="37213" title="public utility" label="public utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="37648" end="37656" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q489080" start="37658" end="37661" title="Automatic Data Processing" label="ADP"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="37663" end="37669" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066028" start="37671" end="37685" title="Charles Schwab Corporation" label="Charles Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q643626" start="37687" end="37693" title="Delphi (auto parts)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199757" start="37695" end="37707" title="Dish Network" label="Dish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992781" start="37709" end="37715" title="Eureka (company)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535858" start="37717" end="37723" title="The Hoover Company" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="37725" end="37733" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865722" start="37735" end="37739" title="USAA" label="USAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q919641" start="37744" end="37760" title="Verizon Wireless" label="Verizon Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495810" start="38036" end="38055" title="Fred Loya Insurance" label="Fred Loya Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772683" start="38059" end="38071" title="Hispanic 500" label="Hispanic 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299169" start="38166" end="38183" title="Dos Lunas Tequila" label="Dos Lunas Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493536" start="38199" end="38213" title="Spira Footwear" label="Spira Footwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992316" start="38234" end="38246" title="El Taco Tote" label="El Taco Tote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324451" start="38268" end="38287" title="El Paso Corporation" label="El Paso Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711408" start="38397" end="38433" title="William Beaumont Army Medical Center" label="William Beaumont Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="38439" end="38458" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="38635" end="38649" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351778" start="38984" end="39011" title="El Paso Intelligence Center" label="El Paso Intelligence Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269450" start="39013" end="39035" title="Joint Task Force North" label="Joint Task Force North"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="39037" end="39070" title="United States Border Patrol" label="U.S. Border Patrol El Paso Sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q489080" start="39189" end="39214" title="Automatic Data Processing" label="Automatic Data Processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248023" start="41397" end="41435" title="Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association" label="Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036307" start="42485" end="42512" title="Wet N&amp;#x27; Wild Waterworld" label="Wet N&amp;#x27; Wild Waterworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="42949" end="42953" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q142686" start="43677" end="43703" title="Chamizal National Memorial" label="Chamizal National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937456" start="44994" end="45007" title="Viva! El Paso" label="Viva! El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q48802957" start="45927" end="45942" title="Ingeborg Heuser" label="Ingeborg Heuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q573955" start="47191" end="47204" title="Plaza Theatre (El Paso)" label="Plaza Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="47210" end="47252" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Historic Building of Significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q573955" start="47295" end="47324" title="Plaza Theatre (El Paso)" label="Kendall Kidd Performance Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q573955" start="47351" end="47371" title="Plaza Theatre (El Paso)" label="Philanthropy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="47382" end="47390" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q573955" start="47460" end="47487" title="Plaza Theatre (El Paso)" label="Plaza Classic Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q574313" start="47494" end="47516" title="Abraham Chavez Theatre" label="Abraham Chavez Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="47533" end="47545" title="concert hall" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021002" start="47562" end="47588" title="Williams Convention Center" label="Williams Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q326735" start="47621" end="47629" title="sombrero" label="sombrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="48013" end="48021" title="concerts" label="concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="48023" end="48031" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="48039" end="48049" title="graduation" label="graduation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801778" start="48137" end="48154" title="McKelligon Canyon" label="McKelligon Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059184" start="49237" end="49284" title="Centennial Museum and Chihuahuan Desert Gardens" label="Centennial Museum and Chihuahuan Desert Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351781" start="49448" end="49477" title="El Paso Museum of Archaeology" label="El Paso Museum of Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055443" start="49513" end="49536" title="North Franklin Mountain" label="North Franklin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="49739" end="49746" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365527" start="49843" end="49854" title="Hueco Tanks" label="Hueco Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124584" start="49980" end="49992" title="Sierra Madre Occidental" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="49996" end="50005" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351782" start="50047" end="50068" title="El Paso Museum of Art" label="El Paso Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q573955" start="50092" end="50105" title="Plaza Theatre (El Paso)" label="Plaza Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788145" start="50215" end="50222" title="Thomas C. Lea, III" label="Tom Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351776" start="50255" end="50296" title="El Paso Holocaust Museum and Study Center" label="El Paso Holocaust Museum and Study Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911438" start="50337" end="50362" title="El Paso Museum of History" label="El Paso Museum of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711004" start="50441" end="50459" title="Magoffin Homestead" label="Magoffin Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971100" start="50515" end="50544" title="National Border Patrol Museum" label="National Border Patrol Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059780" start="50741" end="50755" title="Ysleta Mission" label="Ysleta Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052256" start="50838" end="50864" title="Cathedral Parish of Saint Patrick (El Paso, Texas)" label="Cathedral of Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q786105" start="50900" end="50933" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q142686" start="50937" end="50963" title="Chamizal National Memorial" label="Chamizal National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351804" start="50966" end="50977" title="El Paso Zoo" label="El Paso Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711004" start="51014" end="51047" title="Magoffin Homestead" label="Magoffin Home State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203610" start="51050" end="51061" title="Plaza Hotel (El Paso)" label="Plaza Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885653" start="51064" end="51075" title="Union Depot (El Paso)" label="Union Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351775" start="51078" end="51097" title="El Paso High School" label="El Paso High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="51100" end="51130" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813537" start="51345" end="51353" title="Sun Bowl" label="Sun Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="51421" end="51430" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711510" start="51572" end="51597" title="Southwest University Park" label="Southwest University Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279091" start="51619" end="51637" title="El Paso Chihuahuas" label="El Paso Chihuahuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="51638" end="51646" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="51653" end="51669" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608236" start="51814" end="51830" title="El Paso Marathon" label="El Paso Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871337" start="51868" end="51889" title="El Paso Locomotive FC" label="El Paso Locomotive FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="51931" end="51947" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491714" start="52100" end="52129" title="Franklin Mountains State Park" label="Franklin Mountains State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="52289" end="52299" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055443" start="52346" end="52369" title="North Franklin Mountain" label="North Franklin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="52579" end="52588" title="city park" label="city park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="52605" end="52614" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="52785" end="52798" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="52811" end="52838" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039908" start="52845" end="52865" title="Wyler Aerial Tramway" label="Wyler Aerial Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707904" start="52885" end="52920" title="Texas Parks and Wildlife Department" label="Texas Parks and Wildlife Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339148" start="53231" end="53235" title="KTSM-FM" label="KTSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365527" start="53818" end="53849" title="Hueco Tanks State Historic Site" label="Hueco Tanks State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365527" start="53882" end="53893" title="Hueco Tanks" label="Hueco Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929184" start="53965" end="53980" title="Hueco Mountains" label="Hueco Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="54175" end="54186" title="pictographs" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q852989" start="54365" end="54375" title="bouldering" label="bouldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="54377" end="54390" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q609276" start="54538" end="54561" title="Grade (bouldering)" label="Hueco bouldering grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087526" start="55329" end="55346" title="San Jacinto Plaza" label="San Jacinto Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351804" start="55610" end="55621" title="El Paso Zoo" label="El Paso Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142686" start="55778" end="55804" title="Chamizal National Memorial" label="Chamizal National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059184" start="56122" end="56147" title="Centennial Museum and Chihuahuan Desert Gardens" label="Chihuahuan Desert Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="57033" end="57048" title="retention basin" label="retention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="57309" end="57317" title="muskrats" label="muskrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q650232" start="57319" end="57341" title="spiny softshell turtle" label="spiny softshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q142985" start="57344" end="57355" title="pond slider" label="pond slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137341" start="57362" end="57398" title="Aspidoscelis inornatus heptagrammus" label="Trans-Pecos striped whiptail lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="58118" end="58148" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815761" start="58579" end="58588" title="Tom Fazio" label="Tom Fazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="58626" end="58631" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="58656" end="58661" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580659" start="58695" end="58703" title="Golfweek" label="Golfweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627506" start="59673" end="59689" title="List of mayors of El Paso, Texas" label="mayor of El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q105203959" start="61001" end="61014" title="Eddie Morales" label="Eddie Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779652" start="61016" end="61029" title="Mary Gonzalez" label="Mary Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732801" start="61031" end="61040" title="Joe Moody (Texas)" label="Joe Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q105090898" start="61042" end="61055" title="Claudia Ordaz" label="Claudia Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262124" start="61061" end="61074" title="Vincent Perez (politician)" label="Vincent Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086314" start="61103" end="61115" title="Cesar Blanco" label="Cesar Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="61134" end="61170" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="61277" end="61296" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q979346" start="61305" end="61317" title="Horizon City, Texas" label="Horizon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="61379" end="61389" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="61458" end="61496" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q52274267" start="61549" end="61565" title="Veronica Escobar" label="Veronica Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="61642" end="61652" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q104648170" start="61653" end="61666" title="Tony Gonzales" label="Tony Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="61708" end="61716" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q719568" start="61731" end="61742" title="John Cornyn" label="John Cornyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="61793" end="61823" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708149" start="62180" end="62235" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at El Paso" label="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063124" start="62237" end="62270" title="Paul L. Foster School of Medicine" label="Paul L. Foster School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366812" start="62319" end="62337" title="Brightwood College" label="Brightwood College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568903" start="62339" end="62354" title="Park University" label="Park University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465303" start="62378" end="62396" title="Webster University" label="Webster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889100" start="62405" end="62426" title="University of Phoenix" label="University of Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="62484" end="62511" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351764" start="62587" end="62612" title="El Paso Community College" label="El Paso Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466629" start="62701" end="62719" title="For-profit education" label="for profit schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877933" start="62756" end="62782" title="Doña Ana Community College" label="Doña Ana Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="62889" end="62916" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351777" start="63035" end="63070" title="El Paso Independent School District" label="El Paso Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059782" start="63072" end="63106" title="Ysleta Independent School District" label="Ysleta Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553071" start="63108" end="63143" title="Socorro Independent School District" label="Socorro Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034125" start="63148" end="63185" title="Canutillo Independent School District" label="Canutillo Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052235" start="63426" end="63447" title="Cathedral High School (Texas)" label="Cathedral High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681007" start="63449" end="63464" title="Loretto Academy (El Paso, Texas)" label="Loretto Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437666" start="63466" end="63490" title="Father Yermo High School" label="Father Yermo High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707669" start="63492" end="63517" title="Lydia Patterson Institute" label="Lydia Patterson Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351791" start="64007" end="64029" title="El Paso Public Library" label="El Paso Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720972" start="64319" end="64332" title="El Paso Times" label="El Paso Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720904" start="64390" end="64410" title="El Diario de El Paso" label="El Diario de El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351774" start="64449" end="64468" title="El Paso Herald-Post" label="El Paso Herald-Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="65138" end="65160" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="65166" end="65190" title="Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua" label="Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710562" start="65378" end="65385" title="KCOS (TV)" label="KCOS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706032" start="65440" end="65444" title="KRWG-TV" label="KRWG"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="65451" end="65461" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="65673" end="65684" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="65707" end="65711" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="65713" end="65716" title="KCAL-TV" label="KHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="65718" end="65722" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327204" start="65727" end="65731" title="KCOP" label="KCOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333480" start="65769" end="65773" title="KMEX" label="KMEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340518" start="65793" end="65797" title="KWEX" label="KWEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="65801" end="65812" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607093" start="66132" end="66145" title="2006 United States broadcast TV realignment" label="WB-UPN merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="66151" end="66157" title="The CW Television Network" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340047" start="66164" end="66171" title="KVIA-TV" label="KVIA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="66525" end="66535" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="66549" end="66559" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894821" start="66658" end="66683" title="University Medical Center (El Paso, Texas)" label="University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711408" start="66685" end="66721" title="William Beaumont Army Medical Center" label="William Beaumont Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q30294627" start="66836" end="66868" title="El Paso Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="El Paso Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="66942" end="66963" title="level I trauma center" label="level I trauma center"/>
<link wikidata="Q87742765" start="67442" end="67468" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Texas" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q492013" start="67477" end="67504" title="Refrigerator truck" label="refrigerated morgue trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708149" start="67669" end="67724" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso Campus" label="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063124" start="67726" end="67759" title="Paul L. Foster School of Medicine" label="Paul L. Foster School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708149" start="67948" end="67982" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso Campus" label="Gayle Greve Hunt School of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231062" start="68172" end="68201" title="El Paso International Airport" label="El Paso International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="68206" end="68212" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885653" start="68230" end="68241" title="Union Depot (El Paso)" label="Union Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="68298" end="68302" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818161" start="68304" end="68309" title="U.S. Route 54 in Texas" label="US 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506066" start="68419" end="68427" title="Texas State Highway Spur 601" label="Spur 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878367" start="68450" end="68456" title="U.S. Route 180 in Texas" label="US 180"/>
<link wikidata="Q28122561" start="68461" end="68466" title="U.S. Route 62 in Texas" label="US 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818246" start="68485" end="68498" title="U.S. Route 85 in Texas" label="US Highway 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="68516" end="68524" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Loop 375"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689212" start="68711" end="68716" title="Texas State Highway 20" label="SH 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818220" start="68792" end="68797" title="U.S. Route 80 in Texas" label="US 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303427" start="68882" end="68890" title="Downtown El Paso" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="68996" end="69014" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Transmountain Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413618" start="69488" end="69498" title="modal share" label="mode share"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="69620" end="69630" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231062" start="70084" end="70113" title="El Paso International Airport" label="El Paso International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="70221" end="70231" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823389" start="70317" end="70361" title="El Paso-Las Cruces Combined Statistical Area" label="El Paso-Las Cruces Combined Statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="70364" end="70383" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="70412" end="70422" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="70443" end="70449" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885653" start="70509" end="70520" title="Union Depot (El Paso)" label="Union Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="70536" end="70550" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q756538" start="70551" end="70562" title="Texas Eagle" label="Texas Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="70590" end="70601" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="70606" end="70617" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="70622" end="70633" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="70638" end="70645" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="70674" end="70681" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="70702" end="70712" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="70746" end="70750" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="70755" end="70768" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="70796" end="70800" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="70902" end="70913" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="70915" end="70922" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="70924" end="70930" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="70932" end="70943" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="70945" end="70952" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="70954" end="70965" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="70967" end="70978" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="70980" end="70988" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="70993" end="70999" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="71030" end="71042" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="71072" end="71076" title="Interstate 25" label="I-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="71112" end="71123" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="71125" end="71133" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="71135" end="71151" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="71153" end="71159" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="71161" end="71173" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="71175" end="71183" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q223177" start="71185" end="71191" title="Casper, Wyoming" label="Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q983453" start="71244" end="71260" title="Buffalo, Wyoming" label="Buffalo, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818161" start="71264" end="71269" title="U.S. Route 54 in Texas" label="US 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q28122561" start="71606" end="71611" title="U.S. Route 62 in Texas" label="US 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818246" start="71787" end="71792" title="U.S. Route 85 in Texas" label="US 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878367" start="71915" end="71921" title="U.S. Route 180 in Texas" label="US 180"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="72008" end="72026" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689212" start="72042" end="72047" title="Texas State Highway 20" label="SH 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407658" start="72129" end="72135" title="Texas State Highway 178" label="SH 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="72305" end="72313" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Loop 375"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="72753" end="72757" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059777" start="72940" end="72946" title="Ysleta, El Paso, Texas" label="Ysleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506066" start="72955" end="72963" title="Texas State Highway Spur 601" label="Spur 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818161" start="73230" end="73235" title="U.S. Route 54 in Texas" label="US 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="73241" end="73260" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="73299" end="73307" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Loop 375"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505854" start="73725" end="73747" title="Texas State Highway Loop 375" label="Border West Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638408" start="73861" end="73890" title="Sun Metro Mass Transit System" label="Sun Metro Mass Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744768" start="74141" end="74183" title="American Public Transportation Association" label="American Public Transportation Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q107335262" start="74283" end="74322" title="South Central Regional Transit District" label="South Central Regional Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002908" start="74359" end="74383" title="Sunland Park, New Mexico" label="Sunland Park, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056427" start="74388" end="74407" title="Anthony, New Mexico" label="Anthony, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715003" start="74432" end="74451" title="NMDOT Park and Ride" label="NMDOT Park and Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="74501" end="74523" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="74579" end="74588" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="74872" end="74882" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351770" start="74951" end="74967" title="El Paso Electric" label="El Paso Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971506" start="75065" end="75084" title="National City Lines" label="National City Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404432" start="75545" end="75562" title="El Paso Streetcar" label="El Paso Streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="75568" end="75577" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q928708" start="75659" end="75672" title="PCC streetcar" label="PCC streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303427" start="75798" end="75814" title="Downtown El Paso" label="Downtown El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="75818" end="75848" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309100" start="75916" end="75943" title="Regional Mobility Authority" label="Regional Mobility Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638408" start="76034" end="76043" title="Sun Metro" label="Sun Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="76413" end="76425" title="Nueva España" label="Nueva España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691052" start="76519" end="76541" title="Paso del Norte International Bridge" label="Santa Fe Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966455" start="76641" end="76663" title="Bridge of the Americas (El Paso – Ciudad Juárez)" label="Bridge of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114896" start="76700" end="76734" title="Good Neighbor International Bridge" label="Good Neighbor International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691052" start="76777" end="76812" title="Paso del Norte International Bridge" label="Paso del Norte International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059787" start="76857" end="76893" title="Ysleta–Zaragoza International Bridge" label="Ysleta–Zaragoza International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q239928" start="77089" end="77109" title="Kay Bailey Hutchison" label="Kay Bailey Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="77147" end="77158" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="77167" end="77174" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="77237" end="77252" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="77271" end="77281" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="77550" end="77571" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="77574" end="77596" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629947" start="77613" end="77642" title="List of museums in West Texas" label="List of museums in West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632396" start="77644" end="77678" title="List of people from El Paso, Texas" label="List of people from El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975989" start="77680" end="77750" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in El Paso County, Texas" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673238" start="77752" end="77778" title="El Paso in popular culture" label="El Paso in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="77980" end="77991" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135824" wikidata="Q981916" url="?curid=135824" title="Fabens, Texas">
<text>Fabens is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 8,257 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area. The ZIP Codes encompassing the CDP area are 79836 and 79838.

Fabens is the birthplace of jockey Bill Shoemaker.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.52%, is water.

Fabens is approximately southeast of El Paso along the Rio Grande and Interstate Highway 10. Most visitors only stop for short periods of time to eat at one of the several restaurants or stay overnight in the hotel.

==History==
The city name of Fabens comes from attorney George Wilson Fabens, who worked for the Southern Pacific Railroad. He was the assistant land commissioner for the Southern Pacific Lines in Texas and Louisiana. As the railroad was being built, new towns were named after railroad officers.

===Film location===

In April 1972, Fabens served as a location for the filming of the Sam Peckinpah film &quot;The Getaway&quot;.

===Medical Services===

Dr. Angus Treece owned Fabens Hospital and served the Fabens community for twenty three years before he died on September 9, 1963. He was fifty seven when he died. Dr. Treece also owned the Sunrise Medical Clinic in El Paso.
In 1964, Dr. Francisco Vilorio became the owner of Fabens Hospital. He died on January 24, 2019.

===2005 border incident===
On February 17, 2005, Fabens was the nearest location to a border incident that made national headlines, when Border Patrol agents Ignacio Ramos and Jose Compean were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of eleven and ten years, respectively, for shooting Osbaldo Aldrete-Davila, an undocumented immigrant and alleged drug smuggler who was unarmed when he was shot. Aldrete-Davila was given immunity for his testimony and sued the Border Patrol for $5 million for violation of his civil rights.

Ramos and Compean had their sentences commuted by President George W. Bush during his last full day in office on January 19, 2009, although they did not receive a pardon for their convictions. They were released from prison on March 20, 2009, and in December 2020 President Donald Trump pardoned them for their crimes.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 7,498 people, 1,511 households, and 1,045 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 8,043 people, 2,147 households, and 1,874 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,279 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP is 74.01% White, 0.57% African American, 0.80% Native American, 0.02% Asian, 0.00% Pacific Islander, 21.73% from other races, and 2.86% from two or more races. 96.16% of the population are Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 2,147 households, out of which 55.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.7% were married couples living together, 23.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 12.7% were non-families. 11.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.75 and the average family size was 4.07.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 39.3% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 15.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 25 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.9 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $18,486, and the median income for a family was $20,451. Males had a median income of $17,432 versus $16,354 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $6,647. About 41.2% of families and 43.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 49.4% of those under age 18 and 40.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
* Fabens is served by the Fabens Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981916" start="0" end="6" title="Fabens, Texas" label="Fabens"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="12" end="35" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="45" end="59" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="61" end="66" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="115" end="126" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="146" end="153" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="154" end="183" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="189" end="197" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q718423" start="282" end="296" title="Bill Shoemaker" label="Bill Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="330" end="357" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="488" end="498" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="503" end="524" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="Interstate Highway 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461" start="1035" end="1048" title="Sam Peckinpah" label="Sam Peckinpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q471864" start="1054" end="1077" title="The Getaway (1972 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Getaway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="1513" end="1519" title="Mexico–United States border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="1564" end="1577" title="United States Border Patrol" label="Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992412" start="1585" end="1598" title="Ignacio Ramos" label="Ignacio Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279315" start="1603" end="1615" title="Jose Compean" label="Jose Compean"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="1775" end="1788" title="drug smuggler" label="drug smuggler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680961" start="1848" end="1856" title="Witness immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1938" end="1950" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16176775" start="1991" end="1999" title="commutation of sentence" label="commuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="2013" end="2027" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="2116" end="2122" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="2227" end="2239" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2318" end="2343" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2457" end="2463" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2682" end="2687" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2695" end="2711" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2719" end="2734" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2742" end="2747" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2755" end="2771" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2785" end="2796" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2861" end="2869" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2873" end="2879" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3004" end="3019" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3813" end="3830" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3922" end="3934" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427598" start="4050" end="4084" title="Fabens Independent School District" label="Fabens Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135825" wikidata="Q707110" url="?curid=135825" title="Fort Bliss">
<text>Fort Bliss is a United States Army post in New Mexico and Texas, with its headquarters in El Paso, Texas. Established in 1848, the fort was renamed in 1854 to honor Bvt.Lieut.Colonel William W.S. Bliss (1815–1853), U.S. Army officer, Private Secretary and son-in-law of President Zachary Taylor.

Fort Bliss has an area of about ; it is the largest installation in FORSCOM (United States Army Forces Command) and second-largest in the Army overall (the largest being the adjacent White Sands Missile Range). The portion of the post located in El Paso County, Texas, is a census-designated place with a population of 8,591 as of the time of the 2010 census. Fort Bliss provides the largest contiguous tract () of restricted airspace in the Continental United States, used for missile and artillery training and testing, and at boasts the largest maneuver area (ahead of the National Training Center, which has ). The garrison&#x27;s land area is accounted at , ranging to the boundaries of the Lincoln National Forest and White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. Fort Bliss also includes the Castner Range National Monument.

== Units ==
Fort Bliss is home to the 1st Armored Division, which returned to US soil in 2011 after 40 years in Germany. The division is supported by the 1st Armored Division Sustainment Brigade. The installation is also home to Joint Task Force North (JTF), a joint service command. JTF North supports federal law enforcement agencies in the conduct of counterdrug/counter transnational organized crime operations; it facilitates DoD training in the United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) area of responsibility to disrupt transnational criminal organizations and deter their freedom of action in order to protect the homeland and increase DoD unit readiness. The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command (AAMDC) is a theater level Army air and missile defense multi component organization with a worldwide, 72 hour deployment mission. It is the Army Forces Command and Joint Force Land Component Commanders&#x27; (ARFOR / JFLCC) organization that performs critical theater air and missile defense planning, integration, coordination, and execution functions. The Joint Modernization Command (JMC) plans, prepares, and executes Joint Warfighting Assessments and other concept and capability assessments, provides objective analysis and feasible recommendations to enhance Multi Domain Command and Control and inform Army Modernization decisions. On order, JMC conducts directed assessments in support of the Cross Functional Teams of Army Futures Command.

== 1st Armored Division ==
1st Armored Division units include: 1st Brigade Combat Team, 1st Armored Division (&quot;Ready First&quot;) is prepared to deploy, conduct decisive and sustainable land operations in support of a division, Joint Task Force, or Multinational Force. The Brigade will be trained and ready to conduct decisive action as part of Combined Arms Maneuver or Wide Area Security operations IOT disrupt or destroy enemy military forces, control land, and be prepared to conduct combat operations to protect U.S. national interests.

2nd Brigade Combat Team, 1st Armored Division (&quot;Strike&quot;) is prepared to deploy, conduct decisive and sustainable land operations in support of a division, Joint Task Force, or Multinational Force. The Brigade will be trained and ready to conduct decisive action as part of Combined Arms Maneuver or Wide Area Security operations IOT disrupt or destroy enemy military forces, control land, and be prepared to conduct combat operations to protect U.S. national interests.

3rd Brigade Combat Team, 1st Armored Division (&quot;Bulldog&quot;) is prepared to deploy, conduct decisive and sustainable land operations in support of a division, Joint Task Force, or Multinational Force. The Brigade will be trained and ready to conduct decisive action as part of Combined Arms Maneuver or Wide Area Security operations IOT disrupt or destroy enemy military forces, control land, and be prepared to conduct combat operations to protect U.S. national interests.

1st Armored Division Combat Aviation Brigade (&quot;Iron Eagles&quot;) conducts aviation operations to support geographic combatant commanders conducting unified land operations.

1st Armored Division Artillery (&quot;Iron Steel&quot;) provides direct support, precision strike, and Joint Fires capability to the 1st Armored Division for Unified Land Operations in support of the Division&#x27;s contingency operations. 1AD DIVARTY provides trained and ready fire support forces and assists BCT Commanders in training their fire support systems.

1st Armored Division Sustainment (&quot;Muleskinners&quot;) provides mission command of assigned, attached, and OPCON Echelons above Brigade sustainment units and synchronize distribution and sustainment operations in support of 1st Armored Division, and other aligned units. On order, rapidly deploy to designated contingency areas; receive, integrate, and provide mission command of sustainment units providing operational and tactical sustainment; and perform theater opening, theater distribution, and sustainment operations in support of Unified Land Operations.

== Additional units/agencies ==

The NCO Leadership Center of Excellence (NCOL CoE): Academic institution for noncommissioned officers aligned under Army University and the Combined Arms Command, with additional reporting to Training and Doctrine Command. Provides professional military education to DoD and allied noncommissioned officers.

The United States Army Sergeants Major Academy (USASMA) was accredited as a branch campus of the Command and General Staff College (CGSC) in 2018. CGSC Combined Arms Center Execution Order, dated 21 March 2018, made USASMA the 4th campus of CGSC. On 21 June 2019 USASMA Class 69 became the first students from the Sergeants Major Course to earn Bachelors of Arts in Leadership and Workforce Development (Staff College) through USASMA. The accreditation process took 10 years, beginning with the last officer commandant, Col. Donald E. Gentry.

The 11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade: Known as the &quot;Imperial&quot; Brigade, it strategically deploys combat ready units globally in support of the 32nd AAMDC to conduct joint and combined air and missile defense operations in order to protect the Combatant Commander&#x27;s critical priorities. O/O, conducts reset and training of Patriot, Avenger Iron Dome, and Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) units.

William Beaumont Army Medical Center (WBAMC)

The 5th Armored Brigade: The brigade plans, coordinates, synchronizes, and supports the pre/post mobilization training and demobilization of Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve units in order to provide trained and ready forces for worldwide contingencies. On order, deploys exportable OC/T teams in support of the Army Total Force Policy.

The Fort Bliss Mobilization Brigade: The brigade provides all administrative and logistical aspects of Title 10 support to mobilizing/demobilizing units. Act as focal point for installation support and quality of life issues. Coordinate requirements and integrate mobilization support. Provides personnel and logistical readiness validation input.

The CONUS Replacement Center: CRC receives, processes, equips, and conducts Theater Specific Individual Requirements Training (TSIRT) for military Non Unit Related Personnel (NRP), Department of Defense (DoD) Civilians, and Non Logistics Civil Augmentation Program (Non LOGCAP) Contactors deploying to and redeploying from theaters of operations in support of overseas contingency operations.

The Army Field Support Battalion (AFSBn): AFSBn is responsible for enhancing the readiness of Active, Reserve and National Guard units and continuously synchronizing the distribution of sustainment materiel and force projection at the Installation and field level in order to support the Materiel Enterprise and combat readiness of supported units and contingency operations.

The Network Enterprise Command: This unit defends the security of the Army Global Network Construct, provides transparent delivery of Command, Control, Communications and Computer (C4) Information Technology (IT services to customers).

The Civilian Personnel Advisory Center (CPAC) -- Desert Mountain: CPAC is responsible for assisting customers in recruiting, developing and sustaining a professional civilian workforce through human resource products and advisory services.

The headquarters for the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC), a federal tactical operational intelligence center, is hosted at Fort Bliss. Its DoD (United States Department of Defense) counterpart, Joint Task Force North, is at Biggs Army Airfield. Biggs Field, a military airport located at Fort Bliss, is designated a military power projection platform.

Fort Bliss National Cemetery is located on the post. Other forts in the frontier fort system were Forts Griffin, Concho, Belknap, Chadbourne, Stockton, Davis, Richardson, McKavett, Clark, McIntosh, Inge, and Phantom Hill in Texas, and Fort Sill in Oklahoma. There were &quot;sub posts or intermediate stations&quot; including Bothwick&#x27;s Station on Salt Creek between Fort Richardson and Fort Belknap, Camp Wichita near Buffalo Springs between Fort Richardson and Red River Station, and Mountain Pass between Fort Concho and Fort Griffin.

==Infrastructure==
* DoD&#x27;s second largest installation at 1.12M acres; abuts the largest, White Sands Missile Range
* Maneuver acreage (heavy and light): 924,640.2 acres
* Only Digital Air Ground Integration Range (DAGIR) built to full Army specifications
* Longest runway in the Army, 8th in DoD
* Major trauma center (plus the new WBAMC)
* One of the largest single solar residential community in the continental US (4K+ homes) with potential to expand
* Total building gross square footage (GSF) (less housing): 24,499,406 SF; 2,139 total buildings

==History==

===Early locations===

====Post opposite El Paso del Norte (1849–1854)====

In 1846, Colonel Alexander Doniphan led 1st Regiment of Missouri mounted volunteers through El Paso del Norte, with victories at the Battle of El Brazito and the Battle of the Sacramento. Then on 7 November 1848, War Department General Order no. 58 ordered the establishment of a post across from El Paso del Norte (now Ciudad Juárez). On 8 September 1849, the garrison party of several companies of the 3rd U.S. Infantry (&#x27;The Old Guard&#x27;, currently the oldest active duty regiment in the US Army), commanded by Major Jefferson Van Horne, found only four small and scattered settlements on the north side of the Rio Grande. The &quot;Post Opposite El Paso del Norte&quot; was first established at the site of Coon&#x27;s Ranch (often erroneously referred to as Smith&#x27;s Ranch, now downtown El Paso) and, along with Fort Selden and other Southwestern outposts, protected recently won territory from harassing Apaches and Comanches, provided law and order, and escorted the forty-niners. Van Horne also had nominal command of the Post at San Elizario, the former &quot;Presidio of San Elizario&quot;, seventeen miles downstream from El Paso del Norte. With constant Indian raids, garrisons had to be moved frequently to meet the shifting threats. In September 1851, the Post Opposite El Paso and the Post at San Elizario were closed, the soldiers moved north to Fort Fillmore.

==== Post of El Paso (1854), Fort Bliss, (1854–1868) ====
On 11 January 1854, Companies B, E, I and K of the 8th Infantry, under the command of Lt. Col. Edmund B. Alexander, established Post of El Paso at Magoffinsville under orders from Secretary of War Jefferson Davis. The post was named &#x27;Fort Bliss&#x27; on 8 March 1854 in honor of Lt. Col. William Wallace Smith Bliss, a veteran of the Mexican War (1846–1848) who was cited for gallantry in action.

There it remained for the next 14 years, serving as a base for troops guarding the area against Apache attacks. Until 1861 most of these troops were units of the 8th Infantry Regiment. At the outbreak of the American Civil War, David E. Twiggs, the Commander of the Department of Texas, ordered the garrison to surrender Fort Bliss to the Confederacy, which Col. Isaac Van Duzen Reeve did on 31 March 1861. (Companies B, E, F, H, I, and K were captured by the Confederacy and remained prisoners of war until 25 February 1863 in Texas, with Company A returning safely to the North with their Colors on 26 May 1861.) Confederate forces consisting of the 2nd Regiment of Texas, under the command of Col. John R. Baylor, took the post on 1 July 1861, and used it as a platform to launch attacks into New Mexico and Arizona in an effort to force the Union garrisons still in these states to surrender. Initially the Confederate Army had success in their attempts to gain control of New Mexico, but following the Battle of Glorieta Pass, the Confederate soldiers were forced to retreat when their supply lines were cut. The Confederate garrison abandoned Fort Bliss without a fight the next year when a Federal column of 2,350 men under the command of Colonel James H. Carleton advanced from California. The Californians maintained an irregular garrison at Fort Bliss until 1865, when 5th Infantry units arrived to reestablish the post; these were subsequently relieved by the 25th Infantry, Buffalo Soldiers, on 12 August 1866, followed by the 35th Infantry two months later.

====Camp Concordia (1868–1876)====
After May 1867 Rio Grande flooding seriously damaged the Magoffinsville post, Fort Bliss was moved to a site called &#x27;Camp Concordia&#x27; in March 1868. Camp Concordia&#x27;s location was immediately south of what is now Interstate 10, across from Concordia Cemetery in El Paso. The Rio Grande was about a mile south of the camp at that time; water was hauled daily by mule team to the camp. On 11 March 1869 the old name of Fort Bliss was resumed. Water, heating, and sanitation facilities were at a minimum in the adobe buildings of the fort; records reveal that troops suffered severely from dysentery and malaria and that supplies arrived irregularly over the Santa Fe Trail by wagon train. The Concordia post was abandoned in January 1877, and after troops left in January, El Paso was without a garrison for more than a year. By that time, the town and its environs on the north side of the river had swelled to a population of almost 800.

==== Hart&#x27;s Mill (1878–1893) ====
On New Year&#x27;s Day,1878, Fort Bliss was established as a permanent post; the Company L Buffalo Soldiers of the Ninth Cavalry and Company C of the 15th Infantry, were sent to Fort Bliss to prevent further trouble over the salt beds and the usage of Rio Grande water for irrigation purposes. Prior to this date, the government had had a policy of simply leasing property for its military installations. Now, however, a tract of was purchased at Hart&#x27;s Mill on the river&#x27;s edge in the Pass, near what is today the UTEP. With a $40,000 appropriation, a building program was begun. The first railroad arrived in 1881, and tracks were laid across the military reservation, thereby solving the supply problems for the fort and the rapidly growing town of El Paso. By 1890, Hart&#x27;s Mill had outlived its usefulness, and Congress appropriated $150,000 for construction of a military installation on the mesa approximately east of El Paso&#x27;s 1890 city limits. Although no money was appropriated for the land, $8,250 was easily raised by the local residents, who realized the economic benefit to the area.

==== Present site (1893–today) ====
The present site of Fort Bliss on La Noria mesa, was laid out by Captain John Ruhlen from 1891 to 1892 and was first occupied by four companies of the 18th Infantry in October 1893.

===Pershing expedition===
In January 1914, John J. Pershing arrived in El Paso to take command of the Army 8th Brigade that was stationed at Fort Bliss. At the time, the Mexican Revolution was underway in Mexico, and the 8th Brigade had been assigned the task of securing the Mexico–United States border. In March 1915, under the command of General Frederick Funston, Pershing led the 8th Brigade on the failed 1916–1917 Punitive Expedition into Mexico in search of outlaw Pancho Villa.

On Friday, 11 March 2016, members of the 2nd Squadron, 13th Cavalry Regiment, (3rd BCT, 1st Armored Division, Fort Bliss) conducted a staff ride at Pancho Villa State Park, NM, the former site of Camp Furlong, 2nd Squadron&#x27;s billet in 1915. They reviewed the terrain of the 9 March 1916 raid by Pancho Villa&#x27;s forces on the unit 100 years before. 2nd Squadron then participated in a parade with reenactors, and Roll Call of the fallen.

During this time, the military airfield in El Paso would become one of the homes to the United States Army Border Air Patrol and the 1st Aero Squadron, the U.S. Army&#x27;s first tactical unit equipped with airplanes.

===World War I and postwar===
As American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) commander (1917–1918), John J. Pershing transferred to Fort Bliss and was responsible for the organization, training, and supply of an inexperienced force that eventually grew from 27,000 men to over 2,000,000—the National Army of World War I.

From 10 December 1917 – 12 May 1918, the wartime 15th Cavalry Division existed at Fort Bliss. Similarly, the Headquarters, 2nd Cavalry Brigade was initially activated at Fort Bliss on 10 December 1917 and then deactivated in July 1919, but then reactivated at Fort Bliss on 31 August 1920. Predominantly a cavalry post since 1912, Fort Bliss acquired three light armored cars, eight medium armored cars, two motorcycles, and two trucks on 8 November 1928.

===World War II and postwar===
During World War II, Fort Bliss focused on training anti-aircraft artillery battalions (AAA). In September 1940 the Coast Artillery&#x27;s anti-aircraft training center was established, and in 1941 the 1st Tow Target Squadron arrived to fly target drones (the 6th, 19th, and 27th Tow Target Squadrons were at the nearby Biggs Field). On 3 August 1944, the Anti-Aircraft Artillery School was ordered from Camp Davis to Fort Bliss to make the training of anti-aircraft gunners easier, and they became the dominant force at Fort Bliss following the departure of the U.S. 1st Cavalry Division. On 15 September 1942, the War Dept. made space available for handling up to 1,350 POWs, while POW camps could be constructed. During the war, the base was used to hold approximately 91 German, Italian, and Japanese Americans from Hawaii (then a territory), who were arrested as potential fifth columnists but, in most cases, denied due process.


By February 1946, over 100 Operation Paperclip German scientists and engineers had arrived to develop rockets and were attached to the Office of the Chief of Ordnance Corps, Research and Development Service, Suboffice (Rocket), headed by Major James P. Hamill. Although these men were initially &quot;pretty much kept &quot; (resulting in the nickname &quot;Operation Icebox&quot;), they were subsequently divided into a research group and a group who assisted with V-2 test launches at White Sands Proving Grounds. German families began arriving in December 1946, and by the spring of 1948, the number of German rocket specialists (nicknamed &quot;Prisoners of Peace&quot;) in the US was 127. Fort Bliss rocket launches included firings of the Private missile at the Hueco Range in April 1945. In 1953, funding cuts caused the cancellation of work on the Hermes B2 ramjet work that had begun at Fort Bliss.

In late 1953 after troops had been trained at the Ft Bliss Guided Missile School, field-firing operations of the MGM-5 Corporal were underway at Red Canyon Range Camp, WSPG. In April 1950, the 1st Guided Missile Group named the Republic-Ford JB-2 the ARMY LOON.

===Cold War===

Fort Bliss trained thousands of U.S. Soldiers during the Cold War. As the United States gradually came to master the art of building and operating missiles, Fort Bliss and White Sands Missile Range became more and more important to the country, and were expanded accordingly. On 1 July 1957 the U.S. Army Air Defense Center was established at Fort Bliss. Located at this center, in addition to Center Headquarters, are the U.S. Army Air Defense School; Air Defense; the 6th Artillery Group (Air Defense); the 61st Ordnance Group; and other supporting elements. In 1957 Fort Bliss and its anti-aircraft personnel began using Nike Ajax, Nike Hercules, Hawk, Sprint, Chaparral, and Redeye missiles. Fort Bliss took on the important role of providing a large area for troops to conduct live fire exercises with the missiles.

Because of the large number of Army personnel enrolled in the air defense school, Fort Bliss saw two large rounds of construction in 1954 and 1958. The former was aimed at creating more barracks facilities, while the latter was aimed at building new classrooms, materials labs, a radar park, and a missile laboratory. Between 1953 and 1957 the Army also expanded McGregor Range in an effort to accommodate live fire exercises of the new missile systems. Throughout the Cold War Fort Bliss remained a premier site for testing anti-aircraft equipment.

Fort Bliss was used as the Desert Stage of the Ranger School training course to prepare Ranger School graduates for operations in the deserts of the Middle East. From 1983 to 1987, Fort Bliss was home to the Ranger School&#x27;s newly formed 4th (Desert Ranger) Training Company. This unit was later expanded in 1987 to form the newly created Ranger Training Brigade&#x27;s short-lived 7th Ranger Training Battalion, which was then transferred to the Dugway Proving Grounds in Utah. The deserts of Utah proved to be unsuitable so the 7th Ranger Training Battalion was returned to Fort Bliss from 1991 until the Ranger School&#x27;s Desert Phase was discontinued in 1995.

While the United States Army Air Defense Artillery School develops doctrine and tactics, training current and future soldiers has always been its core mission. Until 1990 the post was used for Basic Training and Advanced Individual Training (AIT), under the 1/56 ADA Regiment and 2/56 ADA Regiment, part of 6th ADA. Before 1989, 1/56 had three basic training companies and two AIT batteries. After 1990, 1/56 dropped basic training, that mission assumed by Fort Sill. The unit now had four enlisted batteries for enlisted AIT, one battery for the Officer&#x27;s Basic Course and Captain&#x27;s Career Course (added in 2004) and one company that trained army truck drivers (MOS 88M).

===Base realignment and closure===
In 1995, the Department of Defense recommended that the U.S. 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment be relocated to Fort Carson, Colorado. Efforts to consolidate units from another post with those units that remained at Fort Bliss were overruled by the Base Realignment and Closing Commission, leaving Fort Bliss without any armored vehicles. Units operating the US Army&#x27;s MIM-104 Patriot Missile Defense System relocated to Fort Bliss during the 1990s. The Patriot system played an important role in the Persian Gulf War/Operation Desert Storm in 1991. In commemoration, the US 54 expressway in northeast El Paso was designated the Patriot Freeway.

===War on terror===
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Fort Bliss provided ADA Battalions for US and NATO use in Afghanistan and Iraq, and has served as one of the major deployment centers for troops bound for Iraq and Afghanistan. This mission is accomplished via nearby Biggs Army Airfield, which is included in the installation&#x27;s supporting areas. Following the War in Afghanistan (2001–present) in 2001 Fort Bliss began training Afghan security forces at the U.S. Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, with the hope that these newly trained soldiers would eventually be able to take control of their own national security.

===Base Realignment and Closure, 2005===

In 2005, the Pentagon recommended transforming Fort Bliss into a heavy armor training post, to include approximately 11,500 new troops from the U.S. 1st Armored Division – at that time stationed in Germany – as well as units from Fort Sill and Fort Hood. An estimated 15,918 military jobs and 384 civilian jobs were planned to be transferred to Fort Bliss, brought the total number of troops stationed at Fort Bliss under this alignment to a total of 33,500 by 2012. Officials from Fort Bliss and the City of El Paso were thrilled with the decision; the general mood of the city government was perfectly captured by 14 May edition of the &quot;El Paso Times&quot;, which boldly proclaimed &quot;BLISS WINS BIG&quot;.

According to Senator Eliot Shapleigh, the BRAC commission considered three primary factors to make its decision: The military value of Fort Bliss, the potential for other branches of the armed service to use a post as large as Fort Bliss, and the lack of urban encroachment around Fort Bliss that would otherwise hinder its growth. The arrival of the 11,500 troops from the 1st Armored Division is also expected to create some 20,196 direct and indirect military and civilian jobs in El Paso. According to the Department of Defense, this is the largest net gain in the United States tied to the Base Realignment and Closure recommendations. Of the 20,196 new jobs expected to come to El Paso as a result of Bliss&#x27;s realignment 9,000 would be indirect civilian jobs created by the influx of soldiers to the &quot;Sun City&quot;. When the BRAC commission recommendations were released Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison&#x27;s spokesman reported that El Paso was the only area that came out with a major gain of forces.

The news that El Paso had been selected to receive major elements of the 1st Armored Division was met with joy, but at the same time many expressed surprise at the panel&#x27;s recommendation to transfer the Air Defense Artillery School, 6th ADA Brigade, and its accompanying equipment (including the MIM-104 Patriot Missile Anti-Aircraft/Anti Missile defense system) to Fort Sill. On 25 August officials representing Fort Bliss went before the BRAC Commission to plead their case for maintaining the ADA school and its accompanying equipment at Fort Bliss, citing among other thing the size of Fort Bliss and the history of the ADA school in the region. The BRAC Commission ultimately ruled against Fort Bliss, and the roughly 4,500 affected soldiers were transferred to Fort Sill, Oklahoma. The entire transfer of soldiers to and from Fort Bliss was completed no later than 15 September 2011.

On 25 June 2009, authority over the post was shifted from Training and Doctrine Command to Forces Command.

==Description==
Among Fort Bliss&#x27;s missions:
* Home of America&#x27;s Tank Division, 1st AD (One of 10 active divisions in the Army)
* Largest Joint Mobilization Force Generation Installation (JMFGI) in DoD (FY19: over 72K): 49K MOB/DeMOB/CRC; 23K Pre Mobilization Exercise Training (PMET)
* One of the largest Power Projection Platforms in the Army
* Home to the Army&#x27;s ONLY CONUS Replacement Center (CRC)
* Interagency operations: El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC), Joint Task Force North (JTF-N), Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
* Joint Modernization Command (JMC)(Futures Command) conducts Joint Warfighter Assessments/Enhance Multi-Domain C2/Informs Army Modernization
* Ability to fire any weapon (pistol to missile)
* Provide anti-aircraft and missile defense capabilities.
* Conduct live fire exercises of nearly every type of Army weapon.
* Host joint military exercises with other U.S. and foreign units,
* Be home to many maintenance crews and supply units.
* Be one of the Army&#x27;s premier bases for test-driving tanks and other equipment.
* House thousands of military vehicles, including all the equipment needed to set up Patriot missile sites.
* Hosted the USAADCEN Air Defense Artillery Center from 1942 to 2010. USAADCEN has completed its transfer to Fort Sill. Concomitantly, the German Air Force Air Defense school is going to move to new training facilities in Germany and Greece. In 2013, the German Air Force deactivated its presence at Fort Bliss, while retaining a presence at Holloman Air Force Base; over the previous 47 years, over 50,000 German Airmen received training at this command. In 2015, due to funding constraints on the planned new facilities in Europe, the German Air Force Air Defense school will stay open at Fort Bliss until 2020.
* Monitor missile launches conducted by White Sands Missile Range, located to the north, in New Mexico.
* Host the CONUS Replacement Center (CRC), the unit-level training site for Soldiers, Sailors, and Airmen who are deploying or re-deploying on an individual basis. This CRC consolidates several other centers and now serves the entire Continental United States (CONUS).
* A secured drone airfield, with a separate 5000 foot runway and dedicated hangar, 20–25 miles north of the main post is under construction, with completion expected by 2016. It will host a company of 9 MQ-1C Gray Eagles for First Armored Division.
Training missions are supported by the McGregor Range Complex, located some to the northeast of the main post, in New Mexico. Most of Fort Bliss lies in the state of New Mexico, stretching northeastward along U.S. Route 54 from El Paso County, Texas to the southern boundary of the Lincoln National Forest in Otero County, New Mexico; in addition, much of the northwestward side of Highway 54 is part of the Fort Bliss Military Reservation, ranging from the northern side of Chaparral, New Mexico to the southern boundary of White Sands Missile Range; the main facilities are within the city limits of El Paso, Texas. According to the city zoning map, the post officially resides in Central El Paso.
Fort Bliss K–12 Schools
Bliss Elementary
Logan Elementary
Milam Elementary
Colin Powell Elementary
Chapin High
Separate from the main post are the William Beaumont Army Medical Center (which also serves the warrior transition battalion for the post&#x27;s wounded warriors) and a Department of Veterans Affairs center at the eastern base of the Franklin Mountains. All of these supporting missions serve the military and retired-military population here, including having served General of the Army Omar N. Bradley in his last days. A new warrior transition complex, located at Marshall and Cassidy roads, was opened in June 2011 to replace the older facility serving the warrior transition battalion. A new location for William Beaumont Army Medical Center, to be located at Spur 601 and Loop 375, is now rescheduled to be completed in September 2019.

The installation is also close to the El Paso Airport (with easy access from the post via Buffalo Soldier Road), Highway 54, and Interstate 10. There is a replica of the Magoffinsville site for Fort Bliss on post, simulating the adobe style of construction. Other items of interest include the Buffalo Soldier memorial statue at the Buffalo Soldier Gate of entry to the post, and a missile museum on Pleasanton Road.

The walls of the old Fort Bliss Officers Club contain adobe bricks that are more than a century old. The building houses a Family Readiness Group, where new personnel can learn about the post&#x27;s activities and support groups. The Fort Bliss Welcome center, for new arrivals, is nearby, in the Building 500 area.

Fort Bliss has been designated a &quot;No Drone Zone&quot; by the FAA, out to 400 feet beyond the lateral edges of the military reservation. This is enforced by the Military Police. Counter-UAS training is available on-post.

==Local impact==

Fort Bliss is the single largest employer in the area supporting a total of 167,358 people with an estimated annual contribution of approximately 25.6 billion.

Fort Bliss is located among a population of more than 2.5M (&quot;Three States, Two Nations&quot;).

Fort Bliss has assisted El Paso during local disasters. In 1897, and again in 1925, the fort provided food and housing to those displaced by flood waters. In 2006, Fort Bliss dispatched soldiers and helicopters to the flood-affected areas to help with rescue efforts there. The flooding of El Paso in 2013 and 2014 were not met with this type of official response.

As of July 2010, electric power consumption at Fort Bliss had been reduced by three megawatts as the base continues to work towards becoming a &quot;net zero&quot; energy installation. In April 2013, Major General Dana J.H. Pittard, USA, announced a $120 million project to be completed by 2015, consisting of the largest solar farm within the U.S. military.

A joint study by Fort Bliss and El Paso-area city governments found that desalination was a viable method for increasing El Paso&#x27;s water supply by 25%. The Kay Bailey Hutchison Desalination Plant, on Montana Avenue, is located on Fort Bliss property, and desalinates the groundwater of the Hueco Bolson for use by El Paso and Fort Bliss. This reverse-osmosis plant protects the fresh groundwater supplies from invasion by more brackish water. This plant is currently the largest non-seawater desalination plant in the world.

In 2010, with the assumption of command by Major General Dana J.H. Pittard, a local that grew up in El Paso, Fort Bliss was made an &quot;open post&quot; which allowed anyone with a valid driver&#x27;s license to enter the post. As of 2015 Fort Bliss is no longer an open post. In 2020, 1st Armored Division&#x27;s Operations Research and Systems Analysis officer (ORSA) created a COVID-19 progression rate model for the division; this model was also used by the COVID-19 task force for the City of El Paso.

Fort Bliss archaeologists manage 20,000 sites on the 1.12 million acre reservation, and serve as tribal liaison to seven federally-funded Indian tribes. The Hueco Tanks historic site in El Paso county is adjacent to the military reservation. Cultural liaison with the tribes at the sacred sites of the reservation is an annual event.

==Geography==
The Fort Bliss census-designated place is located at . According to the United States Census Bureau, the census-designated place has a total area of 6.2 square miles (16.0 km2), all of it land. In terms of its United States physiographic region, it is a southern part of the Basin and Range Province.

===Bunker 11507===
An investigation into above-ground dirt-covered bunkers located on the military reservation was opened in June 2013. These former nuclear weapons bunkers were used by the Air Force during the Cold War, when Biggs Air Force Base was a SAC base. Low level radiation was detected in Bunker 11507. The bunker interiors were previously painted with epoxy paint to contain the radiation, and the paint has now chipped. The radiation contamination is confined to the area around the bunker. The area was closed on 11 July 2013.
==Demographics==


Fort Bliss first appeared as an unincorporated community in the 1970 United States census; and as a census designated place in the 1980 United States census.

As of the census of 2020, there were 11,260 people and 2,282 households residing on the post. The population density was . The racial makeup of the post was 58.2% White, 16.5% African American, 2.4% Asian, 1.4% Native American, 0.5% Pacific Islander, and 15.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 23.5% of the population.

Of the persons living there 12.4% were under the age of 5, 33.8% were under the age of 18 and 0.1% were over the age of 65. The percentage of woman lays at 38.2%. The average household size was 3.82.

The median income for a household on the post was $57,283. The per capita income for the post was $22,181. About 13.1% of the population were below the poverty line.
==Education==

Fort Bliss is within the El Paso Independent School District.

Bliss Elementary School is inside Fort Bliss, serving family housing areas on the main post. Milam Elementary School is in the Aero Vista development on Fort Bliss. Residents zoned to Bliss Elementary are zoned to Navarrete Middle School and Captain John L. Chapin High School. Residents zoned to Milam are zoned to Hartley School and Austin High School.

The Bundeswehr maintains a school for German national children at Fort Bliss. The grade 1–12 school was established circa 1976, and as of 2016 had 55 students.

==Museums and historic preservation==
The Replica Museum is located next to the Noel Parade Field and depicts the Post at the Magoffinsville site. This five building museum was authentically constructed with adobe bricks and painted stucco, and includes a sutler store, bunkhouse, blacksmith shop, saddlery, and a pottery kiln. The museum depicts the story of Fort Bliss and El Paso from 1848 to 1948 and was dedicated on the 100th anniversary.

The Fort Bliss and Ironsides Museums are located next to the Athletic Field and includes outdoor and indoor exhibits. These include important historical artifacts from the founding of Fort Bliss to the present day, such as General Pershing&#x27;s Dodge Command Car and a Patriot Missile.

The Fort Bliss Main Post Historic District, a large historic district including 343 buildings deemed to be contributing, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1998.

==See also==

* 2015 Fort Bliss shooting
* 24th Press Camp Headquarters
* Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and Brigades
* El Paso metropolitan area
* List of World War II prisoner-of-war camps in the United States

==References==
==External links==

* EPCC library guides &quot;Borderlands&quot;
* Fort Bliss Morale, Welfare and Recreation Program website
* &quot;Fort Bliss Monitor&quot;, the post newspaper was renamed ; there is also a Fort Bliss Facebook page
* Colonel Augustine D. Dugan Memorial</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="0" end="10" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="16" end="34" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="43" end="53" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="58" end="63" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="90" end="104" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580961" start="165" end="201" title="William Wallace Smith Bliss" label="Bvt.Lieut.Colonel William W.S. Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="280" end="294" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q785982" start="365" end="372" title="FORSCOM" label="FORSCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="480" end="505" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="543" end="564" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="571" end="594" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="644" end="655" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="739" end="764" title="Continental United States" label="Continental United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q186160" start="873" end="897" title="Fort Irwin National Training Center" label="National Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550881" start="993" end="1016" title="Lincoln National Forest" label="Lincoln National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="1021" end="1046" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321420" start="1091" end="1122" title="Castner Range National Monument" label="Castner Range National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q163673" start="1163" end="1183" title="1st Armored Division (United States)" label="1st Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551048" start="1279" end="1319" title="1st Armored Division Sustainment Brigade" label="1st Armored Division Sustainment Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269450" start="1354" end="1376" title="Joint Task Force North" label="Joint Task Force North"/>
<link wikidata="Q980409" start="1576" end="1606" title="United States Northern Command" label="United States Northern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202156" start="1795" end="1836" title="32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command" label="32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q881111" start="1978" end="1997" title="Army Forces Command" label="Army Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269204" start="2002" end="2038" title="Joint Force Land Component Commander" label="Joint Force Land Component Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967160" start="2196" end="2223" title="Joint Modernization Command" label="Joint Modernization Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075184" start="2566" end="2586" title="Army Futures Command" label="Army Futures Command"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5291" end="5299" title="Center of excellence#United States Army" label="NCOL CoE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889520" start="5607" end="5613" title="United States Army Sergeants Major Academy" label="USASMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="5691" end="5695" title="United States Army Command and General Staff College" label="CGSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12782269" start="6107" end="6141" title="11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade" label="11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q523156" start="6473" end="6508" title="Terminal High Altitude Area Defense" label="Terminal High Altitude Area Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351778" start="8550" end="8577" title="El Paso Intelligence Center" label="El Paso Intelligence Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8667" end="8670" title="United States Department of Defense" label="DoD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269450" start="8722" end="8744" title="Joint Task Force North" label="Joint Task Force North"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="8752" end="8771" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="8844" end="8869" title="power projection" label="military power projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470827" start="8881" end="8909" title="Fort Bliss National Cemetery" label="Fort Bliss National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564738" start="8985" end="8992" title="Fort Griffin" label="Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470969" start="8994" end="9000" title="Fort Concho" label="Concho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470794" start="9002" end="9009" title="Fort Belknap (Newcastle, Texas)" label="Belknap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470902" start="9011" end="9021" title="Fort Chadbourne" label="Chadbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q979901" start="9023" end="9031" title="Fort Stockton, Texas" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471027" start="9033" end="9038" title="Fort Davis National Historic Site" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471915" start="9040" end="9050" title="Fort Richardson, Texas" label="Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471634" start="9052" end="9060" title="Fort McKavett State Historic Site" label="McKavett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470929" start="9062" end="9067" title="Fort Clark, Texas" label="Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471628" start="9069" end="9077" title="Fort McIntosh, Texas" label="McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564744" start="9079" end="9083" title="Fort Inge" label="Inge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471819" start="9089" end="9101" title="Fort Phantom Hill" label="Phantom Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="9116" end="9125" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="9129" end="9137" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304865" start="9349" end="9366" title="Red River Station, Texas" label="Red River Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="9520" end="9545" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711408" start="9763" end="9768" title="WBAMC" label="WBAMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="10081" end="10088" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q881051" start="10089" end="10107" title="Alexander Doniphan" label="Alexander Doniphan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10112" end="10155" title="Mexican American War campaigns#Monterrey, 21 September 1846" label="1st Regiment of Missouri mounted volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="10164" end="10181" title="El Paso del Norte" label="El Paso del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870953" start="10205" end="10225" title="Battle of El Brazito" label="Battle of El Brazito"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873005" start="10234" end="10258" title="Battle of the Sacramento" label="Battle of the Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="10369" end="10406" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="El Paso del Norte (now Ciudad Juárez)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737022" start="10476" end="10493" title="3rd United States Infantry Regiment (TOG)" label="3rd U.S. Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904211" start="10594" end="10619" title="Jefferson Van Horne" label="Major Jefferson Van Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="10694" end="10704" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="10876" end="10883" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472007" start="10901" end="10912" title="Fort Selden" label="Fort Selden"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="10994" end="11000" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="11006" end="11014" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11058" end="11070" title="California Gold Rush#Forty-niners" label="forty-niners"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904211" start="11072" end="11081" title="Jefferson Van Horne" label="Van Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q970898" start="11114" end="11134" title="San Elizario, Texas" label="Post at San Elizario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471142" start="11446" end="11459" title="Fort Fillmore" label="Fort Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645383" start="11571" end="11583" title="8th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="8th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339325" start="11615" end="11634" title="Edmund B. Alexander" label="Edmund B. Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11667" end="11681" title="Magoffinsville" label="Magoffinsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="11700" end="11716" title="Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="11717" end="11732" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580961" start="11813" end="11840" title="William Wallace Smith Bliss" label="William Wallace Smith Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12131" end="12149" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q448348" start="12151" end="12166" title="David E. Twiggs" label="David E. Twiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017885" start="12189" end="12208" title="Department of Texas" label="Department of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769366" start="12234" end="12243" title="Surrender (military)" label="surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="12258" end="12273" title="Confederate States of America" label="the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077252" start="12286" end="12307" title="Isaac Van Duzen Reeve" label="Isaac Van Duzen Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081219" start="12624" end="12638" title="John R. Baylor" label="John R. Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12706" end="12741" title="Trans-Mississippi Theater of the American Civil War#Confederate Territory of Arizona and Federal New Mexico Territory" label="attacks into New Mexico and Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739881" start="12884" end="12910" title="New Mexico Campaign" label="gain control of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q580651" start="12930" end="12953" title="Battle of Glorieta Pass" label="Battle of Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152016" start="13120" end="13147" title="California Column" label="Federal column of 2,350 men"/>
<link wikidata="Q128221" start="13177" end="13194" title="James H. Carleton" label="James H. Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641330" start="13302" end="13314" title="5th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="5th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632271" start="13394" end="13407" title="25th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="25th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="13409" end="13424" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="13545" end="13555" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="13756" end="13769" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="13818" end="13828" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="14051" end="14056" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="14130" end="14139" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="14144" end="14151" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="14199" end="14213" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393124" start="14217" end="14228" title="wagon train" label="wagon train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="14612" end="14627" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646526" start="14636" end="14649" title="9th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="Ninth Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550982" start="14671" end="14684" title="15th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="15th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413801" start="14729" end="14755" title="San Elizario Salt War" label="trouble over the salt beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="15046" end="15050" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="UTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029270" start="15826" end="15839" title="18th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="18th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="15901" end="15917" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="16028" end="16046" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="16134" end="16161" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497814" start="16207" end="16224" title="Frederick Funston" label="Frederick Funston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16279" end="16298" title="Pancho Villa Expedition#Campaign" label="Punitive Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="16331" end="16343" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596571" start="16480" end="16490" title="staff ride" label="staff ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930722" start="16494" end="16517" title="Pancho Villa State Park" label="Pancho Villa State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="16646" end="16658" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="16751" end="16760" title="Historical reenactment" label="reenactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="16815" end="16843" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="military airfield in El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711389" start="16881" end="16917" title="United States Army Border Air Patrol" label="United States Army Border Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056738" start="16926" end="16943" title="1st Aero Squadron" label="1st Aero Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="17045" end="17073" title="American Expeditionary Force" label="American Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="17104" end="17120" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517188" start="17295" end="17308" title="National Army (USA)" label="National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17312" end="17323" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17375" end="17396" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)#1920s and 1930s" label="15th Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17435" end="17468" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)#1920s and 1930s" label="Headquarters, 2nd Cavalry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="17689" end="17700" title="Armored car (military)" label="armored car"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17821" end="17833" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="17866" end="17900" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft artillery battalions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18016" end="18039" title="List of units using the B-26 Marauder during World War II#Tow target squadrons" label="1st Tow Target Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q198952" start="18055" end="18067" title="target drone" label="target drone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18074" end="18114" title="List of units using the B-26 Marauder during World War II#Tow target squadrons" label="6th, 19th, and 27th Tow Target Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="18134" end="18145" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889436" start="18170" end="18200" title="United States Army Air Defense Artillery School" label="Anti-Aircraft Artillery School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030731" start="18218" end="18228" title="Camp Davis" label="Camp Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338" start="18377" end="18402" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)" label="U.S. 1st Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024001" start="18589" end="18595" title="Internment of German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023750" start="18597" end="18604" title="Internment of Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="18610" end="18618" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="18692" end="18704" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q444698" start="18778" end="18797" title="Operation Paperclip" label="Operation Paperclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="18853" end="18859" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100878" start="18909" end="18923" title="United States Army Ordnance Corps" label="Ordnance Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q494101" start="19217" end="19234" title="List of V-2 test launches" label="V-2 test launches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="19238" end="19265" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Proving Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q39466" start="19496" end="19511" title="Private (rocket)" label="Private missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929184" start="19519" end="19530" title="Hueco Mountains" label="Hueco Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741357" start="19607" end="19623" title="Hermes project" label="Hermes B2 ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q31852" start="19773" end="19787" title="MGM-5 Corporal" label="MGM-5 Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q620224" start="19888" end="19906" title="Republic-Ford JB-2" label="Republic-Ford JB-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="19996" end="20004" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="20111" end="20136" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889436" start="20362" end="20390" title="United States Army Air Defense Artillery School" label="U.S. Army Air Defense School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990116" start="20563" end="20572" title="Nike Ajax" label="Nike Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q482925" start="20574" end="20587" title="Nike Hercules" label="Nike Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q482414" start="20589" end="20593" title="MIM-23 Hawk" label="Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706803" start="20595" end="20601" title="Sprint (missile)" label="Sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388613" start="20618" end="20624" title="FIM-43 Redeye" label="Redeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113550" start="20721" end="20739" title="live fire exercise" label="live fire exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21230" end="21238" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418943" start="21359" end="21372" title="Ranger School" label="Ranger School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418943" start="21655" end="21678" title="Ranger Training Brigade" label="Ranger Training Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041043" start="21763" end="21785" title="Dugway Proving Grounds" label="Dugway Proving Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="21789" end="21793" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889436" start="21994" end="22041" title="United States Army Air Defense Artillery School" label="United States Army Air Defense Artillery School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550450" start="22177" end="22191" title="United States Army Basic Training" label="Basic Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550450" start="22196" end="22224" title="Advanced Individual Training" label="Advanced Individual Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="22365" end="22374" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="22441" end="22450" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114481" start="22657" end="22660" title="Military Occupational Specialty" label="MOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q223205" start="22759" end="22792" title="U.S. 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment" label="U.S. 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q602739" start="22809" end="22820" title="Fort Carson" label="Fort Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="22946" end="22985" title="Base Realignment and Closing Commission" label="Base Realignment and Closing Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="23071" end="23109" title="MIM-104 Patriot" label="MIM-104 Patriot Missile Defense System"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="23203" end="23219" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="23220" end="23242" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q409870" start="23274" end="23279" title="US 54" label="US 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="23304" end="23311" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="23379" end="23405" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="23562" end="23566" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="23571" end="23582" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q597859" start="23624" end="23643" title="Biggs Army Airfield" label="Biggs Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="23722" end="23755" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889520" start="23820" end="23853" title="United States Army Sergeants Major Academy" label="U.S. Army Sergeants Major Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163673" start="24177" end="24202" title="1st Armored Division (United States)" label="U.S. 1st Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="24263" end="24272" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q783854" start="24277" end="24286" title="Fort Hood" label="Fort Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720972" start="24677" end="24690" title="El Paso Times" label="El Paso Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="24764" end="24771" title="Texas Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361256" start="24772" end="24787" title="Eliot Shapleigh" label="Eliot Shapleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="25261" end="25282" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q239928" start="25647" end="25667" title="Kay Bailey Hutchison" label="Kay Bailey Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642572" start="26007" end="26022" title="6th Air Defense Artillery (United States)" label="6th ADA Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="26070" end="26135" title="MIM-104 Patriot" label="MIM-104 Patriot Missile Anti-Aircraft/Anti Missile defense system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="26140" end="26149" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="26541" end="26560" title="Fort Sill, Oklahoma" label="Fort Sill, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q827783" start="26723" end="26752" title="United States Army Training and Doctrine Command" label="Training and Doctrine Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q785982" start="26756" end="26770" title="FORSCOM" label="Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113550" start="27581" end="27599" title="live fire exercise" label="live fire exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="27930" end="27945" title="Patriot missile" label="Patriot missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889436" start="27966" end="27974" title="United States Army Air Defense Artillery School" label="USAADCEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="28062" end="28071" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="28187" end="28193" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="28607" end="28632" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="28659" end="28669" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637317" start="28682" end="28706" title="402nd Field Artillery Brigade (United States)" label="CONUS Replacement Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q387188" start="29143" end="29148" title="MQ-1C" label="MQ-1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="29355" end="29365" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q409870" start="29398" end="29411" title="U.S. Route 54" label="U.S. Route 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="29417" end="29438" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550881" start="29471" end="29494" title="Lincoln National Forest" label="Lincoln National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q489756" start="29498" end="29522" title="Otero County, New Mexico" label="Otero County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388498" start="29664" end="29685" title="Chaparral, New Mexico" label="Chaparral, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="29714" end="29739" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="29791" end="29805" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061014" start="29872" end="29887" title="Central El Paso" label="Central El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29913" end="29929" title="El Paso Independent School District#Elementary schools" label="Bliss Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29930" end="29946" title="El Paso Independent School District#Elementary schools" label="Logan Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29947" end="29963" title="El Paso Independent School District#Elementary schools" label="Milam Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29964" end="29987" title="El Paso Independent School District#Elementary schools" label="Colin Powell Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036693" start="29988" end="29999" title="Captain John L. Chapin High School" label="Chapin High"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711408" start="30036" end="30072" title="William Beaumont Army Medical Center" label="William Beaumont Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794277" start="30096" end="30124" title="Army Wounded Warrior Program" label="warrior transition battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794277" start="30145" end="30160" title="wounded warrior" label="wounded warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="30169" end="30199" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841975" start="30234" end="30252" title="Franklin Mountains (Texas)" label="Franklin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730331" start="30368" end="30387" title="General of the Army" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="30388" end="30403" title="Omar N. Bradley" label="Omar N. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="31037" end="31052" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433230" start="31284" end="31306" title="Family Readiness Group" label="Family Readiness Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="32029" end="32037" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="32550" end="32563" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214753" start="32564" end="32581" title="Dana J.H. Pittard" label="Dana J.H. Pittard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="32583" end="32586" title="United States Army" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q239928" start="32871" end="32891" title="Kay Bailey Hutchison" label="Kay Bailey Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214753" start="33298" end="33315" title="Dana J.H. Pittard" label="Dana J.H. Pittard"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="33622" end="33630" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365527" start="33907" end="33918" title="Hueco Tanks" label="Hueco Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="34114" end="34137" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="34171" end="34198" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892634" start="34309" end="34343" title="United States physiographic region" label="United States physiographic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="34374" end="34398" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="34992" end="35016" title="unincorporated community" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730452" start="35024" end="35049" title="1970 United States census" label="1970 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="35060" end="35083" title="census designated place" label="census designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121710" start="35091" end="35116" title="1980 United States census" label="1980 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35282" end="35287" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35295" end="35311" title="African American (U.S. census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35318" end="35323" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35330" end="35345" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35352" end="35368" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35404" end="35412" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="35416" end="35422" title="Latino (U.S. census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351777" start="35873" end="35908" title="El Paso Independent School District" label="El Paso Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036693" start="36153" end="36187" title="Captain John L. Chapin High School" label="Captain John L. Chapin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823126" start="36246" end="36264" title="Austin High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="36271" end="36281" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="36636" end="36647" title="adobe brick" label="adobe brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="36661" end="36667" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566474" start="36684" end="36690" title="sutler" label="sutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="36709" end="36724" title="blacksmith shop" label="blacksmith shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="36726" end="36734" title="saddlery" label="saddlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="37145" end="37160" title="Patriot Missile" label="Patriot Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121339" start="37167" end="37205" title="Fort Bliss Main Post Historic District" label="Fort Bliss Main Post Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="37270" end="37282" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="37302" end="37338" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773293" start="37365" end="37389" title="2015 Fort Bliss shooting" label="2015 Fort Bliss shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870930" start="37392" end="37420" title="24th Press Camp Headquarters" label="24th Press Camp Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37423" end="37486" title="Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and Brigades" label="Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="37489" end="37514" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="El Paso metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378409" start="37517" end="37580" title="List of World War II prisoner-of-war camps in the United States" label="List of World War II prisoner-of-war camps in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135826" wikidata="Q981941" url="?curid=135826" title="Homestead Meadows North, Texas">
<text>Homestead Meadows North is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 5,124 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 5,210 people, 1,409 households, and 1,132 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,232 people, 1,135 households, and 988 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,268 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 73.20% White, 0.43% African American, 1.11% Native American, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 22.71% from other races, and 2.41% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 82.49% of the population.

There were 1,135 households, out of which 58.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.5% were married couples living together, 11.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 12.9% were non-families. 10.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.73 and the average family size was 4.04.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 36.6% under the age of 18, 10.9% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 18.8% from 45 to 64, and 5.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.2 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $30,403, and the median income for a family was $31,547. Males had a median income of $21,694 versus $18,961 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $10,485. About 22.9% of families and 21.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 28.4% of those under age 18 and 14.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Almost all of Homestead Meadows North is served by the Clint Independent School District. A small fragment is in the Socorro Independent School District.

The fragment in Socorro ISD is zoned to Purple Heart Elementary School, Desert Wind Middle School, and El Dorado High School.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981941" start="0" end="23" title="Homestead Meadows North, Texas" label="Homestead Meadows North"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="29" end="52" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="62" end="76" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="78" end="83" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="132" end="143" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="163" end="170" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="171" end="200" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="235" end="262" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="350" end="375" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="489" end="495" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="713" end="718" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="726" end="742" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="750" end="765" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="773" end="789" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="803" end="814" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="850" end="858" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="862" end="868" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1023" end="1038" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1833" end="1850" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1943" end="1955" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="2100" end="2133" title="Clint Independent School District" label="Clint Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553071" start="2162" end="2197" title="Socorro Independent School District" label="Socorro Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351183" start="2303" end="2324" title="El Dorado High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="El Dorado High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135827" wikidata="Q982273" url="?curid=135827" title="Homestead Meadows South, Texas">
<text>Homestead Meadows South is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 7,247 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 7,142 people, 1,567 households, and 1,274 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 6,807 people, 1,512 households, and 1,439 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,628 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 60.95% White, 0.32% African American, 0.44% Native American, 0.09% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 37.04% from other races, and 1.10% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 96.17% of the population.

There were 1,512 households, out of which 71.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 75.5% were married couples living together, 14.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 4.8% were non-families. 4.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 1.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.50 and the average family size was 4.60.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 42.2% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 28.9% from 25 to 44, 14.0% from 45 to 64, and 3.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.7 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $27,615, and the median income for a family was $27,044. Males had a median income of $18,670 versus $13,333 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $6,709. About 25.3% of families and 26.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.7% of those under age 18 and 38.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Homestead Meadows South is served by the Clint Independent School District (CISD).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982273" start="0" end="23" title="Homestead Meadows South, Texas" label="Homestead Meadows South"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="29" end="52" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="62" end="76" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="78" end="83" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="132" end="143" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="163" end="170" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="171" end="200" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="235" end="262" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="350" end="375" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="489" end="495" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="715" end="720" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="728" end="744" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="752" end="767" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="775" end="780" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="788" end="804" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="818" end="829" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="865" end="873" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="877" end="883" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1038" end="1053" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1845" end="1862" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1954" end="1966" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="2097" end="2130" title="Clint Independent School District" label="Clint Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135828" wikidata="Q979346" url="?curid=135828" title="Horizon City, Texas">
<text>Horizon City is a city in El Paso County, Texas, United States. As of the 2020 United States Census, its population was 22,489, reflecting an increase of 5,754 from the 16,735 counted in the 2010 Census.

==History==
The city, incorporated by referendum on October 22, 1988, takes its name from the real-estate development corporation that developed it as a planned community beginning in the early 1960s, the Horizon Corporation. The Horizon Corporation bought up large tracts of land in the southwestern United States, including eastern El Paso County, platted them into subdivisions, and sold lots in them to thousands of people worldwide, often sight unseen, often without access to water or utilities and using questionable sales tactics, between 1962 and 1975. Eventually, the Federal Trade Commission stepped in to stop it in 1981. Only one portion of the development was successful, the area around the intersection of Horizon Boulevard (Farm to Market Road 1281) and Kenazo Street; this became the nucleus of Horizon City.

Much of the land to the east of town consists of undeveloped subdivisions with highly fragmented ownership. The lots in these subdivisions cannot be legally sold and will be difficult to develop due to the 1994 Texas Colonia Act, a state law intended to stop the development of colonias, or neighborhoods underserved by utilities whose residents often live in substandard conditions. It forbids the sale for residential purposes of less than 10 acres of land or the sale of more than 10 acres of land without a guarantee of adequate access to water, sewer services and other utilities. Efforts are currently underway by a local homeowners&#x27; association, the Horizon Communities Improvement Association, to assemble these lots into tracts of land that can be legally developed.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
*Annual maximum avg. temperature = 78.0 °F (25.6 °C)
*Annual minimum avg. temperature = 49.0 °F (9.4 °C)
*Annual avg. Temperature = 63.2 °F (17.3 °C)
*Percentage of possible sunshine = 83
*Mean number of days rain (per year) = 49
*Mean number of days snow (per year) = 2
*Avg. annual precipitation = 9.00 in. 
*Avg. annual snowfall = 6.00 in.

==Government==
The mayor of Horizon City is Ruben Mendoza. The legislative and governing body of the City consists of a mayor and seven Council Members. The mayor and council are elected to four-year terms. The next election for mayor and Council Members for places 3, 5, and 7 will be in May 2023; the election for Council Members for places 1, 2, 4, and 6 will be in May 2025. The current city council members of Horizon City are Walter Miller, Scott Quiroz, Charlie Ortega, Andres (Andy) Renteria, Johnny &quot;Doc&quot; Duran, Rafael (Ralph) Padilla Jr., and Samantha S. Corral.

==Economic development==
Horizon City formed an economic development corporation  in 2011. The corporation has the power to use sales tax funds to help eligible companies with relocations, expansions, and site development. It can acquire property, finance infrastructure projects, and spend funds for a variety of quality-of-life improvements.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 22,489 people, 5,940 households, and 5,011 families residing in the city. The population density was . The 5,490 housing units had an average density of .

===2010 census===
According to the 2010 Census, of the 4,733 households, 64.2% had children under 18 living with them, 66.8% were headed by married couples living together, 14.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.8% were not families. About 10.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.4% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age older. The average household size was 3.54, and the average family size was 3.83.

In the city, the age distribution was 38.2% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 32.1% from 25 to 44, 16.0% from 45 to 64, and 4.5% who were 65 or older. The median age was 26.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.2 males.

For the year 2019, the estimated median annual income for a household in the city was $60,431. The per capita income for the city was $21,507. About 13.3% of the population was below the poverty line.

==Education==

Horizon City is served by the Clint and Socorro Independent School Districts.

The Socorro Independent School District serves the city center and adjacent neighborhoods on the west end of town; the boundary between it and the Clint Independent School District to the east is located at or near Kenazo Street.

===Schools serving Horizon City===

====Clint Independent School District campuses====

* Horizon High School [9th to 12th]
* Horizon Middle School [6th to 8th]
* Ricardo Estrada Middle School [6th to 8th]
* Carroll T. Welch Intermediate School [Pre-K to 5th]
* Desert Hills Elementary School [Pre-K to 5th]
* Frank Macias Elementary School [Pre-K to 5th]

====Socorro Independent School District campuses====

The zoned schools are:
* Eastlake High School [9th to 12th]
* Col. John O. Ensor Middle School [6th to 8th]
* Horizon Heights Elementary School [Pre-K to 5th]

====Other====

* Pete Duarte Head Start Center (Texas Education Agency, Region 19) [Pre-K]

==Government and infrastructure==
The Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the El Paso II District Parole Office in an unincorporated area east of Horizon City.

==References==

==External links==

* City of Horizon City official website
* Horizon Communities Improvement Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979346" start="0" end="12" title="Horizon City, Texas" label="Horizon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="26" end="47" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="74" end="99" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="191" end="202" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617128" start="946" end="970" title="Farm to Market Road 1281" label="Farm to Market Road 1281"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1846" end="1873" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2907" end="2940" title="economic development corporation " label="economic development corporation "/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="2987" end="2996" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3249" end="3274" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4299" end="4316" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4387" end="4399" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="4447" end="4452" title="Clint Independent School District" label="Clint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553071" start="4457" end="4464" title="Socorro Independent School District" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903425" start="4817" end="4836" title="Horizon High School (Texas)" label="Horizon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="4853" end="4874" title="Horizon Middle School (Horizon City, Texas)" label="Horizon Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230261" start="5163" end="5183" title="Eastlake High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Eastlake High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="5428" end="5464" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="5518" end="5537" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135829" wikidata="Q947981" url="?curid=135829" title="Morning Glory, Texas">
<text>Morning Glory is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 522 at the 2020 census, down from 651 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area. The ZIP Code encompassing the CDP area is 79836.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 627 people, 145 households, and 140 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 161 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 88.68% White, 0.48% Native American, 10.53% from other races, and 0.32% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 96.33% of the population.

There were 145 households, out of which 66.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 80.7% were married couples living together, 11.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 3.4% were non-families. 2.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 0.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.32 and the average family size was 4.41.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 42.4% under the age of 18, 10.4% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 15.2% from 45 to 64, and 3.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.3 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $31,154, and the median income for a family was $30,096. Males had a median income of $21,250 versus $13,750 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $7,754. About 8.9% of families and 10.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.4% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Morning Glory is served by the Clint Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q947981" start="0" end="13" title="Morning Glory, Texas" label="Morning Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="19" end="42" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="52" end="66" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="68" end="73" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="120" end="131" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="154" end="165" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="185" end="192" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="193" end="222" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="228" end="236" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="305" end="332" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="402" end="408" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="620" end="625" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="633" end="648" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="662" end="673" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="709" end="717" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="721" end="727" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="880" end="895" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1688" end="1705" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1796" end="1808" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="1928" end="1961" title="Clint Independent School District" label="Clint Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135830" wikidata="Q978638" url="?curid=135830" title="Prado Verde, Texas">
<text>Prado Verde is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population is 246 according to the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 200 people, 60 households, and 55 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 62 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 98.00% White, 0.50% Native American, and 1.50% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 55.00% of the population.

There were 60 households, out of which 51.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 85.0% were married couples living together, 3.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 8.3% were non-families. 8.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 1.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.33 and the average family size was 3.51.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 35.0% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 26.5% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 7.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 119.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.0 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $49,286, and the median income for a family was $68,056. Males had a median income of $38,409 versus $45,179 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $14,186. None of the families and 3.9% of the population were living below the poverty line.

==Education==
Prado Verde is in the Canutillo Independent School District. Residents are zoned to Gonzalo and Sofia Garcia Elementary School, and Canutillo Middle School. Canutillo High School is the zoned comprehensive high school for the entire school district.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978638" start="0" end="11" title="Prado Verde, Texas" label="Prado Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="17" end="40" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="50" end="64" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="66" end="71" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="127" end="138" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="158" end="165" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="166" end="195" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="230" end="257" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="327" end="333" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="542" end="547" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="555" end="570" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="606" end="614" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="618" end="624" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="776" end="791" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1582" end="1599" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1695" end="1707" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034125" start="1746" end="1783" title="Canutillo Independent School District" label="Canutillo Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680303" start="1881" end="1902" title="Canutillo High School" label="Canutillo High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135831" wikidata="Q970898" url="?curid=135831" title="San Elizario, Texas">
<text>San Elizario is a city in El Paso County, Texas, United States. Its population was 10,116 at the 2020 census. It is part of the El Paso metropolitan statistical area. It lies on the Rio Grande, which forms the border between the United States and Mexico. The city of Socorro adjoins it on the west and the town of Clint lies to the north.

== History ==

===&quot;La Toma&quot;: The Official Act of Possession===
In 1598, Juan de Oñate, a Spanish nobleman and conquistador born in Zacatecas, Mexico, led a group of 539 colonists and 7,000 head of livestock (including horses, oxen, and cattle) from southern Chihuahua to settle the province of New Mexico. The caravan traveled a northeasterly route for weeks across the desert until it reached the banks of the Rio Grande in the San Elizario area. A mass was held, a blessing of the standard and a celebration. Oñate performed the ceremony of &quot;La Toma&quot; (&quot;Taking Possession&quot;), in which he claimed the new province for King Philip II of Spain. This is considered to be the &quot;Birth of the American Southwest&quot;.

=== Hacienda de los Tiburcios ===
The settlement that became
San Elizario was first established sometime before 1760 as the civilian settlement of Hacienda de los Tiburcios. The hacienda was located along the route of Camino Real de Tierra Adentro southeast of Socorro on the west bank of the Rio Grande. The hacienda was eventually abandoned by the 1770s.

=== Presidio San Elzeario ===

In 1789, the site of the old hacienda Tiburcios became the new site where the Spaniards relocated a fort called Presidio de San Elzeario. It had originally been established in 1774, located farther south in the El Paso Valley near the site of modern El Porvenir. It had been moved north to be better able to protect the Camino Real and the towns of to its north, Socorro and Ysleta.

The town that grew up around the presidio took its name San Elzeario, or San Elceario (Spanish for Saint Elzear); Saint Elzéar of Sabran is the Roman Catholic patron saint of soldiers. After the Americans acquired the town at the end of the Mexican American War, its name was Americanized as San Elizario.

=== San Elizario ===
San Elizario was El Paso County&#x27;s original county seat.

====Salt War====

In 1877, a conflict, the Salt War, broke out between the town and a troop of Texas Rangers. The Rangers surrendered and two were massacred by the local population. The perpetrators then fled into Mexico and the town lost much of its status.

==== Incorporation ====
San Elizario was incorporated several times between 1871 and 1911, with another unsuccessful attempt at incorporation made in 1986. On November 5, 2013, San Elizario residents voted to re-incorporate the town, having successfully fought off an attempt by Socorro to annex a portion of it, and San Elizario was officially incorporated when El Paso County Judge Veronica Escobar signed an order of incorporation on November 18, 2013.

On May 10, 2014, Maya Sanchez, who led the push to incorporate San Elizario, was elected mayor by a wide margin over two other candidates, while Leticia Hurtado-Miranda, David Cantu, Miguel Najera, Jr., Rebecca Martinez-Juarez, and George Almanzar were elected to the five city council seats.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is covered by water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
San Elizario first appeared as a census designated place in the 1980 U.S. Census; and after incorporation in 2013, as a city in the 2020 U.S. Census.
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 10,116 people, 2,435 households, and 2,168 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 11,046 people, 2,624 households, and 2,440 families resided in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,809 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 94.34% White, 0.15% African American, 5.55% Native American, 0.01% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 4.18% from other races, and 0.76% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 97.88% of the population. Of those 98.88% who identify themselves as Hispanic, 95.02% identify themselves as Mexican, making San Elizario the most Mexican (though not Hispanic, see Mila Doce, Texas) town in the United States.

Of the 2,624 households, 67.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.8% were married couples living together, 15.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 7.0% were not families. About 6.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.21 and the average family size was 4.40.

In the CDP, the population was distributed as 42.3% under the age of 18, 11.0% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 13.4% from 45 to 64, and 4.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.4 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $20,145, and for a family was $20,772. Males had a median income of $16,689 versus $12,648 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $5,915. About 40.2% of families and 44.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 51.8% of those under age 18 and 20.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
San Elizario is served by the San Elizario Independent School District.

==San Elizario Chapel==
San Elizario Chapel (&quot;La Capilla de San Elcear&quot;) was never a mission, but it functioned as a presidio chapel. It provided the religious needs of a &quot;presidio&quot; or outpost of military personnel. The presidio was moved to the present site in 1789, to protect travelers and settlers along the &quot;Camino Real&quot; (Royal Highway) which ran from Mexico City through Ciudad Juárez, then called &quot;Paso del Norte&quot;, to Santa Fe, New Mexico. Its close proximity to the Ysleta and Socorro missions also provided protection for them.

When Mexico became independent from Spain in 1821, the military presence at the presidio decreased. By 1848, the presidio had fallen into ruins. Rebuilding efforts began in 1853, with a small church. This proved inadequate, and the present structure was completed in 1882. The exterior appearance has changed very little since then.

The wedding scene for the movie &quot;Fandango&quot; (1985) was filmed in the plaza of the San Elizario church.

==References==

==External links==
* City of San Elizario
* San Elizario Genealogy and Historical Society
* San Elizario Historic District
* El Paso Mission Trail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q970898" start="0" end="12" title="San Elizario, Texas" label="San Elizario"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="26" end="47" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="97" end="108" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="128" end="135" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="136" end="165" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="182" end="192" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="247" end="253" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q979579" start="267" end="274" title="Socorro, Texas" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q977346" start="314" end="319" title="Clint, Texas" label="Clint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040026" start="422" end="435" title="Juan de Oñate" label="Juan de Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="439" end="446" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="460" end="472" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="481" end="490" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="608" end="617" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="632" end="654" title="province of New Mexico" label="province of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465424" start="899" end="906" title="La Toma" label="La Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="992" end="1010" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1060" end="1078" title="American Southwest" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="1305" end="1334" title="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1588" end="1612" title="Presidio de San Elzeario" label="Presidio de San Elzeario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1687" end="1701" title="El Paso Valley" label="El Paso Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q961853" start="1726" end="1737" title="El Porvenir, Chihuahua" label="El Porvenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q979579" start="1839" end="1846" title="Socorro, Texas" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059777" start="1851" end="1857" title="Ysleta, Texas" label="Ysleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051925" start="1974" end="1996" title="Elzéar of Sabran" label="Saint Elzéar of Sabran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="2101" end="2121" title="Mexican American War" label="Mexican American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413801" start="2293" end="2301" title="San Elizario Salt War" label="Salt War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708025" start="2345" end="2358" title="Texas State Guard" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q52274267" start="2894" end="2910" title="Veronica Escobar" label="Veronica Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3293" end="3320" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="3452" end="3475" title="census designated place" label="census designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121710" start="3483" end="3499" title="1980 U.S. Census" label="1980 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3551" end="3567" title="2020 U.S. Census" label="2020 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3579" end="3604" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3720" end="3726" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3899" end="3912" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q976870" start="4303" end="4319" title="Mila Doce, Texas" label="Mila Doce, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4442" end="4457" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5235" end="5252" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5344" end="5356" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413800" start="5476" end="5516" title="San Elizario Independent School District" label="San Elizario Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241527" start="5543" end="5562" title="San Elizario Chapel" label="San Elizario Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="5614" end="5621" title="mission (Christianity)" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="5646" end="5654" title="presidio" label="presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="5851" end="5874" title="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="&amp;quot;Camino Real&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="5906" end="5917" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="5926" end="5939" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="5984" end="6004" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059777" start="6033" end="6039" title="Ysleta, El Paso, Texas" label="Ysleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q979579" start="6044" end="6051" title="Socorro, Texas" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6133" end="6138" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395484" start="6463" end="6483" title="Fandango (1985 film)" label="&amp;quot;Fandango&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135832" wikidata="Q979579" url="?curid=135832" title="Socorro, Texas">
<text>Socorro is a city in El Paso County, Texas, United States. It is located on the north bank of the Rio Grande southeast of El Paso, and on the border of Mexico. El Paso adjoins it on the west and the smaller city of San Elizario on the southeast; small unincorporated areas of El Paso County separate it from the nearby municipalities of Horizon City to the north and Clint to the east. As of the 2020 census, the city population was 34,306. By the 2010 census, the number had grown to 32,013. As of July 1, 2019, the population estimate for the city from the U.S. Census was 34,370. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area. The city is El Paso County&#x27;s second-largest municipality, after El Paso. It has a council-manager type of government with five city council members.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of , or 0.10%, is covered by water.

==History==

Socorro was established in 1680 by local Manso and Piro Indians fleeing the Pueblo Revolt in northern New Mexico. It took its name from Socorro, the town in central New Mexico from which the Piros had originated, which had been given the name Socorro (Spanish for &quot;aid&quot; or &quot;succor&quot;) by the Spaniards due to the helpful attitude of the Piro toward the Spaniards at the time of first contact. The probable date of a Mass celebrated in the mission church of Nuestra Señora de la Limpia Concepción del Socorro, October 13, 1680, is regarded as the founding date of the city in Texas, called Socorro, established by the Spaniards and the Piro they brought south with them from New Mexico during the Pueblo Revolt. Socorro was first incorporated in 1871, and was reincorporated in 1985 in response to an annexation attempt from neighboring El Paso.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 34,306 people, 9,964 households, and 8,442 families residing in the city. Socorro&#x27;s population makes it the 93rd-largest city in Texas, or bigger than 94% of all Texas cities. From 2010 to 2020, the Socorro city population growth percentage was 7.2% (or from 32,013 people to 34,306 people).

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, 8,792 households and 7,703 families were residing in the city. The population density was 1,453.2 people/sq mi (560.9/km). The 9,313 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.3% White, 0.2% African American, 1.6% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 2.9% from some other race, and 0.8% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 96.7% of the population.

Of the 8,792 households, 56.5% had children under 18 living with them, 62.4% were married couples living together, 19.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 12.4% were not families. About 10.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.5% were someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 3.64, and the average family size was 3.93.

In the city, age distribution was 32.5% under 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 25.3% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.7% who were 65 or older. The median age was 29.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.7 males.

For the period 2009–2011, the estimated median annual income for a household in the city was $30,014, and for a family was $30,998. Males had a median income of $26,239 versus $20,189 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,455. About 29.3% of families and 32.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 44.4% of those under age 18 and 29.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==

Socorro is a city of sales and office employees, construction workers, builders, and service providers.

==Points of interest==

The Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center was designated a National Historic Landmark on December 11, 2023. First created as an orphanage and poor farm in 1915, it became a processing center for the Bracero Program in 1950 which brought Mexicans to the United States as guest agricultural workers.

Bulldog Championship Park includes a splash park, an amphitheater, walking trails, and a pond.

Socorro Mission is a Franciscan mission built around 1840 to serve the Native American population in the area. The white adobe mission is a registered Texas historic landmark and one of three missions on the historic Mission Trail. In the mission stands a $300,000 replica of the&quot; Pieta&quot;. It is one of only 112 authorized replicas of the&quot; Pieta&quot;, finished by artist Michelangelo in 1499, which can be found in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, Vatican City.

Socorro Entertainment Center is a Native American entertainment and concert venue. Past and upcoming concerts include national acts such as Counting Crows, Gipsy Kings, KC and the Sunshine Band, BB King, Everclear, Soul Asylum, and Toad the Wet Sprocket.

The city of Socorro was ranked the 22nd-most exciting city in Texas by Movoto in 2014.

* Socorro Entertainment Center
* Fiesta de San Miguel—Socorro Mission La Purisima—annual bazaar held in September with live music, dancing, food, drinks, games and rides

===Parks===

Bulldog Championship Park, the newest park in El Paso County, contains about 6.25 acres, and is located in the City of Socorro. Park amenities include an amphitheater, pavilions, a splash playground, playgrounds, detention pond, walking trails, and over 90 parking spaces.

Other parks include:
* Amistad Park
* Cougar Park
* Mauro Rosas Park
* Moon City Park
* Paradize Park
* Rio Bosque Wetlands Park
* Rio Vista Park
* Silvestre Reyes Park
* Valle Hermoso Park

==Politics==

The city of Socorro operates under a council–manager government. Citizens are represented on the city council by six elected members—the mayor and five city council members. The city council is responsible for setting policy and enacting ordinances for the benefit of the residents and businesses in Socorro. The city manager is responsible for the strategic management of the operating and administrative services and for executing the policies and laws of the council. The city manager oversees the provision of services, including police, public works, human resources, accounting/purchasing, and planning and zoning.

Council members are elected to a four-year, staggered term.

==Sports==
Socorro High School won the 5A Texas state baseball championship in 2009.

==Education==

Most of Socorro lies within the Socorro Independent School District, with northeast Socorro, including recently annexed areas north of Interstate 10 and between Interstate 10 and Clint, lying within the Clint Independent School District. The following schools, all in the Socorro Independent School District, serve the city of Socorro:

Zoned elementary schools:
* Escontrias Elementary School
* H.D. Hilley Elementary School
* Hueco Elementary School
* Robert R. Rojas Elementary School
* Ernesto Serna Elementary-Intermediate School
* Campestre Elementary School

The zoned middle schools are: Socorro Middle School, Salvador H. Sanchez Middle School, and Ernesto Serna Elementary-Intermediate School.

The sole zoned high school is Socorro High School.

Other Socorro ISD schools include: Escontrias Early Childhood and KEYS Elementary Academy.

The part of Socorro within the Clint Independent School District is zoned to Clint High School, Clint Junior High School, and Surratt Elementary School, all in Clint.

==See also==

* Socorro Mission

==References==

==External links==
* City of Socorro official website 
* Mission Trail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979579" start="0" end="7" title="Socorro, Texas" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="21" end="42" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="98" end="108" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="122" end="129" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="152" end="158" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q970898" start="215" end="227" title="San Elizario, Texas" label="San Elizario"/>
<link wikidata="Q979346" start="337" end="349" title="Horizon City, Texas" label="Horizon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q977346" start="367" end="372" title="Clint, Texas" label="Clint"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="396" end="407" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="601" end="608" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="609" end="638" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="827" end="854" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751783" start="978" end="983" title="Manso Indians" label="Manso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753478" start="988" end="992" title="Piro Pueblo" label="Piro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547791" start="1013" end="1026" title="Pueblo Revolt" label="Pueblo Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="1039" end="1049" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q503818" start="1073" end="1080" title="Socorro, New Mexico" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1846" end="1871" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2210" end="2216" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2293" end="2311" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2405" end="2418" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3505" end="3522" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3616" end="3628" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q130471963" start="3850" end="3884" title="Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center" label="Rio Vista Bracero Reception Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="3902" end="3928" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q979772" start="4042" end="4057" title="Bracero Program" label="Bracero Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="5754" end="5780" title="council–manager government" label="council–manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553071" start="6533" end="6568" title="Socorro Independent School District" label="Socorro Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133969" start="6704" end="6737" title="Clint Independent School District" label="Clint Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553069" start="7236" end="7255" title="Socorro High School (Socorro, Texas)" label="Socorro High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133964" start="7427" end="7444" title="Clint High School" label="Clint High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859261" start="7534" end="7549" title="Socorro Mission" label="Socorro Mission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135833" wikidata="Q145866" url="?curid=135833" title="Sparks, Texas">
<text>Sparks is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 4,529 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,760 people, 896 households, and 808 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,974 people, 718 households, and 654 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 793 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 70.75% White, 0.17% Native American, 0.17% Asian, 28.11% from other races, and 0.81% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 99.46% of the population.

There were 718 households, out of which 67.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.1% were married couples living together, 15.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 8.8% were non-families. 7.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.14 and the average family size was 4.37.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 42.8% under the age of 18, 11.9% from 18 to 24, 27.6% from 25 to 44, 13.5% from 45 to 64, and 4.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.1 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $21,964, and the median income for a family was $24,286. Males had a median income of $15,897 versus $14,395 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $6,068. About 34.1% of families and 38.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 42.3% of those under age 18 and 60.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Sparks is in the Socorro Independent School District.

The zoned schools are: Mission Ridge Elementary School, Desert Wind Middle School, and Eastlake High School.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145866" start="0" end="6" title="Sparks, Texas" label="Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="12" end="35" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="45" end="59" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="61" end="66" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="115" end="126" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="146" end="153" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="154" end="183" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="218" end="245" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="333" end="358" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="468" end="474" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="688" end="693" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="701" end="716" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="724" end="729" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="743" end="754" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="790" end="798" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="802" end="808" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="961" end="976" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1768" end="1785" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1877" end="1889" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553071" start="1996" end="2031" title="Socorro Independent School District" label="Socorro Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230261" start="2121" end="2141" title="Eastlake High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Eastlake High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135834" wikidata="Q978238" url="?curid=135834" title="Tornillo, Texas">
<text>Tornillo ( ) is a border town in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 1,568 at the 2010 census. For statistical purposes, the United States Census Bureau has defined this unincorporated community as a census-designated place (CDP). It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area. The Tornillo and Guadalupe, Chihuahua, area is connected by the Tornillo–Guadalupe International Bridge.

The town is the home of Sonic Ranch, the world&#x27;s largest residential recording complex. 

In June 2018, the US government opened a tent city detention camp for migrant children at the Marcelino Serna Port of Entry on the Mexican border in Tornillo. By January 11, 2019, the last migrant child had been moved out of the camp en route to, or placed with, vetted sponsors.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

The city is located on State Highway 20 and the Southern Pacific Railroad.

===Climate===
According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Tornillo has a semi-arid climate, abbreviated &quot;BSk&quot; on climate maps. Temperatures reach an average high of 96 °F and average low of 62 °F in June, and an average high of 59 °F and average low of 28 °F in December. The annual average rainfall is 9.25 inches.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,432 people, 337 households, and 281 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,609 people, 394 households, and 366 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 437 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.2% White, 0.56% Native American, 1.58% from other races, and 0.68% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino were 99.13% of the population.

There were 394 households, out of which 67.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.1% were married couples living together, 14.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 6.9% were non-families. 6.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.08 and the average family size was 4.27.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 44.0% under the age of 18, 11.2% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 11.9% from 45 to 64, and 5.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.3 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $19,514, and the median income for a family was $20,329. Males had a median income of $16,955 versus $15,761 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $5,778. About 36.6% of families and 36.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.4% of those under age 18 and 40.2% of those age 65 or over.

Celebrity former residents include Pro Jockey Willie Shoemaker and Los Angeles radio personality Jamey Karr.

==Education==
Almost all of Tornillo is served by the Tornillo Independent School District. A small portion lies within the Fabens Independent School District.

== History ==
Tornillo was first platted in 1909 by a group of businessmen from El Paso, Texas who had formed the Tornillo Townsite Company. The first post office in the town opened the same year. Tornillo became the first agricultural area to be approved as part of the Rio Grande Irrigation Project after 1916. Cotton became the main crop in the region, however, by 1970, pecans were also a major agricultural crop in the area.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978238" start="0" end="8" title="Tornillo, Texas" label="Tornillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q902814" start="18" end="29" title="border town" label="border town"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="33" end="54" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="103" end="114" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="191" end="215" title="unincorporated community" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="221" end="244" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="270" end="277" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="278" end="307" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552257" start="326" end="346" title="Guadalupe, Chihuahua" label="Guadalupe, Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810216" start="373" end="412" title="Tornillo–Guadalupe International Bridge" label="Tornillo–Guadalupe International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561835" start="439" end="450" title="Sonic Ranch" label="Sonic Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315792" start="551" end="575" title="Tornillo tent city" label="tent city detention camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103111" start="604" end="633" title="Tornillo Port of Entry" label="Marcelino Serna Port of Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="822" end="849" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689212" start="915" end="931" title="Texas State Highway 20" label="State Highway 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="940" end="965" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="999" end="1028" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="1052" end="1069" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1351" end="1376" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1486" end="1492" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1705" end="1710" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1718" end="1733" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1746" end="1757" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1793" end="1801" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1805" end="1811" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1952" end="1967" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2759" end="2776" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2868" end="2880" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826134" start="3120" end="3156" title="Tornillo Independent School District" label="Tornillo Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427598" start="3190" end="3224" title="Fabens Independent School District" label="Fabens Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q831939" start="3260" end="3264" title="plat" label="plat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="3307" end="3321" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3498" end="3527" title="Rio Grande Irrigation Project" label="Rio Grande Irrigation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="3540" end="3546" title="Cotton" label="Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333877" start="3601" end="3606" title="pecan" label="pecan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135835" wikidata="Q2708888" url="?curid=135835" title="Vinton, Texas">
<text>Vinton is a village in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 2,684 at the 2020 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==

Native Americans inhabited the site of Vinton before the arrival of the Spaniards, who made it a stopping place along the Camino Real, the road from El Paso to Santa Fe, which passed along the east bank of the Rio Grande through what is now Vinton. In Spanish and Mexican colonial times, it was known as La Salinera, from the salt cedars which grew there in abundance; when the area passed to the United States after the US-Mexican War, this water stop became known as Cottonwood, and was located in the northern part of Vinton along the river, 22 miles from El Paso. In 1857, it was used by the San Antonio-San Diego Mail Line and from 1858 to 1861 by the Butterfield Overland Mail, that had a stage station called Cottonwood Station, located 22 miles from El Paso and 25 miles from Fort Fillmore up river in New Mexico.

Vinton was named for Southern Pacific Railroad surveyor John C. Vinton, who laid the cross-country route for the railroad through the area in 1881, and was most likely established around that time. A post office was opened there in 1892, and the town grew slowly in the next 100 years, reaching 605 in 1990, then tripling in population in the following decade to 1892 in the 2000 census. The incorporation of Vinton as Village of Industry on August 8, 1961 originated with Border Steel Corporation, which opened a mill in town that year; now owned by Arcelor Mittal, it is still in operation.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 Census data===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,684 people, 432 households, and 379 families residing in the village.

===2000 Census data===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,892 people, 496 households, and 431 families residing in the village. The population density was . There were 520 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 80.44% White, 1.00% African American, 0.16% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 15.59% from other races, and 2.70% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 93.60% of the population.

There were 496 households, out of which 67.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.7% were married couples living together, 13.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.1% were non-families. 11.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.81 and the average family size was 4.13.

In the village, the population was spread out, with 43.0% under the age of 18, 9.8% from 18 to 24, 31.5% from 25 to 44, 12.7% from 45 to 64, and 3.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.8 males. The median income for a household in the village was $26,779, and the median income for a family was $27,240. Males had a median income of $22,955 versus $14,777 for females. The per capita income for the village was $9,974. About 25.2% of families and 30.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 31.6% of those under age 18 and 32.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Almost all of Vinton is served by the Canutillo Independent School District, while a small section is in the Anthony Independent School District. Childress Elementary School is located in the village, and it is zoned to Childress for pre-kindergarten to fifth grades, and Canutillo Middle School for sixth to eighth grades. High-school students attend Canutillo High School and may also attend Northwest Early College High School should they qualify for admission.

==References==

==External links==
* Village of Vinton official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2708888" start="0" end="6" title="Vinton, Texas" label="Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="23" end="37" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="39" end="44" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="93" end="104" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="124" end="131" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="132" end="161" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="326" end="333" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="337" end="345" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="387" end="397" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413294" start="773" end="804" title="San Antonio-San Diego Mail Line" label="San Antonio-San Diego Mail Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018077" start="834" end="859" title="Butterfield Overland Mail" label="Butterfield Overland Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471142" start="961" end="974" title="Fort Fillmore" label="Fort Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="987" end="997" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1626" end="1653" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1750" end="1775" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1894" end="1900" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2122" end="2127" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2135" end="2151" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2159" end="2174" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2182" end="2187" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2201" end="2212" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2248" end="2256" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2260" end="2266" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2419" end="2434" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3235" end="3252" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3348" end="3360" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034125" start="3488" end="3525" title="Canutillo Independent School District" label="Canutillo Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772779" start="3559" end="3594" title="Anthony Independent School District" label="Anthony Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680303" start="3802" end="3823" title="Canutillo High School" label="Canutillo High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135836" wikidata="Q978527" url="?curid=135836" title="Westway, Texas">
<text>Westway is a census-designated place (CDP) in El Paso County, Texas, United States. The population was 4,188 at the 2010 census. It is part of the El Paso Metropolitan Statistical Area. It is located east of Interstate 10, approximately from the New Mexico - Texas state line.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,811 people, 1,092 households, and 796 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,829 people, 912 households, and 850 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,005 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 98.20% White, 0.47% African American, 0.03% Asian, 0.99% from other races, and 0.31% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 97.47% of the population.

There were 812 households, out of which 54.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.3% were married couples living together, 17.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 6.7% were non-families. 5.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 7.20 and the average family size was 9.36.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 41.2% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 14.8% from 45 to 64, and 4.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.9 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $28,439, and the median income for a family was $25,134. Males had a median income of $19,197 versus $10,157 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $2,636. About 35.2% of families and 36.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 43.9% of those under age 18 and 27.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

Westway is served by the Canutillo Independent School District. Davenport Elementary School is located in the community, and it is zoned to Davenport for pre-kindergarten to fifth grades, and to Alderete Middle School in Canutillo for sixth to eighth grades. High school students attend Canutillo High School and may also attend Northwest High School, the district&#x27;s early-college magnet high school, should they qualify for admission.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978527" start="0" end="7" title="Westway, Texas" label="Westway"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="13" end="36" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108494" start="46" end="60" title="El Paso County, Texas" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="62" end="67" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="116" end="127" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="147" end="154" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351807" start="155" end="184" title="El Paso metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="208" end="221" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="246" end="256" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="310" end="337" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="425" end="450" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="562" end="568" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="784" end="789" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="797" end="813" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="821" end="826" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="839" end="850" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="886" end="894" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="898" end="904" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1057" end="1072" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1864" end="1881" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1973" end="1985" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034125" start="2101" end="2138" title="Canutillo Independent School District" label="Canutillo Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680303" start="2363" end="2384" title="Canutillo High School" label="Canutillo High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135838" wikidata="Q972854" url="?curid=135838" title="Alma, Texas">
<text>Alma is a town in Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population was 373 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==
Alma is located on Interstate 45, approximately southeast of Ennis and north of Corsicana.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.3%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 302 people, 107 households, and 83 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 114 housing units at an average density of 22.7 per square mile (8.8/km2). The racial makeup of the town was 91.06% White, 3.64% African American, 5.30% from other races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.96% of the population.

There were 107 households, out of which 37.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 67.3% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.5% were non-families. 19.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.82 and the average family size was 3.23.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 28.5% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $46,250, and the median income for a family was $57,500. Males had a median income of $37,500 versus $14,205 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,947. About 3.7% of families and 7.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.3% of those under the age of eighteen and 8.3% of those sixty five or over.

The town of Alma has the lowest property taxes allowed by law.

==Education==
The town of Alma is served by the Ennis Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q972854" start="0" end="4" title="Alma, Texas" label="Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="18" end="30" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="32" end="37" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="131" end="144" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="173" end="178" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q939602" start="192" end="201" title="Corsicana, Texas" label="Corsicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="221" end="248" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="340" end="346" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="589" end="594" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="602" end="618" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="631" end="642" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="644" end="652" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="656" end="662" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="814" end="829" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1624" end="1641" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1733" end="1745" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379189" start="1948" end="1981" title="Ennis Independent School District" label="Ennis Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135839" wikidata="Q981958" url="?curid=135839" title="Bardwell, Texas">
<text>Bardwell is a city in Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population was 625 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Bardwell is located at the junction of State Highway 34 and Farm to Market Road 984 in southern Ellis County, southeast of Waxahachie. Highway 34 leads northeast to Ennis and southwest to Italy. Lake Bardwell is to the east.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==History==
The community was settled in the early 1880s when the town&#x27;s namesake, John W. Bardwell, built a cotton gin one mile south of the present-day location. A school opened in 1892 and a post office was established in 1893. When the Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway was routed through Ellis County in 1907, the gin and community were moved to the nearest stretch of track. The town had its own telephone system and electricity supplied by lines from Ennis in 1914. Bardwell prospered throughout the 1920s as a cotton shipping point with three gins and six grocery stores. The population grew to 650 by 1929, but the Great Depression and a subsequent drought severely impacted the community. The main road was rerouted to the new State Highway 34 in the early 1940s and most of Bardwell&#x27;s businesses either closed or moved to sites along the highway. In 1958, Bardwell&#x27;s school consolidated with nearby Ennis. After dropping to a low of 277 during the 1970s, the population began to grow. By 1990, 387 people lived in Bardwell. That figure had grown to 583 by 2000.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, 583 people, 167 households, and 139 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 176 housing units averaged 632.1 per square mile (242.7/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 61.58% White, 17.50% African American, 1.37% Native American, 18.52% from other races, and 1.03% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 47.51% of the population.

Of the 167 households, 47.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.3% were married couples living together, 15.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.2% were not families. About 13.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.49 and the average family size was 3.86.

In the city, the population was distributed as 37.7% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 17.7% from 45 to 64, and 8.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $31,250, and for a family was $35,000. Males had a median income of $28,125 versus $16,250 for females. The per capita income for the city was $10,666. About 26.5% of families and 24.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.8% of those under age 18 and 35.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Bardwell is served by the Ennis Independent School District. The school district had an enrollment of 5,838 for the 2011–2012 school year.

==References==
==External links==

*Ennis Independent School District</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981958" start="0" end="8" title="Bardwell, Texas" label="Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="22" end="41" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="88" end="99" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503696" start="156" end="172" title="Texas State Highway 34" label="State Highway 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="240" end="250" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="282" end="287" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q977238" start="305" end="310" title="Italy, Texas" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19986710" start="312" end="325" title="Lake Bardwell" label="Lake Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="360" end="387" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="545" end="555" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539294" start="676" end="709" title="Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway" label="Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="894" end="899" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="1060" end="1076" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1548" end="1554" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1729" end="1742" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2832" end="2849" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2943" end="2955" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379189" start="3071" end="3104" title="Ennis Independent School District" label="Ennis Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135840" wikidata="Q982629" url="?curid=135840" title="Ennis, Texas">
<text>Ennis () is a city in eastern Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population is 20,159 according to the 2020 census, with an estimated population of 23,686 in 2023. Ennis is home to the annual National Polka Festival.

==History==



In 1871 the Houston and Texas Central Railroad (H&amp;TC) arrived at the spot that would become Ennis as it built north towards Dallas. The city was established that year and surveyed a year later. It is named after Cornelius Ennis, a founder of the H&amp;TC Railroad.

Between 1874 and 1890, the population of Ennis grew tenfold from approximately 300 to 3,000. Many of the new settlers came from the defeated Confederate States of America and others came from the war-torn European nations that later became Czechoslovakia. This early growth was attributed to the success of cotton production in the region, making Ennis a center of trade and commerce for both farmers and the railroad. The influx of Czech migrants would also shape and transform the cultural heritage of the community for years to come.

In 1891, the H&amp;TC chose Ennis to be its northern division headquarters. The machine shops and roundhouse employed several hundred men. One condition of the agreement was that as long as Ennis was able to furnish water the shops could not be moved from the community. The city built the first of three lakes for this purpose: Old City Lake in 1892, followed by New Lake in 1895, and Lake Clark (an extension of New Lake) in 1940. However H&amp;TC would later be acquired by the Texas and New Orleans Railroad (T&amp;NO), a subsidiary of Southern Pacific, in 1934. While it no longer hosted the company headquarters, the shops and yard in Ennis would remain and continue to be used as a hub for other lines and branches serving the city.

On July 14, 1902, the Corsicana Oil Citys of the Texas League moved that day&#x27;s game against Texarkana to Ennis, due to Sunday blue laws in Coriscana. Future major-leaguer Nig Clarke set an all-time record by hitting eight home runs in ten at bats in a 51–3 victory. (Clarke was helped mightily by the fact that Ennis&#x27; tiny ballpark featured a right field fence only about 210 feet from home plate.)

The expansion of the cotton industry supplemented by the railroad provided access to foreign and domestic markets through the port of Houston. By 1920, a total of 152,601 bales of cotton were ginned and shipped from Ellis County, the most of any county in America. In part to the city&#x27;s significant contribution, the Ennis Chamber of Commerce adopted the slogan &#x27;Where Railroads and Cotton Fields Meet.&quot; These two industries - trade and cotton production - produced immense wealth for the community that could be seen in the residential development of the city. Lawyers, doctors, businessmen, and other wealthy residents built churches of many different denominations and numerous fraternal organizations met regularly. Elegant houses along &quot;the Avenue&quot; and north were accompanied by dozens of Folk Victorian houses and Craftsman style bungalows. These Victorian houses and Craftsman bungalows in the northwestern part of the city would eventually become a part of the Templeton-McCanless Residential Historic District.

By the mid-20th century Ennis had become a modern community with schools, three movie theaters, several drugstores, banks and automobile dealerships. Descendants of early settlers had developed new traditions like the National Polka Festival and the Ennis Bluebonnet Trail. Moreover, the city was connected to Dallas to the north and Houston to the South by Interstate Highway 45.

The commercial strip along Ennis Ave. between Downtown and Interstate 45 was hit by a tornado on May 15th, 2013, rendering four homes uninhabitable and damaging as many as 55 businesses. The damage caused by the tornado impacted the National Register Historic District, with some of its historic buildings facing demolition. However, demolition was opposed by local community leaders and activists. As a result, these damaged buildings were sold by the city to developers with the intention of repairing the buildings. Further restoration and revitalization plans were implemented in the Downtown Comprehensive Plan, and the city was admitted to the Texas Main Street Program in January 2015. In recent years, Ennis has seen a boost in its economy and its downtown area has been revitalized. 

Ennis was part of the path of totality during the Solar eclipse of April 8, 2024 with the centerline of the eclipse passing through the northern part of the town. In celebration of the eclipse, Ennis threw a large festival, attempting to attract more visitors to the town and further bolster the economy. The city experienced 4 minutes and 23 seconds of totality.
===Railroads in Ennis===

Throughout the city&#x27;s history, railroads have been instrumental in the community&#x27;s early economic boom and supplemented the city&#x27;s growth for over a century. Three railroads initially laid tracks and operated to and from Ennis—the Houston and Texas Central (H&amp;TC) running north to south-east, the Texas Midland Railroad spurring to the northeast, and the Waxahachie Tap Railroad—later known as the Central Texas and Northwestern Railroad (CT&amp;N)—coming in from the northwest. The CT&amp;N was merged into the H&amp;TC by the early 1900s and both remaining railroads serving the city would be merged into the Texas and New Orleans Railroad in 1934, eventually merging into its parent company Southern Pacific Railroad by 1961. In 1996, Southern Pacific would merge into Union Pacific Railroad which is now serves as the sole rail operator in the city, maintaining a yard and local base of operations for the Ennis Subdivision.

The construction of the Houston and Texas Central Railway would be directly responsible for the early development of the city. Not only was the community strategically located in the middle of the Blackland Prairie, but it was located along the proposed H&amp;TC line from Houston to Dallas—the first rail connection between both cities. However, the railroad&#x27;s decision to establish Ennis meant that the nearby town of Burnham—located five miles south near the present-day community of Ensign—would be bypassed. The issue of this decision presented itself when many businesses in Burnham were attracted to the railroad and relocated to Ennis. As a result, a mob of angry residents reacted violently to the railroad&#x27;s bypass and attacked citizens in the city of Ennis, killing one and injuring several others. Burnham, an otherwise well-planned and relatively developed city, would eventually decline and become a ghost town in the coming decades.

In 1870—as the H&amp;TC was laying track in Ellis County—residents of the neighboring city of Waxahachie refused to give bonds to the railroad and resisted the development of a rail link to the system. After the railroad brought significant growth to Ennis and the decline of the bypassed community of Burnham took hold, attitudes changes as opportunistic businessmen and lawmakers chartered the Waxahachie Tap Railroad to link Waxahachie to the H&amp;TC in an effort to reap some of the economic benefits. Construction was completed in 1879, establishing a 13-mile connection across Ellis County between both cities. In 1881, the railroad would be reorganized into the Central Texas and Northwestern Railway and secured state legislation permitting the railroad to build out west into the Panhandle, but no further construction would be made on the railroad. Eventually, the CT&amp;N was merged into the H&amp;TC in 1901.

In 1882, the H&amp;TC began construction on a spur line which would span over 100 miles from Ennis to the city of Paris, Texas, linking a southern terminus of the St. Louis and San Francisco Railroad. This would bypass the city of Dallas and provide a direct link from St. Louis, Missouri to the port cities of Houston and Galveston. However, in 1885—just three years into construction—the H&amp;TC went into receivership after only building half of the line, stopping just south of the city of Quinlan. In 1892, the Texas Midland Railroad was chartered by businesswoman Hetty Green who would purchase the northeastern spur from the H&amp;TC. The link between the cities of Ennis and Paris would finally be made 13 years later.

After a decade of operation, the Texas Midland was bought out by parties interested in a link and partnership between the Frisco Line and Rock Island Line. Plans were announced to build a line 65 miles south from Ennis to Waco to connect with the recently established Burlington-Rock Island Railroad, a joint venture of the Rock Island Line and Burlington Route. There was significant potential of Ennis becoming a major railroad hub and junction, which could have significantly boosted its already booming development. However, this southern extension would never come to fruition and the Texas Midland would eventually be bought out and annexed by Southern Pacific in 1928, which leased the line to its subsidiary Texas and New Orleans Railroad. In 1934, the T&amp;NO would fully acquire both the Texas Midland and the Houston and Texas Central, dissolving both companies in a merger to consolidate the H&amp;TC line into the Southern Pacific system and fully abandon the Texas Midland Route. While Ennis would continue to see T&amp;NO service to Dallas and Houston, the northeastern spur from Ennis to Paris would sit abandoned and go unused for almost a decade. A washout of the bridge spanning the Trinity River would lead to the official abandonment and decommissioning of the line between Ennis and Kaufman in 1942.

The city was also served by the Texas Electric Railway, an extensive interurban railway network in North Texas that stretched over 200 miles in length at its peak. The line historically ran through Ennis at street level along Dallas Street before running parallel to the T&amp;NO tracks outside of the city center. From 1913 to 1941, Ennis was a stop along the Dallas-Corsicana Line, but the rise of the automobile, decline in ridership, and the economic strain of World War II led to the suspension of service and closure of the line. Like the Texas Midland&#x27;s spur along Breckenridge Street, the interurban line ran along Dallas Street and was likewise paved over after service was suspended. However, these tracks were revealed and partially restored during street renovations in the late-2010s.

By the mid-20th century, the significance of the railroad began to decline in the city, as the postwar boom of the mid-century favored the automobile over the locomotive. Texas and New Orleans&#x27; &quot;Sunbeam&quot; and Hustler services were cut in 1955 and 1957 respectively, after serving the city since the T&amp;NO&#x27;s takeover of the H&amp;TC. Passenger service would not return to Ennis, as attempts by Amtrak to restore service to the city were largely unsuccessful. Ten years after the T&amp;NO&#x27;s merger into Southern Pacific in 1961, Southern Pacific would initially resist attempts to route the Lone Star along the line through Ennis in the early 1970s. In 1989, a spur of the Texas Eagle—the successor of the Lone Star service—running from Dallas to Houston would run nonstop through the city during the alternate service&#x27;s brief three-year stint in the early 1990s. Shortly after in 1996, Southern Pacific would merge into Union Pacific, who has since been the sole railroad operating in the city. Union Pacific would go on to commemorate the city&#x27;s significant railroad history by honoring the legacy of its local yard workers—some of whom were fourth and fifth-generation railroaders - in awarding the city a membership to the company&#x27;s Train Town USA registry in 2013.

===Templeton-McCanless Historic District===

The Templeton-McCanless Residential Historic District is named in honor of two notable figures instrumental in the early development of the city, one of whom—Hix McCanless—was the architect for several early homes built in Ennis from the late 19th century to early 20th century. Because of the city&#x27;s economic boom and the general prosperity of the Gilded Age during this era, many of these early homes were built indulgently with ornate details and great levels of craftsmanship in adherence to the pre-modern architectural styles of the time—namely in the Neoclassical, American Craftsman, and Folk Victorian styles. However, many of these original homes were lost to neglect, demolition, fire, and careless renovation during the 20th century, precipitating the need to preserve the locally historic significance of those remaining. The historic district was created in 1986 after five years of grassroots efforts from the Ennis Heritage Society (now the Ennis Historical Society) and is now an officially registered district in the National Register of Historic Places dedicated to the protection and preservation of these homes. Today, dozens of homes are historically preserved in their original style. Some of the homes have been named after the architect of the house or the family name of its first residents.

==Geography==

Ennis is in the northeastern region of Texas, in eastern Ellis County. Interstate 45 passes through the east side of the city, with access from Exits 247 through 255. I-45 leads north to Dallas and south to Houston. U.S. Route 287 curves around the south side of Ennis and leads northwest to Waxahachie, the Ellis County seat. Texas State Highway 34 passes through the center of Ennis, leading northeast to Kaufman and southwest to Italy. Waco is to the southwest.

Ennis has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.85%, is water.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Ennis has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 20,159 people, 6,642 households, and 4,985 families residing in the city.

==Arts and culture==
===Events===
The National Polka Festival is a three-day festival that has been hosted annually since 1967 during the Memorial Day weekend to commemorate the city&#x27;s historic Czech Texan history and heritage. The festival features Czech cuisine, polka music, a Memorial Day parade through downtown, and polka dances hosted at event halls operated by fraternal organizations such as Sokol or the Knights of Columbus. There is a homecoming-like competition among residents and community-based fraternal organizations to crown the annual Duke and Duchess of Ennis. The Ennis Polka Run takes place to help fund the Rotary Club and the Children&#x27;s Reading Club of Ennis.

The Bluebonnet Trails Festival celebrates the state flower of Texas and the vibrant bloom of wildflowers in the surrounding countryside. The festival includes sightseeing excursions and a street fair in downtown. The festival is held on the third weekend of April, and the Bluebonnet Trails are hosted for the entire month. First hosted in Kachina Prairie Park in 1938, the Bluebonnet Trails have since expanded into a route of several dozen miles along rural farm roads throughout the surrounding countryside east and northeast of the city. The routes for these sightseeing excursions have been officially hosted and mapped out by the Ennis Garden Club since 1951. To commemorate the popularity of the Bluebonnet Trails Festival and the efforts made to celebrate and preserve the state flower of Texas, the Texas Legislature designated Ennis the &quot;Bluebonnet City of Texas&quot; and also declared Ennis the official &quot;Bluebonnet Trail of Texas&quot; in 1997.

The city hosts several other events throughout the year. Unity One Blues on Main Summer Music Festival is a jazz and blues festival hosted in June; Ennis Freedom Fest is a parade and firework show celebrating the 4th of July; the Fall Festival and Monster Mash Dash 5k Marathon are hosted in October; and the Lights of Ennis Festival, the Parade of Lights, and Our Lady of Guadalupe Procession are hosted in December during the Christmas season.

===Attractions===
Lake Bardwell is a reservoir managed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, located southwest of Ennis. It is a flood-control reservoir in the Trinity River Basin and a conservation pool in the Trinity Valley Authority. Surrounding the lake is a park system consisting of Big Mustang Creek Park, Little Mustang Creek Park, High View Park, Love Park, Mott Park, and Highview Marina, all of which offer boat ramps. The lake and parks offer hiking, horseback riding, camping, fishing, and sport boating.

Texas Motorplex in Ennis is a quarter-mile drag racing facility built in 1986 by former funny car driver Billy Meyer. It hosts the annual NHRA FallNationals in October, when hundreds of professional and amateur drag racers compete.

Galaxy Drive-In Theatre Galaxy Drive-In Theatre first opened in 2004, it was with only three screens. Sixteen years later, they had expanded to seven screens, featuring the newest films Hollywood has to offer. All the films shown at the Galaxy Drive-In Theatre are projected digitally and, in certain instances, in 3-D, a rarity in the world of drive-in cinema. Galaxy Drive-In is open seven days a week, 365 days a year.

Ennis Railroad and Cultural Heritage Museum is housed in the former Van Noy restaurant building. The museum&#x27;s collections include: railroad and cultural memorabilia including items related to the Houston and Central Texas Railroad; a large diorama of the old engine roundhouse that once existed just north of the museum&#x27;s location; a large collection of rare china; and a MKT caboose.

Kachina Prairie is a city park preserving one of the last remaining examples of untouched Texas blackland prairie. The first Ennis bluebonnet trail was marked through this area in 1938.

==Government==
The city of Ennis has a City Commissioner/City Manager government type, with several commissioners representing different wards of the city government in city council. The city is also one of the largest incorporated cities in the United States that continues to elect its City Marshal. 

Below is a list of members of the City Government and their position:

==Education==
Education is administered by the Ennis Independent School District, which consists of two early childhood centers, four elementary schools, two intermediate schools, one junior high, and Ennis High School. Secondary education offers several extracurricular programs, such as UIL (University Interscholastic League) Academics and Sports, TSA (Technology Student Association), and the National FFA Organization. Junior high and high school sports include baseball, football, basketball, volleyball, tennis, cross country, track, powerlifting, softball, soccer, and golf.

==Notable people==

* Darrell Lance Abbott, musician and songwriter, co-founder of Pantera and Damageplan
* Vincent Paul Abbott, musician and songwriter, co-founder of Pantera and Damageplan
* Ray Armstrong, college and professional football player
* Bob Banner, producer, co-producer of &quot;The Carol Burnett Show&quot;
* Clyde Barrow, partner in Bonnie and Clyde crime duo. Resided in Ennis later in life
* Alfred H. Bennett, District Judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas
* Pam Bowers, college women&#x27;s basketball coach
* Gary Campbell, college football player and coach
* Steve Collins, college football player
* Chase Craig, writer-cartoonist. Worked with Dell Comics and Gold Key Comics
* Jacobs Crawley, rodeo cowboy, saddle bronc racer
* James &quot;Red&quot; Duke, trauma surgeon, professor, first surgeon to receive President Kennedy at Parkland Medical in Dallas
* Jack Fields, Republican representative of Texas&#x27;s 8th congressional district
* Bob Finley, MLB catcher, Southwest Conference and AFL
* Walt Furnace, Republican representative of the Alaska House of Representatives
* Tanya Godsey, musician, vocalist, and pianist
* Graham Harrell, NFL and college football player lived in Ennis
* Hattie Leah Henenberg, lawyer, judge, appointed to the All-Woman Supreme Court
* D. Van Holliday, theoretical and experimental physicist, acoustician
* Kirby Baxter Holmes, gospel musician and pastor. Instrumental in Martin Luther King Jr.&#x27;s visit to Texas in 1959
* Charles Hudson, MLB starting pitcher
* Jack Lummus, Medal of Honor recipient, 1st Lt. of the US Marine Corps
* Vincent Marshall, Canadian football player
* Hix McCanless, architect, surveyor, civil engineer.
* Robert Randall Onstead, grocer and businessman, founder of Randall&#x27;s Food Markets
* Ginger Rogers, actress, singer, dancer. Lived in Ennis during childhood.
* Rabon Tarrant, jump blues and jazz drummer, singer and songwriter.
* Ernest Tubb, The &quot;Texas Troubadour&quot;, country music singer and songwriter
* Mary Walker, World Barrel Racing Champion, 2013
* Edward Whitacre Jr., former chairman and CEO of AT&amp;T Inc., General Motors

==In popular culture==
Scenes from the following movies were filmed in Ennis: &quot;Deadly Blessing&quot; (1981) starring Sharon Stone; &quot;On Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot; (1986) starring Hallie Foote and Michael Higgins; and &quot;Walking Tall: The Payback&quot; (2007) with Kevin Sorbo and Haley Ramm.

The Ennis Railroad and Cultural Museum was featured on the NBC travel show, The Texas Bucket List.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* City of Ennis official website
* Ennis Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="0" end="5" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="30" end="49" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974989" start="197" end="220" title="National Polka Festival" label="National Polka Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916804" start="250" end="284" title="Houston and Texas Central Railroad" label="Houston and Texas Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q104536897" start="454" end="469" title="Cornelius Ennis" label="Cornelius Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="649" end="678" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="748" end="762" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519350" start="1527" end="1557" title="Texas and New Orleans Railroad" label="Texas and New Orleans Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="1586" end="1602" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q939602" start="1809" end="1818" title="Corsicana, Texas" label="Corsicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134569" start="1836" end="1848" title="Texas League" label="Texas League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="1911" end="1927" title="Sunday blue laws" label="Sunday blue laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032151" start="1963" end="1973" title="Nig Clarke" label="Nig Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911022" start="3016" end="3030" title="Folk Victorian" label="Folk Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q463382" start="3042" end="3057" title="Craftsman style" label="Craftsman style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974989" start="3461" end="3484" title="National Polka Festival" label="National Polka Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3553" end="3559" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="3577" end="3584" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708586" start="3722" end="3736" title="tornado outbreak of May 15–17, 2013" label="May 15th, 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978002" start="3858" end="3893" title="National Register Historic District" label="National Register Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620078" start="4469" end="4499" title="Solar eclipse of April 8, 2024" label="Solar eclipse of April 8, 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985453" start="5125" end="5147" title="Texas Midland Railroad" label="Texas Midland Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519350" start="5439" end="5469" title="Texas and New Orleans Railroad" label="Texas and New Orleans Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="5522" end="5547" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="5600" end="5622" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="6811" end="6821" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="7507" end="7516" title="Texas Panhandle" label="Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830149" start="7755" end="7767" title="Paris, Texas" label="Paris, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320362" start="7804" end="7840" title="St. Louis and San Francisco Railroad" label="St. Louis and San Francisco Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="7910" end="7929" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="7964" end="7973" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q981491" start="8136" end="8143" title="Quinlan, Texas" label="Quinlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985453" start="8158" end="8180" title="Texas Midland Railroad" label="Texas Midland Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q446490" start="8212" end="8223" title="Hetty Green" label="Hetty Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q498404" start="8508" end="8524" title="Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad" label="Rock Island Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="8592" end="8596" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928510" start="8638" end="8669" title="Burlington-Rock Island Railroad" label="Burlington-Rock Island Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="8715" end="8731" title="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad" label="Burlington Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707656" start="9726" end="9748" title="Texas Electric Railway" label="Texas Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="9763" end="9773" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638884" start="10703" end="10710" title="Sunbeam (passenger train)" label="Sunbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="10913" end="10919" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671382" start="11114" end="11123" title="Lone Star (Amtrak train)" label="Lone Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q756538" start="11196" end="11207" title="Texas Eagle" label="Texas Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872885" start="12012" end="12025" title="Hix McCanless" label="Hix McCanless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="12208" end="12218" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="12417" end="12429" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q463382" start="12431" end="12449" title="American Craftsman" label="American Craftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911022" start="12455" end="12469" title="Folk Victorian" label="Folk Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="12894" end="12930" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="13264" end="13277" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="13380" end="13386" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="13400" end="13407" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818259" start="13409" end="13423" title="U.S. Route 287 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="13485" end="13495" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503696" start="13520" end="13542" title="Texas State Highway 34" label="Texas State Highway 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q975843" start="13600" end="13607" title="Kaufman, Texas" label="Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q977238" start="13625" end="13630" title="Italy, Texas" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="13632" end="13636" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="13862" end="13891" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="13912" end="13937" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="14013" end="14038" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974989" start="14164" end="14187" title="National Polka Festival" label="National Polka Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="14264" end="14276" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197358" start="14325" end="14336" title="Czech Texan" label="Czech Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871595" start="14381" end="14394" title="Czech cuisine" label="Czech cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q954854" start="14532" end="14537" title="Sokol (sport organization)" label="Sokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046799" start="14545" end="14564" title="Knights of Columbus" label="Knights of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q573876" start="14867" end="14888" title="Bluebonnet (plant)" label="state flower of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="15629" end="15646" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="16003" end="16014" title="4th of July" label="4th of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q31877" start="16151" end="16172" title="Our Lady of Guadalupe" label="Our Lady of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19986710" start="16255" end="16268" title="Lake Bardwell" label="Lake Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707871" start="16755" end="16770" title="Texas Motorplex" label="Texas Motorplex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16988" end="17011" title="Galaxy Drive-In Theatre" label="Galaxy Drive-In Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708232" start="17897" end="17920" title="Texas blackland prairie" label="Texas blackland prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592272" start="18033" end="18050" title="City Commissioner" label="City Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="18051" end="18063" title="City Manager" label="City Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379189" start="18416" end="18449" title="Ennis Independent School District" label="Ennis Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891045" start="18570" end="18587" title="Ennis High School" label="Ennis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894798" start="18663" end="18696" title="University Interscholastic League" label="University Interscholastic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399551" start="18725" end="18755" title="Technology Student Association" label="Technology Student Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="18766" end="18791" title="National FFA Organization" label="National FFA Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="18888" end="18901" title="cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="18975" end="18995" title="Darrell Lance Abbott" label="Darrell Lance Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="19036" end="19043" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q983933" start="19048" end="19058" title="Damageplan" label="Damageplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380531" start="19061" end="19080" title="Vincent Paul Abbott" label="Vincent Paul Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="19121" end="19128" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q983933" start="19133" end="19143" title="Damageplan" label="Damageplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297141" start="19146" end="19159" title="Ray Armstrong" label="Ray Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353520" start="19204" end="19214" title="Bob Banner" label="Bob Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986215" start="19251" end="19269" title="The Carol Burnett Show" label="Carol Burnett Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="19278" end="19290" title="Clyde Barrow" label="Clyde Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="19303" end="19319" title="Bonnie and Clyde" label="Bonnie and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097539" start="19364" end="19381" title="Alfred H. Bennett" label="Alfred H. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889844" start="19405" end="19468" title="United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas" label="United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209468" start="19471" end="19481" title="Pam Bowers" label="Pam Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887217" start="19491" end="19514" title="women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148786" start="19523" end="19536" title="Gary Campbell (American football coach)" label="Gary Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612235" start="19574" end="19587" title="Steve Collins (American Football)" label="Steve Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087120" start="19615" end="19626" title="Chase Craig" label="Chase Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="19659" end="19670" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534616" start="19675" end="19690" title="Gold Key Comics" label="Gold Key Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995735" start="19693" end="19707" title="Jacobs Crawley" label="Jacobs Crawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="19709" end="19714" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026613" start="19723" end="19735" title="saddle bronc" label="saddle bronc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127980" start="19744" end="19770" title="James &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Duke" label="James &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q338379" start="19772" end="19786" title="trauma surgeon" label="trauma surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="19824" end="19841" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="President Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q743157" start="19874" end="19885" title="Jack Fields" label="Jack Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707395" start="19916" end="19955" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932422" start="19958" end="19968" title="Bob Finley" label="Bob Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="19970" end="19973" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571245" start="19983" end="20003" title="Southwest Conference" label="Southwest Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="20008" end="20011" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q61337231" start="20014" end="20026" title="Walt Furnace" label="Walt Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q720324" start="20061" end="20092" title="Alaska House of Representatives" label="Alaska House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662504" start="20095" end="20107" title="Tanya Godsey" label="Tanya Godsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113253" start="20143" end="20157" title="Graham Harrell" label="Graham Harrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974126" start="20208" end="20229" title="Hattie Leah Henenberg" label="Hattie Leah Henenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188119" start="20263" end="20286" title="All-Woman Supreme Court" label="All-Woman Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203849" start="20289" end="20304" title="D. Van Holliday" label="D. Van Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="20346" end="20357" title="acoustician" label="acoustician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414899" start="20360" end="20379" title="Kirby Baxter Holmes" label="Kirby Baxter Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="20425" end="20447" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5079213" start="20480" end="20494" title="Charles Hudson (baseball)" label="Charles Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="20496" end="20499" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724552" start="20519" end="20530" title="Jack Lummus" label="Jack Lummus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="20532" end="20546" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931928" start="20591" end="20607" title="Vincent Marshall" label="Vincent Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="20609" end="20626" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872885" start="20636" end="20649" title="Hix McCanless" label="Hix McCanless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349164" start="20690" end="20712" title="Robert Randall Onstead" label="Robert Randall Onstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291489" start="20749" end="20776" title="Randall&amp;#x27;s Food Markets" label="Randall&amp;#x27;s Food Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="20779" end="20792" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909493" start="20854" end="20867" title="Rabon Tarrant" label="Rabon Tarrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515757" start="20869" end="20879" title="jump blues" label="jump blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="20884" end="20888" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q963142" start="20923" end="20934" title="Ernest Tubb" label="Ernest Tubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622321" start="21008" end="21019" title="Mary Walker (rodeo)" label="Mary Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529836" start="21027" end="21040" title="Barrel Racing" label="Barrel Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294060" start="21058" end="21077" title="Edward Whitacre Jr." label="Edward Whitacre Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="21106" end="21119" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="21121" end="21135" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415347" start="21221" end="21236" title="Deadly Blessing" label="Deadly Blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="21259" end="21271" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642973" start="21325" end="21337" title="Hallie Foote" label="Hallie Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q338726" start="21342" end="21357" title="Michael Higgins (actor)" label="Michael Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21369" end="21394" title="Walking Tall: The Payback" label="Walking Tall: The Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q313655" start="21413" end="21424" title="Kevin Sorbo" label="Kevin Sorbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q290063" start="21429" end="21439" title="Haley Ramm" label="Haley Ramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="21501" end="21504" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27645624" start="21522" end="21539" title="The Texas Bucket List" label="Texas Bucket List"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135841" wikidata="Q982212" url="?curid=135841" title="Garrett, Texas">
<text>Garrett is a town in Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population was 829 at the 2020 census, up from 806 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Garrett is located in eastern Ellis County and is bordered to the south by the city of Ennis. Interstate 45 passes along the eastern edge of the town, with access from Exit 255. I-45 leads north to downtown Dallas and south to Houston.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Garrett has a total area of , of which , or 1.00%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 448 people, 147 households, and 118 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 158 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 71.43% White, 0.67% African American, 1.56% Pacific Islander, 22.54% from other races, and 3.79% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 35.27% of the population.

There were 147 households, out of which 45.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.9% were married couples living together, 16.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.7% were non-families. 14.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.05 and the average family size was 3.32.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 33.5% under the age of 18, 11.6% from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 19.2% from 45 to 64, and 4.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $40,104, and the median income for a family was $40,469. Males had a median income of $27,132 versus $20,938 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,810. About 8.9% of families and 14.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.2% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Garrett is served by the Ennis Independent School District.

==Police protection==
The town&#x27;s police department consists of one police chief and two full-time police officers. The city also has four reserve police officers who assist the city in the daily police operations. The police department recently updated their police vehicles. The vehicles are two Dodge Durangos which are fully equipped with lights and sirens and visible police markings to serve the town of Garrett. Garrett Police patrols the town of Garrett as well as monitoring traffic on Interstate I-45.

==Fire protection==
The town is served by two fire departments, Garrett Rural Fire Department (formerly Garrett Fire Department) and Garrett City Fire Department. Garrett Rural has two stations with multiple engines and multiple brush trucks, with a large membership that covers the area outside the town limits. Garrett City covers the town limits and consists of one station with an older engine and older utility bed pickup, and with a membership of about 10 firefighters.

==Notable person==
* Norma Gabler, conservative Christian activist and textbook campaigner

==References==
==External links==
* City of Garrett official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982212" start="0" end="7" title="Garrett, Texas" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="21" end="33" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="35" end="40" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="235" end="240" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="242" end="255" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="355" end="361" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="375" end="382" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="402" end="429" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="521" end="527" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="741" end="746" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="754" end="770" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="778" end="794" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="808" end="819" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="855" end="863" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="867" end="873" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1026" end="1041" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1837" end="1854" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1947" end="1959" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379189" start="2073" end="2106" title="Ennis Independent School District" label="Ennis Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q108130974" start="3124" end="3136" title="Mel and Norma Gabler" label="Norma Gabler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135842" wikidata="Q977238" url="?curid=135842" title="Italy, Texas">
<text>Italy ( , unlike the country) is a town in Ellis County, Texas, United States. Its population was 1,926 in 2020. The community was named after Italy by a settler who had visited the European country.

==History==
Italy was founded in 1879 by settlers who found the surrounding land suitable for growing cotton, corn, sweet potatoes, and wheat. The Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad reached Italy in 1890, with the railroad stop making the town an important market center. The population grew steadily, from 1,061 in 1900 to 1,500 in 1925, until the Great Depression sparked a decline lasting over three decades. The town began to see economic and population growth again in the 1970s, with the population rising to nearly 2,000 residents by 2000.

==Geography==

Italy is located in southwestern Ellis County. Interstate 35E crosses the northwestern corner of the town at exit 386; it leads north to Waxahachie, the county seat, north to downtown Dallas, and southwestward to its junction with I-35W near Hillsboro. U.S. Route 77 passes through the center of Italy and parallels I-35E. Texas State Highway 34 leads northeast from the center of Italy to Ennis.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Italy has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, 1,926 people, 765 households, and 561 families resided in the town.

==Notable people==

* Keith Davis, former safety for the Dallas Cowboys
* Dale Evans, actress; wife of Roy Rogers
* Jack Hyles, pastor of First Baptist Church of Hammond, Indiana, founder of Hyles-Anderson College
* Kortnei Johnson, athlete
* J. B. Milam, principal chief of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma
* Art Shires, former first baseman for the Chicago White Sox, Washington Senators and Boston Braves

==Education==

The town is served by the Italy Independent School District, which includes Italy High School (grades 7–12) and Stafford Elementary (prekindergarten - grade 6), and the S.M. Dunlap Memorial Library.

In 2009, the school district was rated &quot;academically acceptable&quot; by the Texas Education Agency.

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Italy has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* City of Italy official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q977238" start="0" end="5" title="Italy, Texas" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="43" end="62" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="107" end="111" title="2020 United States census" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="143" end="148" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="303" end="309" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="311" end="315" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="317" end="329" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="337" end="342" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q925995" start="348" end="378" title="Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad" label="Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="546" end="562" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445636" start="807" end="821" title="Interstate 35E (Texas)" label="Interstate 35E"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="897" end="907" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="913" end="924" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="944" end="950" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445688" start="991" end="996" title="Interstate 35W (Texas)" label="I-35W"/>
<link wikidata="Q982462" start="1002" end="1011" title="Hillsboro, Texas" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="1013" end="1026" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503696" start="1083" end="1105" title="Texas State Highway 34" label="Texas State Highway 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="1150" end="1155" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1175" end="1202" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1271" end="1296" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814313" start="1389" end="1400" title="Keith Davis (safety)" label="Keith Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="1424" end="1438" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q438048" start="1441" end="1451" title="Dale Evans" label="Dale Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="1470" end="1480" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858607" start="1483" end="1493" title="Jack Hyles" label="Jack Hyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q856860" start="1529" end="1545" title="Hammond, Indiana" label="Hammond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q125817180" start="1583" end="1598" title="Kortnei Johnson" label="Kortnei Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104727" start="1610" end="1621" title="J. B. Milam" label="J. B. Milam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797072" start="1676" end="1686" title="Art Shires" label="Art Shires"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="1717" end="1734" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="1736" end="1755" title="Washington Senators (1901-60)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="1760" end="1773" title="Boston Braves" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093606" start="1816" end="1849" title="Italy Independent School District" label="Italy Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892765" start="1866" end="1883" title="Italy High School" label="Italy High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="2072" end="2094" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2226" end="2255" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2269" end="2294" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135843" wikidata="Q981718" url="?curid=135843" title="Maypearl, Texas">
<text>Maypearl is a city in Ellis County, Texas, United States. Its population was 939 in 2020.

==Geography==

Maypearl is located in western Ellis County and is southwest of Waxahachie, the county seat, south of Midlothian, and southwest of downtown Dallas.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Maypearl has a total area of , of which , or 2.16%, is covered by water.

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Maypearl has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, 939 people, 351 households, and 248 families resided in the city.

==Education==
The community is served by the Maypearl Independent School District and is home to the Maypearl High School Panthers. The district received a recognized status by the Texas Education Agency for the 2009–2010 academic year

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*City of Maypearl official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981718" start="0" end="8" title="Maypearl, Texas" label="Maypearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="22" end="41" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="170" end="180" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="186" end="197" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q750795" start="208" end="218" title="Midlothian, Texas" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="246" end="252" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="272" end="299" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="492" end="521" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="538" end="563" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="627" end="652" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797911" start="766" end="802" title="Maypearl Independent School District" label="Maypearl Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797910" start="822" end="842" title="Maypearl High School" label="Maypearl High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="902" end="924" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135844" wikidata="Q750795" url="?curid=135844" title="Midlothian, Texas">
<text>Midlothian is a city in northwest Ellis County, Texas, United States. The city is southwest of Dallas. It is the hub for the cement industry in North Texas, as it is the home to three separate cement production facilities, as well as a steel mill. The population of Midlothian grew by 121% between 2000 and 2010, to a population of 18,037.

==History==


In the early 1800s, settlements began to take place in the area that became Ellis County, but full colonization of this area was slow until 1846, when Sam Houston finalized peace treaties between several of the indigenous inhabitants of the region and the Republic of Texas. The earliest inhabitants of this area were the Tonkawa people, but other tribes also hunted in this area, including the Anadarko, Bidai, Kickapoo, and Waco peoples.

The future Ellis County area of the young Republic of Texas was known as the Peters Colony, named for a Louisville, Kentucky-based land grant company consisting of English and American investors. The young Republic empresario grant program encouraged settlements in North Texas in 1857. The few settlers who lived in this region trapped animals and sold their pelts, and traded goods with the natives. The majority of Ellis County&#x27;s original settlers came from the southern half of the United States. They arrived with their cultural and educational traditions, their methods of farming and care for farm animals, and for a few, the people they had enslaved.

Some of the earliest settlers of the area were the families of William Alden Hawkins and Larkin Newton, who moved to the area in 1848. For Hawkins to claim his of land from the Peters Colony group, he was required to build a house on the property he chose along the mouth of Waxahachie Creek before July 1, 1848. The structure was built before the required deadline, and the land near the present-day Hawkins Spring went to the Hawkins family. For Larkin Newton, who moved his wife Mary and their eight children from Missouri, the same requirement was given. Larkin met the due date and became owner of his 640-acre claim. In 1903, William Alden Hawkins&#x27; grandson William Larkin Hawkins purchased land and built the William L and Emma Hawkins House, now listed as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark.

Ellis County was officially established by the Texas Legislature on December 20, 1849, in a bill sponsored by General Edward H. Tarrant, a popular Texas Ranger and Indian gunfighter during this period. Organized in February 1850, the county was carved out of Navarro County and likely named for Richard Ellis.

In 1883, the name &quot;Midlothian&quot; was accepted by the local population. According to local legend, the area was named Midlothian when the Chicago, Texas, and Mexican Central railroads, which eventually connected Dallas and Cleburne, arrived in the area and a homesick Scottish train engineer stated that the local countryside reminded him of his homeland in Scotland, and the location served as the midpoint between Dallas and Cleburne, and between Ennis and Fort Worth. With the coming of the railroad, Midlothian grew and was incorporated in April 1888.

One of the oldest churches in the city, the First United Methodist Church, was built in 1902, followed by the First Presbyterian Church, constructed in 1913. The Midlothian Cemetery contains headstones dating back to the 1870s. The St Paul Cemetery also stands outside of the city.

==Geography==

Midlothian is located in northwestern Ellis County. Adjacent cities are Cedar Hill to the north, Grand Prairie to the northwest, Venus to the southwest, Waxahachie to the southeast, and Ovilla to the northeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, in 2010 the city had a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.28%, is covered by water. Midlothian&#x27;s extraterritorial jurisdiction includes another .

=== Climate ===

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Midlothian has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==


Per the 2020 United States census, there were 35,125 people, 10,462 households, and 8,817 families residing in the city. As of the 2010 census, the population density was , with a total population of 18,037 people. The 6,138 housing units averaged 74.0 per square mile (28.6/km). The racial makeup of the city was 88.5% White, 3.6% African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 4.2% from other races, and 2.4% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 15.2% of the population. In 2020, its racial and ethnic makeup was 68.87% non-Hispanic white, 8.95% African American, 0.52% Native American, 1.07% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 0.31% some other race, 4.14% multiracial, and 16.07% Hispanic or Latino of any race.

==Government==
The city of Midlothian was incorporated in 1888, and on October 1, 1980, the city was granted a home-rule charter. Midlothian uses a council-manager form of government. The city council is composed of a mayor and six at-large council members elected by the citizenry.

==Economy==
Prior to 1929 and the Great Depression, a number of businesses flourished in the city. The two largest business enterprises centered around cotton and cattle-raising. The region was transformed in later years by the arrival of the cement industry. Midlothian became a prime area for cement quarrying due to the Austin Chalk Escarpment, a unique geological formation that runs north–south through the city. Three of the top-10 largest cement factories in the United States operate in the city: TXI (formerly Texas Industries), Holcim, and Ash Grove. Gerdau Ameristeel, formerly Chaparral Steel, a large steel factory, is adjacent to TXI&#x27;s cement plant.

A large industrial park, Railport, is located along U.S. 67 on the southwestern side of the city. Railport is home to several distribution facilities including Target and QuikTrip.

The northern side of the city is host to MidTexas International Center&#x27;s Auto Park, a large automobile distribution and processing center; and Texas Central Business Lines, a rail transload facility.

===Top employers===
According to Midlothian&#x27;s 2023 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:

==Education==

=== Primary and secondary education ===

Primary and secondary education in the majority of the municipality is provided by the Midlothian Independent School District (MISD), which encompasses an area around . MISD conducts programs for kindergarten through grade 12 and employs roughly 850 employees. MISD has nine school campuses (six are elementary schools with grades K–5) with 461 teachers and an enrollment of 7,564 for the 2012–2013 school year. The student-to-teacher ratio is 16 to 1.

MISD students have historically excelled in a number of extracurricular activities. At Midlothian High School, called the &quot;Panthers&quot;, students have been awarded numerous times in agricultural problem-solvers competitions, and high-quality music organizations. The Midlothian High School baseball, soccer, and softball teams are often seen in the 5A playoff bracket. A $14,000,000 multipurpose athletic stadium was constructed in 2006. The second high school is Midlothian Heritage High School, as they compete in 4A for sports and extracurricular activities. They will be moved up to 5A for the 2022–2023 school year.

Midlothian had two National Merit finalists in 2006, 2007, and 2008.

Some parts of the city extend into the Waxahachie Independent School District, which operates Waxahachie High School.

=== Higher education ===

Higher education opportunities are also readily available in Midlothian. On April 25, 2012, the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board approved the establishment of a multi-institutional teaching center (MITC) in Midlothian known as the Midlothian Higher Education Center (MHEC). As one of only nine MITCs in Texas, the MHEC is a partnership consisting of Navarro College-Midlothian, Tarleton State University, Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce, and University of North Texas-Dallas. The collaboration between the four institutions provides area students the ability to complete baccalaureate and graduate degree programs at Navarro College&#x27;s Midlothian campus.

== Transportation ==
Midlothian is located at the junction of U.S. Highway 67 and U.S. Highway 287. The city&#x27;s location provides easy access to an important ground transportation network consisting of interstate highways, U.S. highways, and state highways that connects Dallas, Fort Worth, the rest of the Metroplex, and the state.

In May 2015, Padera Lake, located three miles northwest of Midlothian, was full from torrential rains. Water overflowing and cracks in an earthen dam gave rise to concerns that failure was imminent. If the dam failed, U.S. Route 287 could have been flooded with up to 15 ft of water, and some severe flooding in the northward-flowing direction towards Joe Pool Lake. Relief efforts included pumping water from behind the dam, and disaster was averted.

=== MidWay Regional Airport ===
Located east of Midlothian is MidWay Regional Airport (JWY). Jointly operated by the cities of Midlothian and Waxahachie, MidWay Regional Airport is a corporate and general-aviation airport. It is a full-service fixed-base operator offering maintenance, repair, rental, sales, servicing, flight planning, computerized weather, UNICOM, RCO, and AWOS. The airport opened in October 1992 to serve a rapidly growing area. An expansion project completed in January 2012 included a major terminal renovation.

=== Eagles Nest Estates Airport ===
Located four miles northeast of Midlothian is Eagles Nest Estates Airport (T56). The airport is in the Eagles Nest Estates Airport Community neighborhood; while it is privately owned by the Eagles Nest Property Association, it is still open to the public. It has no ATC and it relies on pilot-to-pilot communication. The airport opened up in February 1985 and not much else is known about the airport.

== Notable people ==
* Yusuf Estes, American Islamic preacher and chaplain
* Chris Kyle, Navy SEAL sniper with the most confirmed kills of any American serviceman

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* City of Midlothian official website
* Midlothian Economic Development official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q750795" start="0" end="10" title="Midlothian, Texas" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="34" end="53" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="95" end="101" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="125" end="131" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="144" end="155" title="North Texas" label="North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069494" start="236" end="246" title="steel mill" label="steel mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="506" end="517" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="611" end="628" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493185" start="677" end="684" title="Tonkawa" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561576" start="750" end="758" title="Anadarko people" label="Anadarko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903991" start="760" end="765" title="Bidai" label="Bidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429504" start="767" end="775" title="Kickapoo people" label="Kickapoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958867" start="781" end="785" title="Waco tribe" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196540" start="873" end="886" title="Peters Colony" label="Peters Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="900" end="920" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q34846506" start="1736" end="1752" title="Waxahachie Creek" label="Waxahachie Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1862" end="1876" title="Hawkins Springs" label="Hawkins Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1978" end="1986" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2182" end="2214" title="William L and Emma Hawkins House" label="William L and Emma Hawkins House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302881" start="2232" end="2264" title="Recorded Texas Historic Landmark" label="Recorded Texas Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946407" start="2385" end="2402" title="Edward H. Tarrant" label="Edward H. Tarrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="2414" end="2426" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q112603" start="2526" end="2540" title="Navarro County, Texas" label="Navarro County"/>
<link wikidata="Q451191" start="2562" end="2575" title="Richard Ellis (Texas politician)" label="Richard Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2797" end="2803" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q534957" start="2808" end="2816" title="Cleburne, Texas" label="Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206934" start="2927" end="2939" title="Midlothian" label="his homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2943" end="2951" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="3034" end="3039" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="3044" end="3054" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q976904" start="3512" end="3522" title="Cedar Hill, Texas" label="Cedar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q51694" start="3537" end="3550" title="Grand Prairie, Texas" label="Grand Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q982348" start="3569" end="3574" title="Venus, Texas" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="3593" end="3603" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q982645" start="3626" end="3632" title="Ovilla, Texas" label="Ovilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3669" end="3696" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3994" end="4023" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="4042" end="4067" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4130" end="4155" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4406" end="4419" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="4998" end="5007" title="home-rule" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="5205" end="5221" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707759" start="5676" end="5679" title="TXI" label="TXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q267818" start="5709" end="5715" title="Holcim" label="Holcim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804383" start="5721" end="5730" title="Ash Grove Cement Company" label="Ash Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511043" start="5732" end="5738" title="Gerdau" label="Gerdau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5739" end="5749" title="Ameristeel" label="Ameristeel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5760" end="5775" title="Chaparral Steel" label="Chaparral Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504331" start="5893" end="5900" title="U.S. Route 67 in Texas" label="U.S. 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="6001" end="6007" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271953" start="6012" end="6020" title="QuikTrip" label="QuikTrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842585" start="6503" end="6541" title="Midlothian Independent School District" label="Midlothian Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842584" start="6957" end="6979" title="Midlothian High School (Texas)" label="Midlothian High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65060377" start="7341" end="7372" title="Midlothian Heritage High School" label="Midlothian Heritage High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975701" start="7608" end="7646" title="Waxahachie Independent School District" label="Waxahachie Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975699" start="7663" end="7685" title="Waxahachie High School" label="Waxahachie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q410030" start="8447" end="8462" title="U.S. Highway 67" label="U.S. Highway 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818259" start="8467" end="8483" title="U.S. Route 287 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q106651947" start="8736" end="8747" title="Padera Lake" label="Padera Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211835" start="9075" end="9088" title="Joe Pool Lake" label="Joe Pool Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895081" start="9238" end="9261" title="MidWay Regional Airport" label="MidWay Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="9420" end="9439" title="fixed-base operator" label="fixed-base operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123330" start="10174" end="10185" title="Yusuf Estes" label="Yusuf Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964775" start="10228" end="10238" title="Chris Kyle" label="Chris Kyle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135845" wikidata="Q974895" url="?curid=135845" title="Milford, Texas">
<text>Milford is an incorporated rural community located in North Central Texas, in the southwestern corner of Ellis County, United States. The population was 722 at the 2020 census.

The town is located northeast of Hillsboro and southwest of Waxahachie. The community received media attention due to a Chevron gas pipeline explosion and resulting town evacuation which occurred in 2013.

==History==

===Settlement and early history===
Milford dates back to the 1850s, when several men from Cherokee County came to the Mill Creek valley and bought land at 50 cents an acre from Ellis County landowner Arvin Wright. Milford was named by William R. Hudson after the factory town of Milford, Massachusetts. During 1853 the first house, a combined residence and general store belonging to William R. Hudson, was built, along with a two-story schoolhouse which served as church and community hall until it burned during the Civil War. In 1854 Wright, Hudson, and J.M. Higgins laid out town lots atop a ridge. In 1857, a gristmill began operation at the community. Milford was incorporated in 1888, with W.R. McDaniel serving as the first mayor. In 1890, the tracks of the Dallas and Waco Railway (later acquired by the Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad) reached the community, which became an important shipping point for area cotton farmers.

By 1892 Milford had grown to a population of 800, and had three churches, a bank, a hotel, two cotton gins, and approximately two dozen other businesses, as well as a weekly newspaper. There were now two schools in Milford, Mollie Poe&#x27;s private Lone Star Institute and the community-financed Milford Academy. In 1902 the Presbyterian Synod of Texas accepted the town&#x27;s offer to open the Texas Presbyterian College for Girls in Milford, and by 1925 the Dallas-Waco electric interurban railway had reached the town. The town continued to flourish, with the population soaring to 1,200 by 1929, but the population saw a slow decline due to the Great Depression, and the Presbyterian college closed due to lagging enrollment. By 1931 the population of Milford was 747, and would continue to decline as the population reached a low of 490 in 1968. The town would grow once again, and by 1990 the population was back up to 711, before dropping to 685 in 2000.

===2013 gas pipeline explosion===

====Explosion and fire====
Just after 8:30AM CDT on November 14, 2013, an explosion and resulting fire occurred near the intersection of U.S. 77 and FM 308 when a Chevron Corporation liquefied petroleum gas pipeline was punctured by a Chevron drilling crew. The five man crew abandoned the rig and escaped the explosion unharmed.

====Aftermath====
Due to concerns about harmful air quality conditions due to the burning pipeline, and the proximity of the fire to another larger gas line, the entire town of approximately 700 residents was forced to evacuate, including Milford ISD staff and students, to the nearby town of Italy as a evacuation zone was established.

While some residents were permitted to return to the town temporarily under police escort, the town remained evacuated through November 16 as the pipeline continued to burn. The fire also caused the postponement of a six-man football playoff game scheduled for November 15 as the players could not retrieve their gear.

====Chevron response====
The company issued several statements through their website expressing their sincere regret to people impacted by this event which included a toll-free claims hotline which residents affected by the incident could call. The company also provided overnight accommodations at local hotels for residents due to conditions not allowing them to return home.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.29%, is water.

U.S. Route 77 passes through the center of town as Main Street, while Interstate 35E runs along the northern edge of town, with access from Exit 381. Downtown Dallas is to the north.

==Demographics==


As of the 2020 United States census, there were 722 people, 296 households, and 217 families residing in the town.

==Education==

The town is served by the Milford Independent School District and is home to the Milford High School Bulldogs.

From 1902–1929, the town was home to the Texas Presbyterian College for Girls. Milford gave the school of land and $25,000 to assist in its founding. It was later expanded to before closing in 1929 and merging with Austin College in Sherman, Texas.

==In popular culture==

Milford is the setting of the 2015 sci-fi, action comedy film &quot;Lazer Team&quot;. This movie was the first feature-length film ever created by a company founded, and located in Texas called Rooster Teeth.

Milford is also the setting of the 2016 independent comedy and LGBT film &quot;Hurricane Bianca&quot; starring actor and drag superstar &quot;Bianca Del Rio&quot; (Roy Haylock).

==Photo gallery==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Milford official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974895" start="0" end="7" title="Milford, Texas" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="54" end="67" title="North Texas" label="North Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="68" end="73" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="105" end="117" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q982462" start="211" end="220" title="Hillsboro, Texas" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="238" end="248" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q108842" start="487" end="502" title="Cherokee County, Texas" label="Cherokee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857885" start="676" end="698" title="Milford, Massachusetts" label="Milford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="915" end="924" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="1011" end="1020" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q925995" start="1210" end="1240" title="Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad" label="Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1315" end="1321" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="1427" end="1437" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707911" start="1729" end="1765" title="Texas Presbyterian College" label="Texas Presbyterian College for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707656" start="1794" end="1833" title="Texas Electric Railway" label="Dallas-Waco electric interurban railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="1983" end="1999" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2481" end="2487" title="List of Farm to Market Roads in Texas (300–399)#FM 308" label="FM 308"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="2495" end="2514" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="2515" end="2538" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q977238" start="2956" end="2961" title="Italy, Texas" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3731" end="3758" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="3823" end="3836" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="3893" end="3907" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35E"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3982" end="3988" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4036" end="4061" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851734" start="4183" end="4218" title="Milford Independent School District" label="Milford Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851729" start="4238" end="4257" title="Milford High School (Texas)" label="Milford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707911" start="4310" end="4346" title="Texas Presbyterian College for Girls" label="Texas Presbyterian College for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823037" start="4484" end="4498" title="Austin College" label="Austin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q982379" start="4502" end="4516" title="Sherman, Texas" label="Sherman, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353472" start="4611" end="4621" title="Lazer Team" label="Lazer Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="4737" end="4750" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856799" start="4832" end="4848" title="Hurricane Bianca" label="Hurricane Bianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226036" start="4895" end="4909" title="Bianca Del Rio" label="Bianca Del Rio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135846" wikidata="Q981163" url="?curid=135846" title="Oak Leaf, Texas">
<text>Oak Leaf is a city in Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population was 1,552 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Oak Leaf is located in northern Ellis County and is bordered to the northwest by Ovilla, to the north by Glenn Heights, and to the east by Red Oak. Waxahachie, the county seat, is to the south, and downtown Dallas is to the north.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which , or 0.10%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,552 people, 612 households, and 514 families residing in the city.

== Education ==
The city of Oak Leaf is served by the Red Oak Independent School District.

==References==

==External links==
* City of Oak Leaf – Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981163" start="0" end="8" title="Oak Leaf, Texas" label="Oak Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="22" end="34" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="36" end="41" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982645" start="200" end="206" title="Ovilla, Texas" label="Ovilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q969371" start="224" end="237" title="Glenn Heights, Texas" label="Glenn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q979142" start="258" end="265" title="Red Oak, Texas" label="Red Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="267" end="277" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="283" end="294" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="326" end="332" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="368" end="395" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="487" end="512" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304680" start="649" end="684" title="Red Oak Independent School District" label="Red Oak Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135847" wikidata="Q974908" url="?curid=135847" title="Palmer, Texas">
<text>Palmer is a town in Ellis County, Texas, United States. It is part of the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex. Its population was 2,393 in 2020.

==Geography==

Palmer is located in northeastern Ellis County. Interstate 45 passes through the east side of the town, with access from Exits 258 through 260; I-45 leads north to downtown Dallas and south to Ennis. Waxahachie, the county seat, is to the west.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 1.04%, is covered by water.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, 2,393 people, 782 households, and 627 families were residing in the town.

==Culture==
Portions of &quot;Tender Mercies&quot;, a 1983 film about a country western singer, were filmed in Palmer, although the majority was filmed in Waxahachie. In both towns, director Bruce Beresford deliberately filmed more barren and isolated locations that more closely resembled the West Texas area. The Texas town portrayed in &quot;Tender Mercies&quot; is never specifically identified.

== Education ==

Palmer has three schools: Palmer High School, Middle School, and Elementary School. Palmer built the current elementary school in 2015, leaving the old school for gym and cafeteria use. Palmer Elementary has over 350 students ranging from prekindergarten to third grade. The junior high and middle school were combined a few years earlier to become the Palmer Middle School, housing fourth through eight grades, with around 350 students. Palmer High School is the second-newest building and serves over 300 students between 9th and 12th grades. Palmer High School and Palmer Middle School have athletics ranging from 7th to 12th grades. Sports include track and field, basketball, football, baseball, softball, volleyball, cross country, and golf. Extracurricular activities include band and National Honor Society.

==Transportation==
===Major highways===
* Interstate 45

===Air===
The city is served by the privately owned Dallas South Port Airport.

== Gallery ==
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974908" start="0" end="6" title="Palmer, Texas" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="20" end="39" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="74" end="101" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="201" end="214" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="326" end="332" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982629" start="346" end="351" title="Ennis, Texas" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="353" end="363" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="369" end="380" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="416" end="443" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="547" end="572" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113987" start="679" end="693" title="Tender Mercies" label="Tender Mercies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="721" end="743" title="country music" label="country western singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="840" end="855" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="943" end="953" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="1926" end="1939" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135848" wikidata="Q981750" url="?curid=135848" title="Pecan Hill, Texas">
<text>Pecan Hill is a city in Ellis County, Texas, United States. The population was 735 at the 2020 census, up from 626 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Pecan Hill is located in northern Ellis County and is bordered to the north by the city of Red Oak. Waxahachie, the county seat, is to the southwest, and downtown Dallas is to the north.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Pecan Hill has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 672 people, 226 households, and 200 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 234 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 93.75% White, 1.19% African American, 0.30% Native American, 4.32% from other races, and 0.45% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.78% of the population.

There were 226 households, out of which 44.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.9% were married couples living together, 12.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 11.1% were non-families. 9.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.97 and the average family size was 3.14.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 29.5% under the age of 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 28.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $55,000, and the median income for a family was $57,596. Males had a median income of $43,125 versus $29,432 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,195. About 3.1% of families and 2.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.0% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Most of Pecan Hill is served by the Red Oak Independent School District, while portions are in the Waxahachie Independent School District. The respective zoned public high schools are Red Oak High School and Waxahachie High School.

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981750" start="0" end="10" title="Pecan Hill, Texas" label="Pecan Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="24" end="36" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="38" end="43" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="122" end="133" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q979142" start="242" end="249" title="Red Oak, Texas" label="Red Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="251" end="261" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="267" end="278" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="314" end="320" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="356" end="383" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="457" end="463" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="677" end="682" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="690" end="706" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="714" end="729" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="742" end="753" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="789" end="797" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="801" end="807" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="959" end="974" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1768" end="1785" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1877" end="1889" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304680" start="2013" end="2048" title="Red Oak Independent School District" label="Red Oak Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975701" start="2076" end="2114" title="Waxahachie Independent School District" label="Waxahachie Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304679" start="2161" end="2180" title="Red Oak High School (Texas)" label="Red Oak High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975699" start="2185" end="2207" title="Waxahachie High School" label="Waxahachie High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135849" wikidata="Q979142" url="?curid=135849" title="Red Oak, Texas">
<text>Red Oak is a city in Ellis County, Texas, United States. It is part of the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex. The population was 10,769 at the 2010 census, up from 4,301 at the 2000 census. The North Central Texas Council of Governments projects that number to grow to 63,329 by the year 2030, as it is on the verge of explosive suburban growth.

==History==
One of the first settlers to this area was James E. Patton and his family in 1844. They settled in what is now known as Ovilla, Texas, located about two miles from Red Oak. Before Red Oak was given its name in 1849, it was known as Possum Trot due to the animal that lived there. The Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad began near the Red Oak area in 1884 and was completed in 1890. This railroad allowed people to travel to Dallas and Waco. In 1949, Red Oak became an incorporated town of Ellis, County. In 2023, Google announced a 600 million dollar data center campus on a 375 acre land, right off Ovilla Road in Red Oak, making it the second data center to be built in Texas.

==Geography==

Red Oak is located along the northern edge of Ellis County. Adjacent cities include Glenn Heights to the northwest, Lancaster to the north, Ferris to the east, Pecan Hill to the southeast, Waxahachie to the south, and Oak Leaf to the west. It is south of downtown Dallas via Interstate 35E, which has two exits in Red Oak.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Red Oak has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Red Oak has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==


As of the 2020 United States census, there were 14,222 people, 4,098 households, and 3,293 families residing in the city.

==Education==

The majority of the city of Red Oak is served by the Red Oak Independent School District. That district&#x27;s schools include Shields Elementary, Eastridge Elementary, Red Oak Elementary, Wooden Elementary, Russell P Schupmann Elementary, Red Oak Middle School, and Red Oak High School.

The city extends into the Waxahachie Independent School District and the Ferris Independent School District. The former operates Waxahachie High School.

In addition Life School, a public charter school, operates the K–12 Red Oak campus.

Texas State Technical College operates a branch campus in Red Oak.

==Transportation==
===Major highways===
* Interstate 35E/U.S. Route 77

===Air===
The city of Red Oak jointly owns the Ferris Red Oak Muni Heliport together with the city of Ferris.

==Notable people==
* Demi Burnett, contestant on season 23 of The Bachelor
* Michelle Carter, gold medal winner in the women&#x27;s shot put at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro
* Pinky Higgins, Major League Baseball player and manager, born in Red Oak
* Sarah Jaffe, singer/songwriter
* Louise Ritter, gold medal winner in the women&#x27;s high jump at the 1988 Summer Olympics
* Nikki Stringfield, guitarist for American heavy metal band The Iron Maiden

==Geographic location==
==References==

==External links==
* Red Oak official website
* Red Oak ISD
* Red Oak ISD Education Foundation
* Red Oak ISD Bands
* Handbook of Texas Online – Red Oak, TX</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979142" start="0" end="7" title="Red Oak, Texas" label="Red Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="21" end="33" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="35" end="40" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="75" end="102" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q969371" start="1133" end="1146" title="Glenn Heights, Texas" label="Glenn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q976739" start="1165" end="1174" title="Lancaster, Texas" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q973550" start="1189" end="1195" title="Ferris, Texas" label="Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q981750" start="1209" end="1219" title="Pecan Hill, Texas" label="Pecan Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="1238" end="1248" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q981163" start="1267" end="1275" title="Oak Leaf, Texas" label="Oak Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="1313" end="1319" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445636" start="1324" end="1338" title="Interstate 35E (Texas)" label="Interstate 35E"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1390" end="1417" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1591" end="1620" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1643" end="1668" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1745" end="1770" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304680" start="1926" end="1961" title="Red Oak Independent School District" label="Red Oak Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304679" start="2140" end="2159" title="Red Oak High School (Texas)" label="Red Oak High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975701" start="2188" end="2226" title="Waxahachie Independent School District" label="Waxahachie Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445376" start="2235" end="2269" title="Ferris Independent School District" label="Ferris Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975699" start="2291" end="2313" title="Waxahachie High School" label="Waxahachie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544955" start="2328" end="2339" title="Life School" label="Life School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708092" start="2401" end="2430" title="Texas State Technical College" label="Texas State Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445636" start="2511" end="2525" title="Interstate 35E (Texas)" label="Interstate 35E"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="2526" end="2539" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q973550" start="2588" end="2616" title="Ferris Red Oak Muni Heliport" label="Ferris Red Oak Muni Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q973550" start="2643" end="2649" title="Ferris, Texas" label="Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83688112" start="2673" end="2685" title="Demi Burnett" label="Demi Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742405" start="2701" end="2710" title="The Bachelor (season 23)" label="season 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q700722" start="2714" end="2726" title="The Bachelor (American TV series)" label="The Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q439129" start="2729" end="2744" title="Michelle Carter (athlete)" label="Michelle Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057728" start="2841" end="2854" title="Pinky Higgins" label="Pinky Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422425" start="2916" end="2927" title="Sarah Jaffe" label="Sarah Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179429" start="2949" end="2962" title="Louise Ritter" label="Louise Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q58051748" start="3042" end="3059" title="Nikki Stringfield" label="Nikki Stringfield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135850" wikidata="Q645475" url="?curid=135850" title="Waxahachie, Texas">
<text>Waxahachie ( ) is the county seat of Ellis County, Texas, United States. Its population was 41,140 in 2020. The city was founded in 1850, and incorporated in 1871. Much of the employment is provided by a number of industries and by educational institutions, including primary and secondary schools, a community college and a private university. In the mid-1980s, the city became a filming location for a number of movies and occasional episodes of television series.

==Etymology==
Some sources state that the name means &quot;cow&quot; or &quot;buffalo&quot; in an unspecified Native American language. One possible Native American origin is the Alabama language, originally spoken in the area of Alabama around Waxahatchee Creek by the Alabama-Coushatta people, who had migrated by the 1850s to eastern Texas. In the Alabama language, &quot;waakasi hachi&quot; means &quot;calf&#x27;s tail&quot; (the Alabama word &quot;waaka&quot; being a loan from Spanish &quot;vaca&quot;).

A Waxahatchee Creek near present-day Shelby, Alabama, suggests that Waxahachie shares the same name etymology. Many place names in Texas and Oklahoma have their origins in the Southeastern United States, largely due to forced removal of various southeastern Indian tribes. The area in central Alabama that includes Waxahatchee Creek was for hundreds of years the home of the Upper Creek moiety of the Muscogee Creek Nation. Again, this would suggest a Muscogee Creek-language origin of Waxahachie. &quot;Waxahachie&quot;, therefore, may be an anglicized pronunciation of the Muscogee compound word &quot;wakvhvce&quot; from the Muscogee words &quot;wakv&quot; (meaning &quot;cow&quot; derived from the Spanish &quot;vaca&quot;) and the Muscogee word &quot;hvcce&quot; (meaning &quot;river&quot; or &quot;creek&quot;).

==History==



Waxahachie was founded in August 1850 as the seat of the newly established Ellis County on a tract of land donated by early settler Emory W. Rogers, a native of Lawrence County, Alabama, who migrated to Texas in 1839. It was incorporated on April 28, 1871, and in 1875, the state legislature granted investors the right to operate a rail line from Waxahachie Tap Railroad to Garrett, Texas, which greatly increased the population of Waxahachie.

From 1902 to 1942, Waxahachie was the second home of Trinity University, which was a Presbyterian-affiliated institution founded in 1869. Then-Trinity&#x27;s main administration and classroom building is today the Farmer Administration Building of Nelson University. Trinity&#x27;s present-day location is in San Antonio.

The town is the namesake of the former United States Naval Ship &quot;Waxahachie&quot; (YTB-814).

In 1988, the area around Waxahachie was chosen as the site for the Superconducting Super Collider, which was to be the world&#x27;s largest and most energetic particle accelerator, with a planned ring circumference of . Seventeen shafts were sunk and of tunnel were bored before the project was cancelled by Congress in 1993.

In 2020, County Judge Todd Little came into the national spotlight when the county&#x27;s only elected African American, Constable Curtis Polk, Jr., protested having his office located in the basement of the courthouse next to a segregation-era sign that read &quot;Negroes&quot;. The controversy was resolved amicably when Little worked with Polk to relocate him to another office.

==Geography==

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Waxahachie has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==


As of the 2020 United States census, 41,140 people, 12,522 households, and 9,073 families resided in the city.

==Economy==
Employment opportunities in the city are highly oriented toward industry. Owens Corning, Georgia-Pacific, International Paper, James Hardie Industries, Berry Global, Americase, Cardinal Glass, Magnablend, and Dart Container are located within a few miles of each other. Nonindustrial employers include Baylor Scott &amp; White Health, Waxahachie Independent School District, Walgreens Distribution Center, Walmart, H-E-B, Navarro College, and Nelson University.

==Arts and culture==

===Annual cultural events===
The Scarborough Renaissance Festival (also called Scarborough Faire) is located southwest of the town. It opens annually during April and May, and has been in operation since 1981. The Scarborough grounds are also home to Screams Halloween Theme Park in October.

The city&#x27;s annual Gingerbread Trail Festival features tours of many of the Gingerbread homes.

The Crossroads of Texas Festival, featuring artists, craftsmen, music, and food from around Texas, takes place in downtown on the last Saturday in October. The festival was known as the &quot;Texas Country Reporter&quot; Festival from 1996 to 2023.

Bethlehem Revisited, a re-enactment of the birth of Jesus, occurs behind Central Presbyterian Church in early December.

===Tourism===
Waxahachie is locally known for its elaborate Richardsonian Romanesque courthouse. The town also features many examples of Victorian architecture and Gingerbread-style homes, several of which have been converted into bed and breakfast inns. The Ellis County Art Association hosts ART on the Square (Cultural Attractions- Events and Facilities; 113 West Franklin Street).
==Parks and recreation==
Parks in Waxahachie include Spring Park, Getzendaner Memorial Park, Richards Park, Chapman Park, and Brown-Singleton Park. Getzendaner Park features the historic Chautauqua Auditorium, built in 1902. Lake Waxahachie features a range of camping and fishing areas.

==Government==
The city of Waxahachie is a voluntary member of the North Central Texas Council of Governments association, the purpose of which is to coordinate individual and collective local governments and facilitate regional solutions, eliminate unnecessary duplication, and enable joint decisions.

===State government===
Waxahachie is represented in the Texas Senate by Republican Brian Birdwell, District 22, and in the Texas House of Representatives by Republican Brian Harrison, District 10.

The Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the Waxahachie District Parole Office in Sherman.

===Federal government===
At the federal level, the two U.S. senators from Texas are Republicans John Cornyn and Ted Cruz; since 2003, Waxahachie has been part of Texas&#x27;s 6th congressional district, which is currently represented by Republican Jake Ellzey.

The United States Postal Service operates the Waxahachie Post Office.

== Education ==

===Primary and secondary===

Almost all of Waxahachie is served by the Waxahachie Independent School District (WISD), which currently has eight elementary campuses, three middle-school campuses, and two high schools. WISD offers advanced-placement and dual-credit courses, and varied career and technology courses.

Waxahachie High School, classified as 6A, offers a range of extracurricular activities to its students, including football, volleyball, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s soccer, baseball, softball, golf, tennis, concert and marching band, drama, choir, drill team, and dozens of academic teams and clubs. The football program made the playoffs every year from 1989 to 2010.Waxahachie Global High School, an ECHS T-STEM school emphasizing instruction in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in a small-learning-community environment, opened on August 27, 2007.

The city limits of Waxahachie extend into the Ferris, Midlothian, and Red Oak ISDs.

In addition to the district schools, Life School, a public charter-school system, operates a 7–12 grade campus. On April 15, 2014, Life School broke ground on a new high school in Waxahachie, planned to accommodate about 1,000 9th–12th graders.

===Private schools===

The several private schools include Waxahachie Preparatory Academy (K-12), Mercy Preparatory Academy (K-12), First Christian Day School (through 8th grade), and St. Joseph Catholic School (through 8th grade). 

===Colleges and universities===

Two postsecondary educational institutions have campuses in the city of Waxahachie: Navarro College, a community college based in Corsicana, Texas, and Nelson University, a private, four-year university affiliated with the Assemblies of God, which offers accredited undergraduate and graduate degrees.

==Media==
The first newspaper in Waxahachie, the now-defunct &quot;Waxahachie Argus&quot;, was established in 1870. The &quot;Waxahachie Daily Light&quot; has served the town since 1891. Additionally, 47 radio stations are within close listening range of Waxahachie. KBEC radio has served the community and surrounding area since 1955.

==Gallery==
==Infrastructure==

===Health care===
Both Altus Emergency Center and Baylor Scott &amp; White Health at Waxahachie provide emergency services locally, as does Ennis Regional Medical Center, about 14 miles away in Ennis. Between 2003 and 2010, Waxahachie&#x27;s healthcare industry added 555 jobs, making it the city&#x27;s fourth-largest employment sector.

===Transportation===
* Interstate 35E is a major north-south freeway serving as a bypass around the west side of Waxahachie. The freeway connects with Red Oak, DeSoto/Lancaster, and Dallas to the north; Italy, Hillsboro, and Waco to the south.
* U.S. Route 287, also a freeway, runs in a northwest-southeast direction through the north side of the city. The freeway connects with Midlothian, Mansfield, and Fort Worth to the west and Ennis to the east.
* U.S. Route 77, a north-south highway, serves as the main thoroughfare through the city, passing through downtown and the north side of the city. The highway parallels Interstate 35 and reconnects with the interstate just outside the city limits. Many of the city&#x27;s commercial developments line Highway 77.

==Notable people==

* Robert Benton, won an Oscar for Best Original Screenplay for &quot;Places in the Heart&quot;, filmed in Waxahachie. 
* Jammal Brown, professional football player 
* Tevin Campbell, Grammy-nominated R&amp;B singer 
* Emanuel Cleaver, U.S. Representative 
* Bessie Coleman, first female African-American pilot (born in Atlanta, Texas; moved to Waxahachie at age 2) 
* Elizabeth Otis Dannelly, poet 
* Frederic Forrest, Oscar-nominated actor 
* Robert J. Groden, JFK assassination expert, released the Zapruder film on national TV on March 6, 1975 
* Josie Briggs Hall, author of &quot;A Scroll of Facts and Advice&quot; 1905, the first book published by a black woman Texan 
* Bill Ham, manager for ZZ Top 
* Dale Hansen, sports anchor WFAA-TV Channel 8 Dallas, Texas 
* John Paul Jackson, Charismatic minister, prophet and teacher
* Desmond Mason, professional basketball player 
* Julie Miller, songwriter, singer, and recording artist 
* Dick Murdoch, professional wrestler 
* Byron Nelson, professional golfer 
* Jim Pitts, former member of the Texas House of Representatives 
* Jalen Reagor, professional football player
* Montae Reagor, former defensive tackle for the Denver Broncos and Indianapolis Colts.
* Paul Richards, Major League Baseball player, manager and executive 
* Aldrick Robinson, professional football player and coach
* Broderick Sargent, professional football player 
* Brian Waters, professional football player 
* John Wray, former member of the Texas House of Representatives and former mayor of Waxahachie

==In popular culture==

Additionally, the long-running television series &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot;, starring Chuck Norris, was filmed in Waxahachie on occasion. Some scenes in &quot;Prison Break&quot; were filmed in Waxahachie. Scenes from &quot;Bonnie and Clyde&quot; (1967) were also shot here.

In 2018, an animated short film from Crypt TV titled &quot;Dark Vessel&quot; featured the town as its 1977-based setting.

In 2021, Miranda Lambert, Jon Randall and Jack Ingram released a song named for the city on their acoustic album &quot;The Marfa Tapes&quot;. It was later recorded again with full production for inclusion on Lambert&#x27;s solo album &quot;Palomino&quot; in 2022.

==Sister cities==
Sabinas in Coahuila, Mexico, has been proposed as Waxahachie&#x27;s sister city. Sabinas is located about south of Eagle Pass, Texas.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* City of Waxahachie official website
* City-data.com
* Texas State Historical Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645475" start="0" end="10" title="Waxahachie, Texas" label="Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="22" end="33" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130" start="37" end="56" title="Ellis County, Texas" label="Ellis County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="578" end="593" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815020" start="647" end="663" title="Alabama language" label="Alabama language"/>
<link wikidata="Q499687" start="738" end="755" title="Alabama people" label="Alabama-Coushatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275022" start="1017" end="1032" title="Shelby, Alabama" label="Shelby, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="1381" end="1389" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q502737" start="1975" end="1999" title="Lawrence County, Alabama" label="Lawrence County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599376" start="2162" end="2185" title="List of Texas railroads" label="Waxahachie Tap Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q982212" start="2189" end="2203" title="Garrett, Texas" label="Garrett, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311379" start="2313" end="2331" title="Trinity University (Texas)" label="Trinity University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132876" start="2508" end="2525" title="Southwestern Assemblies of God University" label="Nelson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2569" end="2580" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q610424" start="2622" end="2646" title="United States Naval Ship" label="United States Naval Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875363" start="2647" end="2679" title="Waxahachie (YTB-814)" label="&amp;quot;Waxahachie&amp;quot; (YTB-814)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192186" start="2749" end="2779" title="Superconducting Super Collider" label="Superconducting Super Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="2841" end="2861" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3539" end="3568" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3587" end="3612" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3677" end="3702" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114736" start="3865" end="3878" title="Owens Corning" label="Owens Corning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509282" start="3880" end="3895" title="Georgia-Pacific" label="Georgia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q202972" start="3897" end="3916" title="International Paper" label="International Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135535" start="3918" end="3941" title="James Hardie Industries" label="James Hardie Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894819" start="3943" end="3955" title="Berry Global" label="Berry Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225569" start="4000" end="4014" title="Dart Container" label="Dart Container"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568258" start="4093" end="4124" title="Baylor Scott &amp;amp; White Health" label="Baylor Scott &amp;amp; White Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975701" start="4126" end="4164" title="Waxahachie Independent School District" label="Waxahachie Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="4166" end="4175" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="4197" end="4204" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q830621" start="4206" end="4211" title="H-E-B" label="H-E-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982160" start="4213" end="4228" title="Navarro College" label="Navarro College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132876" start="4234" end="4251" title="Nelson University" label="Nelson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430310" start="4309" end="4341" title="Scarborough Renaissance Festival" label="Scarborough Renaissance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501282" start="4649" end="4666" title="Gingerbread (architecture)" label="Gingerbread homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707608" start="4861" end="4883" title="Texas Country Reporter" label="Texas Country Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4971" end="4976" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501297" start="5100" end="5124" title="Richardsonian Romanesque" label="Richardsonian Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137809" start="5125" end="5135" title="courthouse" label="courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="5177" end="5199" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="5271" end="5288" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196385" start="5612" end="5633" title="Chautauqua Auditorium (Waxahachie, Texas)" label="Chautauqua Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34901790" start="5650" end="5665" title="Lake Waxahachie" label="Lake Waxahachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054766" start="5781" end="5823" title="North Central Texas Council of Governments" label="North Central Texas Council of Governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="6074" end="6086" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042340" start="6101" end="6115" title="Brian Birdwell" label="Brian Birdwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="6141" end="6171" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="6220" end="6256" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q719568" start="6413" end="6424" title="John Cornyn" label="John Cornyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="6429" end="6437" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707393" start="6479" end="6518" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q105061782" start="6565" end="6576" title="Jake Ellzey" label="Jake Ellzey"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="6583" end="6611" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975701" start="6738" end="6776" title="Waxahachie Independent School District" label="Waxahachie Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975699" start="6983" end="7005" title="Waxahachie High School" label="Waxahachie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975698" start="7390" end="7419" title="Waxahachie Global High School" label="Waxahachie Global High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445376" start="7637" end="7643" title="Ferris Independent School District" label="Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842585" start="7645" end="7655" title="Midlothian Independent School District" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304680" start="7661" end="7668" title="Red Oak Independent School District" label="Red Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544955" start="7713" end="7724" title="Life School" label="Life School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982160" start="8273" end="8288" title="Navarro College" label="Navarro College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="8292" end="8309" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q939602" start="8319" end="8335" title="Corsicana, Texas" label="Corsicana, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132876" start="8341" end="8358" title="Nelson University" label="Nelson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="8412" end="8429" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q55671253" start="8618" end="8640" title="Waxahachie Daily Light" label="Waxahachie Daily Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325745" start="8759" end="8763" title="KBEC" label="KBEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445636" start="9223" end="9237" title="Interstate 35E in Texas" label="Interstate 35E"/>
<link wikidata="Q979142" start="9351" end="9358" title="Red Oak, Texas" label="Red Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q981771" start="9360" end="9366" title="DeSoto, Texas" label="DeSoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q976739" start="9367" end="9376" title="Lancaster, Texas" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="9382" end="9388" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q977238" start="9403" end="9408" title="Italy, Texas" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q982462" start="9410" end="9419" title="Hillsboro, Texas" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="9425" end="9429" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818259" start="9446" end="9460" title="U.S. Route 287 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q750795" start="9580" end="9590" title="Midlothian, Texas" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q974040" start="9592" end="9601" title="Mansfield, Texas" label="Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="9607" end="9617" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="9655" end="9668" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q59085" start="9989" end="10002" title="Robert Benton" label="Robert Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q59073" start="10056" end="10075" title="Places in the Heart" label="Places in the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993376" start="10108" end="10120" title="Jammal Brown" label="Jammal Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q720599" start="10154" end="10168" title="Tevin Campbell" label="Tevin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10170" end="10176" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="10187" end="10194" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334654" start="10205" end="10220" title="Emanuel Cleaver" label="Emanuel Cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q254376" start="10245" end="10259" title="Bessie Coleman" label="Bessie Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q756137" start="10306" end="10320" title="Atlanta, Texas" label="Atlanta, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53239088" start="10355" end="10378" title="Elizabeth Otis Dannelly" label="Elizabeth Otis Dannelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q719266" start="10388" end="10404" title="Frederic Forrest" label="Frederic Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490226" start="10431" end="10447" title="Robert J. Groden" label="Robert J. Groden"/>
<link wikidata="Q147530" start="10488" end="10501" title="Zapruder film" label="Zapruder film"/>
<link wikidata="Q63189311" start="10537" end="10554" title="Josie Briggs Hall" label="Josie Briggs Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909284" start="10664" end="10672" title="Bill Ham" label="Bill Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="10686" end="10692" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210468" start="10696" end="10707" title="Dale Hansen" label="Dale Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742518" start="10758" end="10775" title="John Paul Jackson" label="John Paul Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463317" start="10821" end="10834" title="Desmond Mason" label="Desmond Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569812" start="10870" end="10882" title="Julie Miller" label="Julie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026618" start="10928" end="10940" title="Dick Murdoch" label="Dick Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q725776" start="10967" end="10979" title="Byron Nelson" label="Byron Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197521" start="11004" end="11013" title="Jim Pitts" label="Jim Pitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="11036" end="11066" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q61051336" start="11070" end="11082" title="Jalen Reagor" label="Jalen Reagor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903145" start="11115" end="11128" title="Montae Reagor" label="Montae Reagor"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="11162" end="11176" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="11181" end="11199" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153216" start="11203" end="11216" title="Paul Richards (baseball)" label="Paul Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q14564166" start="11273" end="11289" title="Aldrick Robinson" label="Aldrick Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972962" start="11332" end="11349" title="Broderick Sargent" label="Broderick Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965585" start="11383" end="11395" title="Brian Waters" label="Brian Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067157" start="11429" end="11438" title="John Wray (Texas politician)" label="John Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="11603" end="11623" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673" start="11640" end="11652" title="Chuck Norris" label="Chuck Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q80044" start="11713" end="11725" title="Prison Break" label="Prison Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q181776" start="11777" end="11793" title="Bonnie and Clyde (film)" label="Bonnie and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608616" start="11866" end="11874" title="Crypt TV" label="Crypt TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="11961" end="11976" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271434" start="11978" end="11989" title="Jon Randall" label="Jon Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677067" start="11994" end="12005" title="Jack Ingram" label="Jack Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839670" start="12071" end="12086" title="The Marfa Tapes" label="The Marfa Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q111441917" start="12192" end="12200" title="Palomino (Miranda Lambert album)" label="Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010445" start="12235" end="12242" title="Sabinas, Coahuila" label="Sabinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="12246" end="12262" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12303" end="12314" title="sister city" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q982486" start="12350" end="12367" title="Eagle Pass, Texas" label="Eagle Pass, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135851" wikidata="Q981816" url="?curid=135851" title="Dublin, Texas">
<text>Dublin is a city located in southwestern Erath County in Central Texas, United States. Its population was 3,359 at the 2020 census, down from 3,654 at the 2010 census.

The town is the former home of the world&#x27;s oldest Dr Pepper bottling plant (see Dublin Dr Pepper). The plant was for many years the only U.S. source for Dr Pepper made with real cane sugar (from Texas-based Imperial Sugar), instead of less expensive high-fructose corn syrup. Contractual requirements limited the plant&#x27;s distribution range to a radius of Dublin, an area encompassing Stephenville, Tolar, Comanche, and Hico.

Dublin was the southern terminus of the Wichita Falls and Southern Railroad, one of the properties of Frank Kell, Joseph A. Kemp, and later Orville Bullington of Wichita Falls. The line was abandoned in 1954.

Dublin was the boyhood home of legendary golfer Ben Hogan, who was born on August 13, 1912, at the hospital in nearby Stephenville. Hogan lived in Dublin until 1921, when he and his family relocated to Fort Worth.

American jurist and 1924 Texas Republican gubernatorial nominee George C. Butte married and resided in Dublin for several years and is interred there at Live Oak Cemetery.

Dublin is the birthplace of Lt. Col. George Andrew Davis, Jr., who was awarded the Medal of Honor for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty on 10 February 1952, near the Sinuiju-Yalu River area in North Korea. Davis ranks 16th on the list of most highly decorated U.S. military personnel of all time who received the Medal of Honor.

In 2005, Governor Rick Perry signed a bill that designated Dublin as the official Irish Capital of Texas. Thus, Dublin is known to be home to many people of Irish American descent.

==Geography==
Dublin is located in southwestern Erath County. U.S. Route 377 bypasses the city on the west, leading northeast to Stephenville, the county seat, and southwest to Comanche. Texas State Highway 6 passes through the center of Dublin as Blackjack Street, leading southeast to Hico and west to De Leon. Fort Worth is to the northeast, and Waco is to the southeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Dublin has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by relatively high temperatures and evenly distributed precipitation throughout the year. The Köppen climate classification describes the weather as humid subtropical, designated as &quot;Cfa&quot;.
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, 3,359 people, 1,025 households, and 730 families were residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 3,754 people, 1,309 households, and 920 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 1,507 housing units had an average density of 442.5/sq mi (170.6/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 80.42% White, 0.24% African American, 0.91% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 16.28% from other races, and 2.05% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 29.62% of the population.

Of the 1,309 households, 39.8% had children under 18 living with them, 53.4% were married couples living together, 11.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.7% were not families. About 26.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.7% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.78, and the average family size was 3.38.

In the city, the age distribution was 32.4% under 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 25.6% from 25 to 44, 17.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.5% who were 65 or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.9 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 86.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $24,397, and for a family was $27,880. Males had a median income of $27,798 versus $16,786 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,724. About 28.1% of families and 31.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 41.1% of those under age 18 and 10.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Local media==
The local newspaper is &quot;The Dublin Citizen&quot;. Local television stations that provide coverage for Dublin and surrounding areas come from the Dallas/Fort Worth and Waco/Temple/Killeen metropolitan areas. Local radio stations include KSTV-FM, KEQX and KTRL (FM), all licensed to Dublin or Stephenville, with studios in Erath County.

==Education==

The city is served by the Dublin Independent School District and is home to the Dublin Lions. 

==Events==

Each year, several events are held in Dublin.

During the week of St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, the community welcomes visitors with a parade, &quot;ambassador&quot; pageant, and other events.

Each June during the Dr Pepper birthday celebration, Dublin celebrates its era as the oldest Dr Pepper bottling plant in the world, when it still bottled Dr Pepper with the original recipe and pure cane sugar. Following legal disputes, Dr Pepper Snapple split ties with the Dublin bottling company after 120 years of service. The newly renamed Dublin Bottling Works has become an independent company and continues to hold the birthday celebration every June.

The birthday events coincide with the Irish Stampede, a charity 10-2-4K run sponsored by the local Lions Club; the &quot;Tour de Agua&quot; bicycle race; and the &quot;Gotta Love Gravel: Dublin&quot; evening gravel ride sponsored by Dublin Bottling Works. Scores of former students from Dublin primary, middle, and high schools return at this time for the annual Dublin Area Reunion.

The community celebrates its large Hispanic population with events during Cinco de Mayo (in May) and during Hispanic Heritage month is observed in September and October.

The local Dublin Chamber of Commerce sponsors one-third of the tri-angler tournament, with a bass-fishing tournament in July held nearby at Proctor Lake. October safe trick or treating activities seek to ensure safe Halloween activities, and Christmas festivities the first Thursday in December include an annual Christmas parade.

The Double In Cowboy Church holds routine barrel races and other western-related riding events.

Throughout the year, visitors to the community enjoy seeing the five local museums—the Rodeo Heritage Museum, the Dublin Historical Museum, the Dr Pepper Museum, the National Health and Public Safety History Museum, and the renowned Ben Hogan Museum.

==Notable people==

* Gene Autry was co-owner of a world championship rodeo company and Lightning C Ranch in Dublin, Texas.
* George Andrew Davis, Jr., highly decorated fighter pilot and flying ace was born in Dublin in 1920.
* Johnny Duncan, a popular country singer in the 1970s, was born in Dublin.
* Dustin Hodge, a television producer and writer, graduated from Dublin High School.
* Ben Hogan golfer who created a new category of golf clubs.
* Nicole James, captain and member of the USA Women&#x27;s Olympic Rugby Team, was born in Dublin.
* H. Lane Mitchell, municipal public works commissioner in Shreveport, Louisiana - born in Dublin.
* Rom Stanifer was an Olympic rifle competitor.
* Slim Willet, musician, songwriter and radio personality, was born in Dublin.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* List of Irish place names in other countries

==References==

==External links==
* City of Dublin official website
* Dublin at the Handbook of Texas Online, Texas State Historical Assoc. Online Website
* Dublin demographic data at City-Data.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981816" start="0" end="6" title="Dublin, Texas" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110500" start="41" end="53" title="Erath County, Texas" label="Erath County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109433" start="57" end="70" title="Central Texas" label="Central Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="119" end="130" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="155" end="166" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="224" end="233" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310881" start="254" end="270" title="Dublin Dr Pepper" label="Dublin Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="352" end="362" title="sugarcane" label="cane sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006894" start="381" end="395" title="Imperial Sugar" label="Imperial Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="424" end="448" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q981525" start="563" end="575" title="Stephenville, Texas" label="Stephenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q981707" start="577" end="582" title="Tolar, Texas" label="Tolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q981306" start="584" end="592" title="Comanche, Texas" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q981451" start="598" end="602" title="Hico, Texas" label="Hico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="767" end="780" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="863" end="872" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q981525" start="933" end="945" title="Stephenville, Texas" label="Stephenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="1017" end="1027" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1061" end="1071" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="1072" end="1085" title="gubernatorial" label="gubernatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507050" start="1094" end="1109" title="George C. Butte" label="George C. Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651290" start="1240" end="1264" title="George Andrew Davis, Jr." label="George Andrew Davis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="1286" end="1300" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1458" end="1469" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="1604" end="1612" title="governor of Texas" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="1613" end="1623" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="1752" end="1766" title="Irish American" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816863" start="1839" end="1853" title="U.S. Route 377 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 377"/>
<link wikidata="Q981525" start="1906" end="1918" title="Stephenville, Texas" label="Stephenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="1924" end="1935" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="1964" end="1985" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q981458" start="2081" end="2088" title="De Leon, Texas" label="De Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="2126" end="2130" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2170" end="2197" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2389" end="2418" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2444" end="2461" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2540" end="2565" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2672" end="2678" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2866" end="2879" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3925" end="3942" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4036" end="4048" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="4290" end="4296" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="4297" end="4307" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="4312" end="4316" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q427075" start="4317" end="4323" title="Temple, Texas" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q128228" start="4324" end="4331" title="Killeen, Texas" label="Killeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338275" start="4381" end="4388" title="KSTV-FM" label="KSTV-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710576" start="4390" end="4394" title="KEQX" label="KEQX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339095" start="4399" end="4408" title="KTRL (FM)" label="KTRL (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310930" start="4522" end="4556" title="Dublin Independent School District" label="Dublin Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q12067953" start="4670" end="4692" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day in the United States" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310881" start="4878" end="4922" title="Dublin Dr Pepper" label="oldest Dr Pepper bottling plant in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310881" start="5136" end="5157" title="Dublin Bottling Works" label="Dublin Bottling Works"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5373" end="5385" title="Tour de Agua" label="Tour de Agua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247526" start="5948" end="5960" title="Proctor Lake" label="Proctor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="6470" end="6486" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q342723" start="6511" end="6521" title="Gene Autry" label="Gene Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651290" start="6615" end="6639" title="George Andrew Davis, Jr." label="George Andrew Davis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1702316" start="6717" end="6730" title="Johnny Duncan (country singer)" label="Johnny Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65584889" start="6793" end="6805" title="Dustin Hodge" label="Dustin Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="6878" end="6887" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41635578" start="6939" end="6951" title="Nicole James" label="Nicole James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590569" start="6979" end="7014" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national rugby union team" label="USA Women&amp;#x27;s Olympic Rugby Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421665" start="7038" end="7054" title="H. Lane Mitchell" label="H. Lane Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="7095" end="7116" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519310" start="7137" end="7149" title="Rom Stanifer" label="Rom Stanifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173978" start="7185" end="7196" title="Slim Willet" label="Slim Willet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574571" start="7292" end="7336" title="List of Irish place names in other countries" label="List of Irish place names in other countries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135852" wikidata="Q981525" url="?curid=135852" title="Stephenville, Texas">
<text>Stephenville is a city and county seat of Erath County, Texas, United States. It is on the North Bosque River, which forms nearby. Founded in 1854, it is home to Tarleton State University. Stephenville is a small town located in Central Texas, as of the 2020 census, the city&#x27;s population was 20,847, and it is the principal city in the Stephenville Micropolitan Statistical Area. Stephenville is among several communities that call themselves the &quot;Cowboy Capital of the World&quot;.

==History==

Stephenville is founded by and named after John M. Stephen, who settled there in 1854, and donated the land for the townsite laid out by George B. Erath when the county was organized in 1856. In the first two years of its settlement, the population increased to 776. The population then declined until 1871, because the townsite was in Comanche territory and raids were common, and because the hardships of the American Civil War led citizens to leave. The population grew after Stephenville became an agriculture and livestock center. Coal mining also became important to the area in 1886, and was a major segment of the economy for the 30 years.

Stephenville was incorporated in 1889, with the arrival of the Fort Worth and Rio Grande Railway. In the 1890s, many of the buildings around the town square were built, Tarleton State University opened, and the community&#x27;s two newspapers merged to become the &quot;Empire-Tribune&quot;, which is still in operation. In February 1907, the Stephenville North and South Texas Railway was chartered by Stephenville and Hamilton business interests, which sold the line in 1910 to the St. Louis Southwestern Railway of Texas system. In the 20th century, industry became an important part of Stephenville, and the population has steadily increased since the 1920s.

=== Stephenville lights ===
In January 2008, dozens of people in Stephenville reported seeing patterns of lights in the night sky, which were eventually discovered to have been caused by a military training maneuver. Some described it as a single large unidentified flying object. The Air Force Reserve issued a statement from the NAS Fort Worth Joint Reserve Base that jets from the 457th Fighter Squadron were in military airspace designated for training during the time people reported seeing the lights. The F-16s had been engaged in training maneuvers and dropping counter-measure flares used to confuse heat-seeking missiles. Following news reports of the UFO sighting, &quot;media calls came from all over the world&quot;, and local police Constable Lee Roy Gaitan gave more than 100 interviews. The town reacted in a &quot;UFO frenzy&quot;; T-shirts proclaiming the town &quot;Alien Capital of the World&quot; and &quot;Erath County -- the New Roswell&quot;, were rushed into production, and the local high school suddenly received $7,000 for college scholarships.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which are land and is covered by water.

Stephenville is served by three major US highways – US Highway 377, US Highway 281, and US Highway 67 (the last of which joins US Hwy 377).

===Climate===

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Stephenville has a humid subtropical climate, with the abbreviation &quot;Cfa&quot;.

==Demographics==

===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, the town had a population of 20.9k people with a median age of 25.7 and a median household income of $48,602. 95.5% of residents are U.S. citizens. Over one year, it&#x27;s median household income grew from $47,161 to $48,602, a 3.06% increase. Ethnic groups in Stephenville include White (Non-Hispanic) (75.6%), White (Hispanic) (12.7%), Black or African American (Non-Hispanic) (3.29%), Other (Hispanic) (2.68%), and Two+ (Non-Hispanic) (2.11%). No households reported speaking a non-English language at home as their primary shared language. This does not consider potential multi-lingual situations, but only the primary self-reported language spoken by all members of the household. Universities include Tarleton State University (3,536 degrees awarded in 2021). In 2020, the median property value was $153,400, and the homeownership rate was 45.9%. The average reported commute time was 16.1 minutes, and average car ownership was 2 cars per household.

==Education==
Stephenville is served by the Stephenville Independent School District, and two colleges: Tarleton State University and Ranger College.

==Notable people==

* Jessie G. Beach (1887 – 1954), paleontologist and museum aid, born in Stephenville.
* Art Briles, former football coach at Baylor University
* Milton Brown Recording artist, cofounder of Western Swing born in Stephenville
* Bradley Cadenhead, founder of 764 (organization), the name of which refers to Stephenville’s ZIP codes.
* Giovannie and the Hired Guns, American country rock band
* Leon Hale (newspaper writer), born in Stephenville
* Dustin Hodge, television producer and writer
* Brock Holt, professional baseball player, graduated from Stephenville High School
* Jewel, singer-songwriter, lived on a Stephenville ranch.
* Kevin Kolb, NFL quarterback
* Jess Lockwood, world champion bull rider
* J.B. Mauney, world champion bull rider
* Ty Murray, world champion rodeo cowboy
* Carey Wentworth Styles, newspaperman, founder of &quot;The Atlanta Constitution&quot;
* Hugh Wolfe, professional football player

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Stephenville Official City Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981525" start="0" end="12" title="Stephenville, Texas" label="Stephenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="27" end="38" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110500" start="42" end="61" title="Erath County, Texas" label="Erath County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361595" start="91" end="109" title="Bosque River" label="North Bosque River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551554" start="162" end="187" title="Tarleton State University" label="Tarleton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="254" end="265" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506971" start="645" end="660" title="George Bernard Erath" label="George B. Erath"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="844" end="852" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="919" end="937" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078111" start="1220" end="1253" title="Fort Worth and Rio Grande Railway" label="Fort Worth and Rio Grande Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551554" start="1326" end="1351" title="Tarleton State University" label="Tarleton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611015" start="1500" end="1542" title="Stephenville North and South Texas Railway" label="Stephenville North and South Texas Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q975411" start="1577" end="1585" title="Hamilton, Texas" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364214" start="1641" end="1680" title="St. Louis Southwestern Railway of Texas" label="St. Louis Southwestern Railway of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="2074" end="2100" title="unidentified flying object" label="unidentified flying object"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="2106" end="2123" title="Air Force Reserve" label="Air Force Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016367" start="2152" end="2185" title="Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth" label="NAS Fort Worth Joint Reserve Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638161" start="2205" end="2227" title="457th Fighter Squadron" label="457th Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2927" end="2954" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816863" start="3078" end="3092" title="U.S. Route 377 in Texas" label="US Highway 377"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3094" end="3108" title="U.S. Route 281#Texas" label="US Highway 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504331" start="3114" end="3127" title="U.S. Route 67 in Texas" label="US Highway 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3299" end="3328" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3356" end="3381" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3469" end="3494" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611013" start="4500" end="4540" title="Stephenville Independent School District" label="Stephenville Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551554" start="4560" end="4585" title="Tarleton State University" label="Tarleton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292764" start="4590" end="4604" title="Ranger College" label="Ranger College"/>
<link wikidata="Q108536179" start="4629" end="4644" title="Jessie G. Beach" label="Jessie G. Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="4660" end="4674" title="Paleontology" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796715" start="4715" end="4725" title="Art Briles" label="Art Briles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531285" start="4772" end="4784" title="Milton Brown" label="Milton Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="4816" end="4829" title="Western Swing" label="Western Swing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4853" end="4870" title="Bradley Cadenhead" label="Bradley Cadenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q131374946" start="4883" end="4901" title="764 (organization)" label="764 (organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119683271" start="4959" end="4987" title="Giovannie and the Hired Guns" label="Giovannie and the Hired Guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524668" start="5018" end="5027" title="Leon Hale" label="Leon Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q65584889" start="5071" end="5083" title="Dustin Hodge" label="Dustin Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q660679" start="5118" end="5128" title="Brock Holt" label="Brock Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229018" start="5202" end="5207" title="Jewel (singer)" label="Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777562" start="5261" end="5271" title="Kevin Kolb" label="Kevin Kolb"/>
<link wikidata="Q69866631" start="5291" end="5304" title="Jess Lockwood (bull rider)" label="Jess Lockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104722" start="5334" end="5345" title="J.B. Mauney" label="J.B. Mauney"/>
<link wikidata="Q14249324" start="5375" end="5384" title="Ty Murray" label="Ty Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q63119719" start="5416" end="5438" title="Carey Wentworth Styles" label="Carey Wentworth Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="5471" end="5495" title="Atlanta Journal Constitution" label="The Atlanta Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612049" start="5504" end="5514" title="Hugh Wolfe" label="Hugh Wolfe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135853" wikidata="Q975857" url="?curid=135853" title="Lott, Texas">
<text>Lott is a city in Falls County, Texas, United States. As of the 2020 census, the city population was 644.
==History==
The Texas Townsite Company bought the land in 1889. When the San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway was built through the area in 1890, Lott was founded; it was named in honor of Uriah Lott, president of the railroad. A post office was established at the settlement in 1890, with S. J. Crump as postmaster. When the community was incorporated by unanimous vote later that year, its population was estimated at more than 200. By 1892 Lott had Baptist, Methodist, and Presbyterian churches, two cotton gins and gristmills, a weekly newspaper, and 350 residents. Its population estimates were as high as 1,200 by the end of the 1890s. Lott continued to prosper throughout the first part of the 20th century when the town developed into a well-known speed trap, securing the town&#x27;s primary revenue source to the present day. The First National Bank of Lott was established in 1903, and the Lott State Bank was chartered in 1909. Local businesses did well, and residents were optimistic about the community&#x27;s future growth. Lott&#x27;s economy received an additional boost in the 1920s when State Highway 44 (later U.S. 77) built through the community. The Great Depression, however, brought significant changes. In 1933, the First National Bank of Lott went into receivership and did not reopen. During the mid-1930s, many local families had to accept government relief to make ends meet, although the Public Works Administration and the Works Progress provided some residents with jobs on street and water works.

Cotton and corn were for many years the staple crops of area farmers, but government subsidies encouraged diversification into stock raising and truck farming. The population of the community was reported as 921 in the 1930s; it rose to 1,021 in the 1940s, but fell to 956 by the early 1950s. Lott lost its rail service in 1967, when the Southern Pacific abandoned the section of track between Waco and Rosebud. Population estimates for Lott fluctuated between 750 and 950 residents from the 1960s through the 1980s, and the number of businesses fell steadily, from 45 in the 1940s to 12 in the 1980s. Thirteen businesses and 828 residents were reported in Lott at the end of the 1980s. In 1990, its population was estimated at 775.

In June 2015, a TV station reported that the cities of Calvert, Franklin, Hearne, and Lott in a &quot;Texas Triangle&quot; were using their police departments to issue numerous speeding tickets to turn their municipal court into a &quot;cash cow&quot;.

==Geography==

Lott is located southwest of the center of Falls County on high ground between the north-flowing Little Deer Creek and the south-flowing Cottonwood Creek, both tributaries of the Brazos River.

U.S. Route 77 passes through the city, leading north to Waco and south to Cameron. Texas State Highway 320 crosses US 77 at the west edge of downtown; it leads northeast to Marlin and southwest to Zabcikville.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Lott has a total area of , of which , or 1.40%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 644 people, 243 households, and 139 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 724 people, 299 households, and 196 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 343 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 71.69% White, 20.99% African American, 0.14% Asian, 4.97% from other races, and 2.21% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 9.25% of the population.

There were 299 households, out of which 33.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.1% were married couples living together, 22.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.4% were non-families. 31.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 3.07.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 29.0% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 24.6% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 76.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $22,875, and the median income for a family was $27,500. Males had a median income of $25,556 versus $19,318 for females. The per capita income for the city was $10,650. About 27.1% of families and 27.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.2% of those under age 18 and 25.0% of those age 65 or over.
==Education==
The City of Lott is served by the Rosebud-Lott Independent School District.

==Photo gallery==
==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975857" start="0" end="4" title="Lott, Texas" label="Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q27238" start="18" end="30" title="Falls County, Texas" label="Falls County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="32" end="37" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="64" end="75" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471349" start="179" end="215" title="San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway" label="San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="1975" end="1991" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="2031" end="2035" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q981973" start="2040" end="2047" title="Rosebud, Texas" label="Rosebud"/>
<link wikidata="Q981815" start="2426" end="2433" title="Calvert, Texas" label="Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q974124" start="2435" end="2443" title="Franklin, Texas" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q981420" start="2445" end="2451" title="Hearne, Texas" label="Hearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="2819" end="2831" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="2834" end="2847" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="2890" end="2894" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q981520" start="2908" end="2915" title="Cameron, Texas" label="Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504237" start="2917" end="2940" title="Texas State Highway 320" label="Texas State Highway 320"/>
<link wikidata="Q982441" start="3007" end="3013" title="Marlin, Texas" label="Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063458" start="3031" end="3042" title="Zabcikville, Texas" label="Zabcikville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3062" end="3089" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3189" end="3214" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3305" end="3311" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3525" end="3530" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3539" end="3555" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3563" end="3568" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3581" end="3592" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3628" end="3636" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3640" end="3646" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3798" end="3813" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4610" end="4627" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4721" end="4733" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368091" start="4856" end="4896" title="Rosebud-Lott Independent School District" label="Rosebud-Lott Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135854" wikidata="Q982441" url="?curid=135854" title="Marlin, Texas">
<text>Marlin is a city in Falls County, Texas, United States. Its population was 5,462 at the 2020 census. Since 1851, it has been the county seat of Falls County. Marlin has been given the nickname &quot;The Hot Mineral Water City of Texas&quot; by the 76th Texas State Legislature. Mineral water was discovered there in 1892.

==History==
===Establishment and antebellum era (1851–1861)===
The city of Marlin is located east of the Brazos River, which runs through the center of the county. The low falls on the river southwest of present-day Marlin was the site of Sarahville de Viesca, established in 1834 by Sterling C. Robertson.

The act of the state legislature creating Falls County that passed on January 28, 1850, established Viesca (renamed Fort Milam) as the county seat. Citizens petitioned to choose their own location and a vote was held on January 21, 1851, that established the county seat at Adams, near the home of Dr. Allensworth Adams. On March 22, 1851, the Falls County commissioners court voted to rename Adams the &quot;Town of Marlin&quot; to honor former Robertson County &quot;alcalde&quot; John Marlin. The new town of Marlin was laid out around a courthouse square and a log courthouse was constructed, which also served as a school and church. In 1854, a new courthouse was constructed for $5,000; it was painted white with dark green shutters and a chrome yellow door.

In 1859, the population of Marlin was 2,875 whites, 1,225 slaves, and nine free blacks.

== Schools ==

=== Early schools ===
The first schools in Falls County were private schools established at Marlin. A tuition school, Marlin Male and Female Academy, was located on Ward Street in 1871, north of the courthouse square. The school was renamed and relocated before finally being sold in 1886, only to be destroyed by fire in 1900. A new public brick school was constructed in 1903 and a high school was completed in 1917. The Marlin Independent School District was established in 1923. Nearly half a century before, in 1875, two other schools for African Americans were organized. The two black schools were dependent on state funds, and met in the African and Baptist churches. In 1916, the city council voted to build a school for blacks; later, the Booker T. Washington High School was constructed in 1951 on Commerce Street and designed by the architectural firm of Thomas, Jameson, and Merrill. This school remains standing, but is vacant. The two school districts merged in 1968 into the Marlin Independent School District (MISD). In 1900, the town&#x27;s Jewish residents organized a Sunday school.

=== Modern schools ===

A high-school commencement ceremony in Texas was called off after the district found that only of five of 33 students were eligible to graduate, officials said Friday. Marlin HS, 30 miles southeast of Waco, had been set to pass out diplomas on Thursday May 26, 2023, before the MISD revealed that a number of pupils &quot;did not meet requirements due to attendance or grades.&quot; In announcing the ceremony postponement, Superintendent Darryl Henson said that students in his district &quot;will he held to the same high standard as any other student in Texas.&quot;

&quot;We maintain high expectations, not as an imposition, but as a show of faith in our students&#x27; abilities,&quot; Henson said in a statement to the community. Superintendent Henson and his staff audited student files this past weekend to find only five were eligible to graduate, district spokesperson Leah Wayne told NBC News on Friday. The ineligibility stemmed from a myriad of reasons, including failing grades, attendance, verification and documentation issues.

== Reconstruction era (1865–1877) ==

The town of Marlin was formally incorporated by the state legislature on January 12, 1867. Two former slaves served as elected or appointed officials in Marlin: Nelson Denson and Lige Moore. The Houston &amp; Texas Central Railway reached Marlin on 1871 as a stop on the &quot;Waco Tap&quot; line that extended northwest from Bremond (Robertson County) to Waco. The location of the depot on the eastern side of the town led to the development of a commercial district eastward from the courthouse square along Live Oak Street.

In 1875, the 1854 courthouse burned and a new brick courthouse was constructed. The courthouse was badly damaged in a storm in 1886 and replaced with a new structure designed by architect Eugene T. Heiner.

== The mineral water era (1890s–1960s) ==

In 1891, the City of Marlin issued bonds worth $25,000 to drill an artesian well. Hot mineral water was accidentally discovered and later alleged to have medicinal properties. To harness the potential benefit of these &quot;healing waters&quot;, the first bath house was constructed in 1895, with several others to follow. A least two of those early houses had large swimming pools with ornate, covered buildings. Other bath houses were subsequently constructed that included individual bathing areas with marble tubs and cooling rooms with available massages for a full spa treatment. Thousands were soon attracted to Marlin to &quot;take the cure.&quot;

While Marlin had a number of small hotels in the 19th century, the construction of the three-story Arlington Hotel in 1895 demonstrated the economic impact and potential of the mineral-water industry. The hotel and adjacent bathhouse burned in January 1899, but were both replaced with more elaborate structures that opened in 1901. The new Arlington Hotel hosted notable community events and statewide conventions. Other than the Hilton and the numerous boarding houses (such as Captain Bourrupt&#x27;s and the Harris Houses), the town had several other hotels, among them the Fannin, the Majestic, and the Imperial; most were on Coleman Street and within a few blocks of the public hot water fountain and the mineral water wells—on a sort of bath-house row.

In 1929, Conrad Hilton began construction of a Hilton Hotel that was opened on May 27, 1930, at a cost of $375,000 and to which Marlin citizens and businesses contributed $50,000. The nine-floor, 110-room hotel remains the tallest building in Marlin and was built on Coleman Street across from the Marlin Sanitarium Bathhouse, which burned in the early 1990s. The hotel was connected to the bathhouse by a tunnel that has not been filled in, but is inaccessible. Mr. Hilton&#x27;s first venture into the hotel business that featured several hotels in Cisco, Mineral Wells, El Paso, and Marlin were not successful, and Mr. Hilton sold those hotels in the 1930s. The Marlin Hilton was bought by the Moody’s of Galveston and later known as the Falls Hotel, then bought by the Smithwicks. It has been closed since the late 1960s as a hotel, but parts of the first floor have held small businesses-beauty shops, an optometrist&#x27;s office, an insurance agency, and restaurants. One such restaurant, the Cactus, occupied its space for about 10 years until about 2016. For many years, the first-floor ballroom also featured class reunions and school dances, as well as public outside auction house usages. None of those businesses occupy the hotel at present. The hotel structure still stands, but is unoccupied. In recent years, sporadic renovations have occurred.

Along with the decline of the hot mineral water industry after World War II and the advent of penicillin, many of the bath-house-related businesses closed and those older structures were gradually demolished or reconfigured. Most of the remnants of the bath-house businesses had closed by the late 1960s. In the early 1980s, a short-lived revival arose with some new bathing structures that did not succeed, and neither did one other attempt at that industry&#x27;s revitalization in that 1990s. Only the Buie-Allen Hospital (&quot;circa&quot; 1912), now closed, and a very few former boarding houses remain as apartments, as well as some of the intact late 19th-century commercial district and numerous early 20th-century residences constructed by doctors and many others who served the bath-house clientele. Hot mineral water can still usually be obtained from a fountain outside the Marlin Chamber of Commerce in the 1929 pavilion when the city maintains that access. The former location of one of the several bath houses, the Sanitarium Bath House (burned down by accidental arson), is now a small city park featuring a gazebo that is adjacent to the old Houston and Texas Central railroad tracks. Those tracks are currently owned by the Union Pacific Railroad. The waters remain and at least three wells are still active, but not accessible. The local three-story Falls Community Hospital has heated (as of the 1980s) its structure via the mineral water.
The active Falls County Historical Commission has an extensive museum. Adjacent to the museum is a lively, active theater group, the Palace Theatre, that features plays and dinner-house productions, as well as occasional outside professional entertainment.

== Marlin sports ==

=== Marlin spring training (1904–1918) ===

Marlin&#x27;s mild climate, hot mineral water baths, and proximity by train to Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio made it an appealing spring training location for Major League Baseball teams. Four different teams trained in Marlin from 1904 to 1918: Chicago White Sox, St. Louis Cardinals, Cincinnati Reds, and New York Giants. Players stayed at the Arlington Hotel, which is no longer standing.

In the same era, Marlin was home to minor league baseball. The Marlin Marlins (1916–1917) and Marlin Bathers (1923–1925) played as members of the Class D level Central Texas League and Texas Association.

=== Chicago White Sox (1904) ===

The Chicago White Sox baseball team visited &quot;Marlin Springs&quot; from March 7 to March 17, 1904, as part of their spring training tour of the South. The team&#x27;s selection of Marlin can be credited to Ted Sullivan. The &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; quoted Sullivan in an article published on February 7, 1904: &quot;If I had looked the United States over for a spring training ground for a ball club, I do not believe I could have found a spot I would pick ahead of Marlin Springs ... [Charles] Comiskey asked me last December when I was coming to Texas to pick him out a place to train. I met a man in Dallas, who told me he left his crutches at Marlin; that he went there suffering with rheumatism. I took a run down to Marlin ... and I found the ideal spot for training grounds. The place has a magnificent hotel. Adjoining this place is a beautiful natatorium equipped with hot sulphur and all kinds of baths... The ball grounds here are on even surface and are only four blocks from the hotel. This is the spot I selected for the Chicago American league club...&quot; The White Sox left Marlin on March 17 &quot;with expressions of regret and of hope that its individuals will be with the White Sox next spring when they return here for a similar stay.&quot; Among those on the White Sox who trained in Marlin was George Davis. On the last full day (March 16), Manager Nixey Callahan had the team make a ten-mile round trip walk to the Brazos River after dinner.

=== St. Louis Cardinals (1905) ===

The St. Louis Cardinals chose &quot;Marlin Springs&quot; as their 1905 spring training site after delays in preparations of a site in Houston. As a result, the Chicago White Sox chose to train in New Orleans. The Cardinals arrived in Marlin on March 6, 1905 and &quot;a large gathering of local fans [were] on hand to welcome the big leaguers.&quot; Visits to the hot mineral water baths were a part of the team&#x27;s daily routine. A St. Louis newspaper reported that &quot;[practice] ends at 4 o&#x27;clock and the players get to the bath about 15 minutes later. The baths are hot, and it takes until 5 before the players are cooled off enough to go to the hotel, which is but a couple of steps distant. The baths not only put the players in first-class condition and remove any surplus weight, but they also tend to prevent soreness.&quot; The Cardinals broke camp at Marlin on March 17, 1905.

=== Cincinnati Reds (1906–1907) ===

The Cincinnati Reds baseball team held spring training in Marlin in 1906 and 1907.

=== New York Giants (1908–1918) ===

The New York Giants baseball team held spring training in Marlin from 1908 to 1918.

== Modern utilities ==
Telephones began appearing in households in Marlin in 1900. Automobiles, electricity, and Lone Star Gas followed shortly. By the mid-1900s, Marlin had a bottling company, stock pens, a brickyard, a turkey-processing plant (the building can still be seen on Williams Street/South Business Highway 6), a saddlery, a water crystallization plant, and a pottery plant.

== Modern history ==

===The 2000s===
The loss of major employers in the late 20th and early 21st centuries resulted in a loss of population and a reduction in the city&#x27;s tax base. While at the census in 2000, Marlin had a population of 6,628 (a modest increase of 242 people from 1990), by 2010, its population had declined to 5,967 residents. According to the US and Texas census, Marlin&#x27;s largest population peaked at two times in its history, 1950 and 1980, with 7009 being its highest.

First to change hands or close was the Swift turkey-processing plant. Next was Marlin Mills, a carpet-manufacturing company, closed during the 1980s economic decline. A styrofoam company, open in another building in Marlin&#x27;s industrial park, caught fire and the remains were demolished. A dress-manufacturing plant, which catered to large businesses, such as the airline industry, closed. Wallace, a business form-printing company5 employing hundreds, closed in the mid-2000s. In the early 2000s, 1100 small to medium-sized VA hospitals closed all over the US, one of which was the Thomas T. Connally Veterans Affairs Hospital, a five-floor building located at the corner of Ward and Virginia Streets. The hospital closed in 2005, resulting in the loss of more than 100 jobs, as the economy in Marlin continued to wane.

More recent investments include the construction of a three-story, 60-room Best Western Hotel on Texas State Highway 6, at Farm-to-Market Road 147. However, plans for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice to open a medical facility for prisoners at the former Veterans&#x27; Affairs Hospital, expected to add an additional 100 to 150 jobs to the Marlin economy, did not materialize. Funds were reallocated to renovate the TDJC hospital in Galveston, which was badly damaged by Hurricane Rita.

====2011====
The Heart of Texas Council of Governments granted the city of Marlin $35,000 to remove 15 dilapidated buildings and structures in the town, which included 300 tons of debris. Over of water lines were constructed on 20 streets in 2011. The city also started and completed a 500,000-gallon water tower project.

In 2011, the city brought back its Annual Music and Blues Festival, and raised money to revamp the city baseball fields and revive the City Little League, which attracted 160 children that year.

The city&#x27;s crime rate decreased by 45% in 2011.

====2015====

On November 10, 2015, Marlin Chief of Police Darrell Allen died while in office. He had suffered a gunshot while at an off-duty security job in Temple on November 1. The suspect was placed into custody at the scene by other officers working security.

In December 2015, a protest occurred after the city water had been turned off for almost a week. Even after the city and the state had extensively renovated the water treatment system, the man who had worked for the city as the water systems manager, instead of calling for repairs, cut wires when alarms sounded instead of fixing the problems. The state found the disengaging of the systems when they removed panels to determine the problems. This led to a city-wide water crisis that caused the water system to repair extensive damage.

====2019====

On May 4, 2019, Marlin native Carolyn Lofton was elected as the first black woman to serve as mayor. She stated that she was motivated to run &quot;on a desire to uplift and improve the community in which I live for all those who are currently here and those who seek to make a home here.&quot;

==Geography==

Marlin is located in east-central Falls County at (31.307975, −96.892975). Texas State Highway 6 runs along the eastern edge of the city, leading northwest to Waco and southeast to Bryan. Texas State Highway 7 runs through the center of town as Bridge Street and Live Oak Street, leading east to Kosse and west to Chilton.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which , or 1.09%, is covered by water.

===Climate===
The climate in the area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Marlin has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.
==Transportation==
===Highways and other major roads===
* Texas State Highway 6, also known as Williams, Craik Streets in city limits
* Texas State Highway 7, also known as Bridge, Live Oak Streets in city limits
* Farm-to-market road 147, starts at Highway 7 and ends at Highway 14 less than four miles southwest of Groesbeck

===Airport===
Marlin and Falls County are served by the Marlin Municipal Airport, located northeast of the center of Marlin.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 5,462 people, 1,889 households, and 874 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, 6,628 people, 2,415 households, and 1,509 families were residing in the city. The population density was . The 2,826 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 41.84% White, 44.48% African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.20% Asian, 11.64% from other races, and 1.58% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 18.30% of the population.

Of the 2,415 households, 30.2% had children under 18 living with them, 35.7% were married couples living together, 22.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.5% were not families. About 34.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 18.9% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.47, and the average family size was 3.21.

In the city, the age distribution was 33.2% under 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 21.3% from 25 to 44, 18.9% from 45 to 64, and 19.3% who were 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.6 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 80.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $21,443, and for a family was $26,861. Males had a median income of $25,220 versus $18,111 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,555. About 27.9% of families and 31.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.8% of those under age 18 and 16.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
===Municipal government===

In December 2015, Damien Eaglin, then the acting police chief, was designated as Marlin chief of police. He replaced Darrell Allen, who was shot and killed in November of that year. Nathan Sodek was named chief in October 2018. He killed himself in September 2019 when Texas Rangers served him a warrant in connection of an investigation of sexual misconduct.

===State government===
The Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) operates the Marlin Unit, a transfer facility for men, in the City of Marlin. The unit opened in June 1992 and was transferred to the Texas Youth Commission (TYC) in May 1995. When it was a part of TYC, the facility, named the Marlin Orientation and Assessment Unit, served as the place of orientation for children of both sexes being committed into TYC from the facility&#x27;s opening in 1995 to its transfer out of TYC in 2007. In September 2007 the facility was transferred back to the TDCJ. The 2007 conversions of the Marlin unit, to house 600 adult prisoners, had the possibility of improving the economy of Marlin. Around that time Texas officials were examining the possibility of converting a former Veterans Administration medical center in Marlin into a prison unit for psychiatric patients.

The TDCJ also operates the William P. Hobby Unit, a prison for women located southwest of Marlin in unincorporated Falls County and named for former Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby.

===Federal government===
The United States Postal Service operates the Marlin Post Office.

==Education==
The City of Marlin is served by the Marlin Independent School District.

==Newspapers==
The city of Marlin has had several newspapers. The current newspaper that has been serving Marlin since 1890 is the &quot;Marlin Democrat&quot;, issued every Wednesday. Another newspaper published in the 19th and 20th centuries was &quot;The Falls County Freeman&quot;, which served the African-American community. &quot;The Marlin Ball&quot; was established in 1874 by T.C. Oltorf and continued until about 1901. &quot;The Falls County Record&quot; was popular during the 1940s and 1950s. &quot;The Marlin Democrat&quot; and &quot;The Rosebud News&quot; remain the only active newspapers in Falls County.

==Culture==
===Filmed in Marlin===
*&quot;Leadbelly&quot; (1976), starring Roger E. Mosley, was filmed on and around Wood Street in 1974.
*&quot;Infamous&quot; (2006), starring Sandra Bullock, was filmed around Falls County Courthouse and unrestored homes of Marlin.
* &quot;Making New Family Memories in Rural Texas&quot; (2016), was filmed in 2016.

==Notable people==

* Danario Alexander, wide receiver for the San Diego Chargers, was born in Marlin and graduated from Marlin High School in 2006
* Ken &quot;Coach&quot; Carter (second home), opened an unconventional boarding school in town in the fall of 2009 which has not been open for years and sits vacant
* Ben Clarkson Connally was appointed a federal district judge by President Harry Truman
* Tom Connally, U.S. senator, 1928–1952, was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during World War II, and member of the U.S. House of Representatives, 1918–1928
* Bruce Curry, world champion boxer, was born in Marlin in 1956
* Bobbi Humphrey, jazz flautist and singer, was born in Marlin in 1950
* Blind Willie Johnson, blues/gospel street musician, had Marlin as his attributed birthplace, although his birth records are lost; his birthplace has also been traced to Beaumont, Texas
* Dan Kubiak, state representative, graduated from Marlin High School in 1957
* Curtis Modkins, running backs coach for Chicago Bears, is a former offensive coordinator for the San Francisco 49ers
* O.L. Rapson was the first manager of the Grand Rapids Hotel and manager of a small store outside of Marlin
* Bob (Robert Jasper) Reeves (1892–1960) was a Western movie actor
* Ben Herbert Rice, Jr. Was a federal district judge appointed by President Harry Truman
* LaDainian Tomlinson, the great San Diego Chargers and New York Jets running back, was born in Marlin; Tomlinson Hill, an unincorporated community just west of Marlin, is named for antebellum plantation owner James K. Tomlinson, from whom his slaves, including LaDainian Tomlinson&#x27;s nineteenth century ancestors, took their name
* Phil Wellman, minor league baseball player and manager, is infamous for a 2007 tirade against umpires after his ejection from a game

==Photo gallery==
== See also ==

==References==

==External links==

* City of Marlin official website
* Marlin Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982441" start="0" end="6" title="Marlin, Texas" label="Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27238" start="20" end="32" title="Falls County, Texas" label="Falls County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="34" end="39" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="129" end="140" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="428" end="440" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422944" start="562" end="582" title="Sarahville de Viesca, Texas" label="Sarahville de Viesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611378" start="607" end="628" title="Sterling C. Robertson" label="Sterling C. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246798" start="1114" end="1125" title="John Marlin (Texas settler)" label="John Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771848" start="1924" end="1958" title="Marlin Independent School District" label="Marlin Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="2589" end="2602" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916804" start="3908" end="3943" title="Houston and Texas Central Railway" label="Houston &amp;amp; Texas Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q908183" start="4039" end="4046" title="Bremond, Texas" label="Bremond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407776" start="4429" end="4445" title="Eugene T. Heiner" label="Eugene T. Heiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="4558" end="4571" title="artesian well" label="artesian well"/>
<link wikidata="Q324956" start="5918" end="5931" title="Conrad Hilton" label="Conrad Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="5956" end="5968" title="Hilton Hotel" label="Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="8513" end="8535" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="9187" end="9202" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="9216" end="9237" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="9486" end="9507" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q105564048" start="9513" end="9527" title="Marlin Marlins" label="Marlin Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q105564048" start="9544" end="9558" title="Marlin Bathers" label="Marlin Bathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="9596" end="9603" title="Class D (baseball)" label="Class D"/>
<link wikidata="Q105123337" start="9610" end="9630" title="Central Texas League" label="Central Texas League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059673" start="9635" end="9652" title="Texas Association" label="Texas Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="9693" end="9710" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693775" start="9899" end="9911" title="Ted Sullivan (baseball)" label="Ted Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q597832" start="10191" end="10199" title="Charles Comiskey" label="Comiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856958" start="11015" end="11027" title="George Davis (baseball)" label="George Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041963" start="11070" end="11084" title="Nixey Callahan" label="Nixey Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="12141" end="12156" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="12262" end="12277" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="12654" end="12663" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194725" start="13402" end="13411" title="styrofoam" label="styrofoam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="13463" end="13478" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580225" start="13839" end="13864" title="Veterans Health Administration" label="Veterans Affairs Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q830334" start="14134" end="14152" title="Best Western Hotel" label="Best Western Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="14156" end="14177" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504435" start="14182" end="14201" title="Farm-to-Market Road" label="Farm-to-Market Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="14230" end="14266" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="14501" end="14510" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="14539" end="14553" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q608201" start="15019" end="15032" title="Little League" label="Little League"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="15091" end="15101" title="crime rate" label="crime rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427075" start="15287" end="15293" title="Temple, Texas" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="16418" end="16422" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q695556" start="16440" end="16445" title="Bryan, Texas" label="Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503634" start="16447" end="16468" title="Texas State Highway 7" label="Texas State Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015313" start="16555" end="16560" title="Kosse, Texas" label="Kosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q973366" start="16573" end="16580" title="Chilton, Texas" label="Chilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="16600" end="16627" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16833" end="16862" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="16884" end="16909" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="17014" end="17035" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503634" start="17092" end="17113" title="Texas State Highway 7" label="Texas State Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504435" start="17171" end="17190" title="Farm-to-market road" label="Farm-to-market road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503647" start="17228" end="17238" title="Texas State Highway 14" label="Highway 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q980571" start="17273" end="17282" title="Groesbeck, Texas" label="Groesbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q650113" start="17340" end="17364" title="Marlin Airport" label="Marlin Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="17438" end="17463" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="17558" end="17564" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17737" end="17750" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="18797" end="18814" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="18908" end="18920" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="19327" end="19340" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="19446" end="19482" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708219" start="19624" end="19646" title="Texas Youth Commission" label="Texas Youth Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="20200" end="20223" title="Veterans Administration" label="Veterans Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303052" start="20322" end="20343" title="William P. Hobby Unit" label="William P. Hobby Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985847" start="20347" end="20363" title="incarceration of women in the United States" label="prison for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="20395" end="20409" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="20444" end="20463" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808226" start="20464" end="20474" title="Bill Hobby" label="Bill Hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="20506" end="20534" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771848" start="20619" end="20653" title="Marlin Independent School District" label="Marlin Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23074316" start="20793" end="20808" title="Marlin Democrat" label="Marlin Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228616" start="21320" end="21329" title="Leadbelly (film)" label="Leadbelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346591" start="21353" end="21368" title="Roger E. Mosley" label="Roger E. Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q467078" start="21423" end="21431" title="Infamous (2006 film)" label="Infamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="21455" end="21469" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21547" end="21600" title="List of Fixer Upper episodes#Season 3 (2015–16)" label="&amp;quot;Making New Family Memories in Rural Texas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214930" start="21652" end="21669" title="Danario Alexander" label="Danario Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="21693" end="21711" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771846" start="21751" end="21769" title="Marlin High School (Texas)" label="Marlin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329947" start="21780" end="21808" title="Ken Carter" label="Ken &amp;quot;Coach&amp;quot; Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885433" start="21945" end="21966" title="Ben Clarkson Connally" label="Ben Clarkson Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="22009" end="22031" title="President Harry Truman" label="President Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q912806" start="22034" end="22046" title="Tom Connally" label="Tom Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="22093" end="22127" title="Senate Foreign Relations Committee" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="22167" end="22196" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926410" start="22210" end="22221" title="Bruce Curry" label="Bruce Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q529243" start="22274" end="22288" title="Bobbi Humphrey" label="Bobbi Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="22295" end="22303" title="flautist" label="flautist"/>
<link wikidata="Q712586" start="22345" end="22365" title="Blind Willie Johnson" label="Blind Willie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="22367" end="22372" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="22373" end="22379" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="22514" end="22529" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213836" start="22532" end="22542" title="Dan Kubiak" label="Dan Kubiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="22544" end="22564" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195834" start="22610" end="22624" title="Curtis Modkins" label="Curtis Modkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="22650" end="22663" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="22707" end="22726" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072067" start="22729" end="22740" title="O.L. Rapson" label="O.L. Rapson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595010" start="22770" end="22788" title="Grand Rapids Hotel" label="Grand Rapids Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17413878" start="22838" end="22864" title="Bob Reeves (actor)" label="Bob (Robert Jasper) Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885832" start="22905" end="22926" title="Ben Herbert Rice, Jr." label="Ben Herbert Rice, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q537463" start="22994" end="23013" title="LaDainian Tomlinson" label="LaDainian Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="23025" end="23043" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="23048" end="23061" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="23062" end="23074" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819024" start="23096" end="23110" title="Tomlinson Hill, Texas" label="Tomlinson Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23202" end="23220" title="James K. Tomlinson" label="James K. Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185838" start="23329" end="23341" title="Phillip Wellman" label="Phil Wellman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135855" wikidata="Q981973" url="?curid=135855" title="Rosebud, Texas">
<text>Rosebud is a city in Falls County, Texas, United States. Its population was 1,296 at the 2020 census.

==City landmarks==
Rosebud is the home of the &quot;Rosebud Christmas tree&quot;, a 170-ft-tall artificial tree located at 128 W. Main St. The tree was erected by Bell Falls Milam Electric Co-op in the early 1960s. BFM was then bought out by Heart of Texas Electric Co-op. In December 2013, the facility was purchased by M6 Oilfield Rentals and Mfg, LLC, as a development site and regional distribution center. Owner Kenny Ray Murray has indicated that the tree is a Rosebud city icon and a community tradition that will remain as long as the town itself.

==Geography==
Rosebud is located in southwestern Falls County. U.S. Route 77 passes through the center of town as 5th Street, leading north to Waco and south to Cameron. Texas State Highway 53 leads west to Temple, intersecting US 77 just north of Rosebud.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Rosebud has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,296 people, 423 households, and 308 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, 1,493 people, 571 households, and 379 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 673 housing units averaged 865.1 per square mile (333.1/km). The racial makeup of the city was 59.14% White, 18.29% African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.07% Asian, 0.27% Pacific Islander, 19.16% from other races, and 2.95% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 29.74% of the population.

Of the 571 households, 31.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.4% were married couples living together, 17.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.6% were not families. About 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 20.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.21.

In the city, the population was distributed as 28.8% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 21.8% from 25 to 44, 20.8% from 45 to 64, and 22.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $24,063, and for a family was $33,300. Males had a median income of $25,662 versus $18,462 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,577. About 21.0% of families and 24.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.5% of those under age 18 and 22.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Photo gallery==

==Notable people==
* Greg Knox (born 1963), from Rosebud, is an American football coach. 
* Kenneth McDuff, the Broomstick Killer, was a serial killer in Texas 
* LaDainian Tomlinson, Hall of Fame running back
* A. D. Whitfield Jr. (born 1943), is a former American football running back

==References==

==External links==

* City of Rosebud official website
* Rosebud, Texas from the Handbook of Texas Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981973" start="0" end="7" title="Rosebud, Texas" label="Rosebud"/>
<link wikidata="Q27238" start="21" end="40" title="Falls County, Texas" label="Falls County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="89" end="100" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="723" end="736" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="803" end="807" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q981520" start="821" end="828" title="Cameron, Texas" label="Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503746" start="830" end="852" title="Texas State Highway 53" label="Texas State Highway 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q427075" start="867" end="873" title="Temple, Texas" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="935" end="962" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1137" end="1166" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1189" end="1214" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1277" end="1302" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1395" end="1401" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1577" end="1590" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2719" end="2736" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2830" end="2842" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q48594743" start="2958" end="2967" title="Greg Knox" label="Greg Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738884" start="3029" end="3043" title="Kenneth McDuff" label="Kenneth McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="3074" end="3087" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q537463" start="3100" end="3119" title="LaDainian Tomlinson" label="LaDainian Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="3121" end="3133" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647683" start="3149" end="3164" title="A. D. Whitfield" label="A. D. Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="3323" end="3340" title="Handbook of Texas" label="Handbook of Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135856" wikidata="Q969718" url="?curid=135856" title="Bailey, Texas">
<text>Bailey is a city in Fannin County, in the U.S. state of Texas. The population was 220 at the 2020 census, down from 289 at the 2010 census.

==History==
The town began in the late 1850s, when farmers moved into the area to take advantage of the rich soil. Cotton and corn became the principal crops. Two prominent residents competed to have the town named after themselves: Doctors Josiah S. Bailey and A. J. Ray owned land that was to become the townsite. The dispute ended in 1885, when the St. Louis Southwestern Railway used the land donated by Bailey for its right-of-way.

==Geography==

Bailey is located in southern Fannin County. Texas State Highway 11 passes through the city, leading northwest to Whitewright and southeast to Wolfe City. Texas State Highway 78 crosses Highway 11 south of the center of Bailey, leading north to Bonham, the Fannin County seat, and southwest to Leonard.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Bailey has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 213 people, 80 households, and 60 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 98 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 90.61% White, 0.94% Native American, 0.47% Asian, 4.69% from other races, and 3.29% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.80% of the population.

There were 80 households, out of which 40.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.5% were married couples living together, 8.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.0% were non-families. 23.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.15.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 29.1% under the age of 18, 12.2% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 9.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $42,292, and the median income for a family was $42,500. Males had a median income of $40,417 versus $25,417 for females. The per capita income for the city was $26,677. About 19.7% of families and 21.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 36.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 13.3% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
The City of Bailey is served by the Bonham Independent School District.

==Notable people==
*Ruby Allmond, singer/songwriter
*Jim Battle, Major League Baseball player
*Roy Leslie, Major League Baseball player

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969718" start="0" end="6" title="Bailey, Texas" label="Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="20" end="33" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="42" end="52" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="56" end="61" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055404" start="493" end="523" title="St. Louis Southwestern Railway" label="St. Louis Southwestern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503643" start="639" end="661" title="Texas State Highway 11" label="Texas State Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q974945" start="708" end="719" title="Whitewright, Texas" label="Whitewright"/>
<link wikidata="Q969649" start="737" end="747" title="Wolfe City, Texas" label="Wolfe City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503798" start="749" end="771" title="Texas State Highway 78" label="Texas State Highway 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="839" end="845" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q970983" start="888" end="895" title="Leonard, Texas" label="Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="915" end="942" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1012" end="1018" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1229" end="1234" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1242" end="1257" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1265" end="1270" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1283" end="1294" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1330" end="1338" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1342" end="1348" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1500" end="1515" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2311" end="2328" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2422" end="2434" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941941" start="2569" end="2603" title="Bonham Independent School District" label="Bonham Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376269" start="2626" end="2638" title="Ruby Allmond" label="Ruby Allmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003794" start="2659" end="2669" title="Jim Battle (baseball)" label="Jim Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373071" start="2701" end="2711" title="Roy Leslie" label="Roy Leslie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135857" wikidata="Q144856" url="?curid=135857" title="Bonham, Texas">
<text>Bonham is a city and is the county seat of Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population was 10,408 at the 2020 census. James Bonham (the city&#x27;s namesake) sought the aid of James Fannin (the county&#x27;s namesake) at the Battle of the Alamo. Bonham is part of the Texoma region in northern Texas and southern Oklahoma.

==History==
One of Texas&#x27;s oldest cities, Bonham dates to 1837, when Bailey Inglish built a two-story blockhouse named Fort Inglish about from the current downtown. Inglish and other acquaintances settled there in the summer of 1837, and the settlement was named &quot;Bois D&#x27;Arc&quot;. The Congress of the Republic of Texas named the city Bloomington in 1843, but renamed it Bonham in honor of James Butler Bonham, a defender of the Alamo. On February 2, 1848, Bonham was incorporated as a city. A 1936 statue of Bonham by Texas sculptor Allie Tennant is on the courthouse grounds.

After connecting to the Texas and Pacific Railway the city began to grow, and by 1885 there were six churches, three colleges, two public schools, three weekly newspapers, a sawmill, two grain mills, a power plant, and about 2,300 inhabitants. 1890 saw the addition of streetcars, an ice plant, and the opening of the Texas Power and Light Company, the area&#x27;s utility provider. In 1925 the city was connected to natural gas lines.

In 1898, 1911–1914 and 1921–1922, Bonham hosted minor league baseball. The Bonham Boosters and other Bonham teams played as members of the Class D Texas-Oklahoma League (1911–1914, 1921–1922) and the Independent Southwestern League (1898). Bonham teams featured a different moniker each season. Baseball Hall of Fame member Kid Nichols was Manager of the 1914 Bonham Sliders.

During the Second World War, a training camp and an aviation school for the United States Army Air Forces were in the vicinity of Bonham, as was a prisoner-of-war camp for German soldiers. Parts of the camp, approximately 0.5 miles north of US 82, can still be visited today.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Bonham has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
Bonham&#x27;s climate is characterized by hot, humid summers and mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Bonham has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 10,408 people, 2,963 households, and 1,696 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 3,400 housing units. There were 2,963 households, out of which 28.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.3% were married couples living together, 15.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37% were non-families. 32.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 32.3% had someone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.4 and the average family size was 3.05.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 21% under the age of 19, 9% from 20 to 24, 31% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years.

The median income for a household in the city was $43,793, and the median income for a family was $52,334. Males had a median income of $26,035 versus $21,897 for females. The per capita income for the city was $24,874. About 14.9% of the population were below the poverty line.

==Education==
The city is served by the Bonham Independent School District. The city&#x27;s high school is Bonham High School.

Grayson County College operated a branch campus in Bonham until 2012.

==Infrastructure==
Highways in the Bonham area include U.S. Route 82, Texas State Highway 78, Texas State Highway 56, and Texas State Highway 121.

==Notable people==
*Homer Blankenship, Major League Baseball pitcher of 1920s
*Ted Blankenship, MLB pitcher of 1920s
*Charlie Christian, pioneering jazz guitarist
*Charlie Cole, photojournalist, known for his photo of the Tank Man during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
*Roberta Dodd Crawford, lyric soprano and voice instructor
*Danny Darwin, Major League Baseball pitcher
*Karen Dalton, folk blues singer
*John Wesley Hardin, well-known outlaw and gunfighter in late 19th-century Texas
*Durwood Keeton, American football player
*Kenny Marchant, congressman, Texas 24th District
*Joe Melson, BMI Award-winning songwriter for Roy Orbison 
*Tom McBride, Major League Baseball outfielder
*Roy McMillan, Cincinnati Reds All-Star shortstop
*Jerry Moore, former head coach of Appalachian State Mountaineers football team
*Joe Morgan, Baseball Hall of Fame second baseman
*Sam Rayburn, politician, former Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives
*James Tague, writer and a key witness to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy
*B. A. Wilson, NASCAR driver

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* City of Bonham official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="0" end="6" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="28" end="39" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="43" end="63" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093388" start="126" end="138" title="James Bonham" label="James Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315952" start="184" end="196" title="James Fannin" label="James Fannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="233" end="252" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="Battle of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708363" start="276" end="282" title="Texoma" label="Texoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="439" end="449" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160911" start="633" end="666" title="Congress of the Republic of Texas" label="Congress of the Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093388" start="737" end="756" title="James Butler Bonham" label="James Butler Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="776" end="781" title="Alamo" label="Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838627" start="881" end="894" title="Allie Tennant" label="Allie Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407682" start="950" end="975" title="Texas and Pacific Railway" label="Texas and Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="1411" end="1432" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933656" start="1438" end="1453" title="Bonham Boosters" label="Bonham Boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707405" start="1510" end="1531" title="Texas-Oklahoma League" label="Texas-Oklahoma League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571429" start="1575" end="1594" title="Southwestern League" label="Southwestern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="1658" end="1679" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196371" start="1687" end="1698" title="Kid Nichols" label="Kid Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1751" end="1767" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="1816" end="1845" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2048" end="2066" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2226" end="2255" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2277" end="2302" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2395" end="2420" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2678" end="2693" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3360" end="3377" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941941" start="3504" end="3538" title="Bonham Independent School District" label="Bonham Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255158" start="3571" end="3589" title="Bonham High School (Texas)" label="Bonham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598396" start="3592" end="3614" title="Grayson County College" label="Grayson County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818234" start="3718" end="3731" title="U.S. Route 82 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503798" start="3733" end="3755" title="Texas State Highway 78" label="Texas State Highway 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="3757" end="3779" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="Texas State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503882" start="3785" end="3808" title="Texas State Highway 121" label="Texas State Highway 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889955" start="3831" end="3848" title="Homer Blankenship" label="Homer Blankenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3850" end="3871" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="3872" end="3879" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693020" start="3890" end="3905" title="Ted Blankenship" label="Ted Blankenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q356490" start="3929" end="3946" title="Charlie Christian" label="Charlie Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666655" start="3975" end="3987" title="Charlie Cole (photographer)" label="Charlie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q58682" start="4033" end="4041" title="Tank Man" label="Tank Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="4053" end="4086" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351492" start="4088" end="4109" title="Roberta Dodd Crawford" label="Roberta Dodd Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220271" start="4147" end="4159" title="Danny Darwin" label="Danny Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q467670" start="4192" end="4204" title="Karen Dalton" label="Karen Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="4225" end="4243" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="4256" end="4262" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="4267" end="4277" title="gunfighter" label="gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4299" end="4304" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640910" start="4306" end="4320" title="Durwood Keeton" label="Durwood Keeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q368184" start="4348" end="4362" title="Kenny Marchant" label="Kenny Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4364" end="4375" title="United States House of Representatives" label="congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211321" start="4398" end="4408" title="Joe Melson" label="Joe Melson"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="4410" end="4413" title="Broadcast Music, Inc." label="BMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="4443" end="4454" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816756" start="4457" end="4468" title="Tom McBride (baseball)" label="Tom McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142885" start="4492" end="4502" title="outfielder" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373156" start="4504" end="4516" title="Roy McMillan" label="Roy McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="4518" end="4533" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="4534" end="4542" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="4543" end="4552" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184123" start="4554" end="4565" title="Jerry Moore (American football, born 1939)" label="Jerry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4588" end="4618" title="Appalachian State Mountaineers#Football" label="Appalachian State Mountaineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="4634" end="4644" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="4646" end="4667" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="4668" end="4682" title="second baseman" label="second baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378052" start="4684" end="4695" title="Sam Rayburn" label="Sam Rayburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="4716" end="4760" title="Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161440" start="4762" end="4773" title="James Tague" label="James Tague"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="4824" end="4849" title="President John F. Kennedy" label="President John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833903" start="4851" end="4863" title="B. A. Wilson" label="B. A. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="4865" end="4871" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135858" wikidata="Q972662" url="?curid=135858" title="Dodd City, Texas">
<text>Dodd City is a town in Fannin County, in the U.S. state of Texas. The population was 369 at the 2020 census, representing no change from the 2010 census.

==History==
The town was established in 1839.

==Geography==

Dodd City is located east of the center of Fannin County. Texas State Highway 56 passes through the town center, leading east to Windom and west to Bonham, the county seat.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Dodd City has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 419 people, 160 households, and 120 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 188 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.94% White, 1.43% African American, 0.72% Native American, 0.24% from other races, and 1.67% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.24% of the population.

There were 160 households, out of which 35.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.4% were married couples living together, 8.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.0% were non-families. 22.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.05.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 28.6% under the age of 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 21.0% from 45 to 64, and 14.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 110.6 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $35,313, and the median income for a family was $45,972. Males had a median income of $38,750 versus $22,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,873. About 10.4% of families and 15.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.0% of those under age 18 and 10.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Dodd City is served by the Dodd City Independent School District and is home to the Dodd City High School Hornets, 2021 Texas State Class 1A champions in Girls Basketball and Softball.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q972662" start="0" end="9" title="Dodd City, Texas" label="Dodd City"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="23" end="36" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="45" end="55" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="59" end="64" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="275" end="297" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="Texas State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q981652" start="346" end="352" title="Windom, Texas" label="Windom"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="365" end="371" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="377" end="388" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="408" end="435" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="508" end="514" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="728" end="733" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="741" end="757" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="765" end="780" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="793" end="804" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="840" end="848" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="852" end="858" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1010" end="1025" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1823" end="1840" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1934" end="1946" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287726" start="2063" end="2100" title="Dodd City Independent School District" label="Dodd City Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287727" start="2120" end="2141" title="Dodd City High School" label="Dodd City High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135859" wikidata="Q975328" url="?curid=135859" title="Ector, Texas">
<text>Ector is a city in Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population was 737 at the 2020 census, up from 695 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Ector is located in western Fannin County. Texas State Highway 56 runs through the center of town, leading east to Bonham, the county seat, and west to Savoy.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, 600 people, 238 households, and 163 families were residing in the city. The population density was . The 263 housing units averaged 222.4/sq mi (86.1/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 95.33% White, 1.17% Native American, 0.50% Asian, 0.33% from other races, and 2.67% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1.50% of the population.

Of the 238 households, 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.9% were married couples living together, 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.5% were not families. About 29.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52, and the average family size was 3.13.

In the city, the population was distributed as 30.3% under the age of 18, 4.5% from 18 to 24, 29.0% from 25 to 44, 20.7% from 45 to 64, and 15.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $38,125, and for a family was $46,500. Males had a median income of $30,781 versus $24,063 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,083. About 2.9% of families and 5.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.8% of those under age 18 and 10.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The city of Ector is served by the Ector Independent School District.

== History ==
The community started in the late 19th century when farmers settled near Caney Creek. It is named for one of the pioneer settlers of the area, Ector Owens. It was originally named Victor&#x27;s Station, but was changed when residents were informed by postal authorities that a town of that name already existed. Postal service began in 1886, and it was connected to the Texas and Pacific Railway in 1892, making Ector a shipping point for area farmers. In 1904, the town had 218 residents, and infrastructure included a church, a school, and a bank. The population reached 451 in 1926, at which time there were 25 business, and the population reached 457 in 1947. The population was reported as 650 in 1988. However, the number of businesses declined over this period, from 12 in 1936 to three in 1988. By that time, most of the residents were commuting to jobs in Sherman, to the west, and Denison, to the northwest.

A $320 million resort and bunker facility called Trident Lakes was under development near Ector in 2017. James O’Connor was CEO with former Navy SEAL Rob Kaneiss as chief security officer. By 2018, the owner of Trident Lakes Property Holdings, John Eckerd, was under investigation for money laundering with investors calling the project a scam.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975328" start="0" end="5" title="Ector, Texas" label="Ector"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="19" end="39" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="190" end="212" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="Texas State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="262" end="268" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="274" end="285" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q969587" start="299" end="304" title="Savoy, Texas" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="324" end="351" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="423" end="429" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="599" end="612" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1691" end="1708" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1800" end="1812" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334309" start="1936" end="1969" title="Ector Independent School District" label="Ector Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407682" start="2356" end="2381" title="Texas and Pacific Railway" label="Texas and Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q982379" start="2851" end="2858" title="Sherman, Texas" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q534669" start="2877" end="2884" title="Denison, Texas" label="Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="3045" end="3054" title="Navy SEAL" label="Navy SEAL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135860" wikidata="Q981126" url="?curid=135860" title="Honey Grove, Texas">
<text>Honey Grove is a city in Fannin County, Texas, United States. Honey Grove bills itself as &quot;The Sweetest Town in Texas&quot;. The population was 1,715 at the 2020 census, up from 1,668 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Honey Grove is in central North Texas, in eastern Fannin County, east of Bonham, the county seat, north of Greenville, east of Sherman, and northeast of the central business district of Dallas. Honey Grove was developed on flat to gently rolling terrain with scattered trees. The city is at an elevation ranging from about above sea level. U.S. Highway 82 and State Highway 56 traverse the city from east to west, and State Roads 34, 100, and 824 run north and south. Bonham is the closest major economic center. Its climate produces an annual average daily maximum temperature of 75.1 °F, and an average annual rainfall is . It is also a part of the Texoma region.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.40%, is covered by water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,715 people, 798 households, and 496 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 1,746 people, 693 households, and 451 families were residing in the city. The population density was . The 814 housing units averaged 308.4/sq mi (119.0/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 78.87% White, 16.32% African American, 0.40% Native American, 0.34% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 2.58% from other races, and 1.43% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 5.90% of the population.

Of the 693 households, 29.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.8% were married couples living together, 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.8% were not families. About 32.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 19.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.04.

In the city, the population was distributed as 25.3% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 24.6% from 25 to 44, 19.7% from 45 to 64, and 23.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 85.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.5 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $28,859, and for a family was $37,266. Males had a median income of $27,560 versus $22,050 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,701. About 12.4% of families and 16.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.3% of those under age 18 and 16.7% of those age 65 or over.

== History ==
David Crockett discovered the area of Honey Grove when he camped there on his way to join the Texas Army at San Antonio in 1836. Crockett sent many letters back to Tennessee, telling of an area with an abundance of honey-filled trees, hence the town&#x27;s name. In 1837, Samuel Erwin became the first settler of the place. B. S. Walcott contributed much to the town&#x27;s development, by planning the city&#x27;s landscape and later on by selling building lots. In 1873, Honey Grove was officially established.

Samuel Erwin and Davy Crockett, old friends from Kentucky, were instrumental in the founding of Honey Grove. Samuel Augustus Erwin has a large gravestone marker in Honey Grove, stating: &quot;Virginia-born Samuel Erwin was married in 1819 in Tennessee to Sally Rodgers Crisp (1795–1860), in a ceremony performed by local magistrate David Crockett. First settler in the Honey Grove area, Erwin arrived here in 1837 and surveyed land grants for other pioneers. A surveyor by profession, he platted the town site for his friend B.S. Wolcott in 1848. He was the town&#x27;s first postmaster and one of Fannin County&#x27;s earliest Justices of the Peace.&quot;

The Crockett Park Monument, in the same area, indicates that Honey Grove was named by Crockett, but he died before it could become a town. It states that one of his old friends, Sam Erwin, became the founder of the settlement. The monument reads in part that Crockett traveled by riverboat, horseback, and on foot, entering Texas along the Red River, camping at a site half a mile northeast of today&#x27;s park, where he found wild bees and honey in hollow trees, and called the campsite a &quot;honey grove&quot;. He is said to have told friends he would settle here later, but he died a few weeks later in the cause of Texan liberty, at the Alamo.

In 2007, Honey Grove was also a temporary filming location for an episode of &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, in which the local high school won a contest the CW and Sunkist promoted. Fans submitted videos in hopes their town would be selected. Mark Schwahn, the creator of &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, ultimately chose Honey Grove High School as the winner. The cast from &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, who filmed with Honey Grove High School, included Chad Michael Murray, Sophia Bush, Hilarie Burton, James Lafferty, and Bethany Joy Lenz.

Honey Grove Texas was also included in the series, A Woman of Independent Means. Starring Sally Field and Tony Goldwyn.

== Government ==

Honey Grove is a type A, general law municipality whose government consists of a mayor and five aldermen. The mayor presides over council meetings, is signatory for the city, and is recognized as the ceremonial and governmental head of the city for most purposes.

==Education==
The city of Honey Grove is served by the Honey Grove Independent School District. In 2009, the district built a new high school, track, and gymnasium.

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Honey Grove has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Notable people==
* Tyler Bryant, member of Tyler Bryant &amp; the Shakedown
* Bill Erwin, actor
* John Underwood, former NFL player
* Mule Wilson, former NFL player
* Robert G. &quot;Bob&quot; Goss (1898-1978), former police chief of Kilgore, and Texas Ranger

== Photo gallery ==
==References==

==External links==
*City of Honey Grove official website
*Honey Grove Chamber of Commerce </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981126" start="0" end="11" title="Honey Grove, Texas" label="Honey Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="25" end="45" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="162" end="173" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="251" end="262" title="North Texas" label="North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="298" end="304" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="310" end="321" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="332" end="342" title="Greenville, Texas" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q982379" start="352" end="359" title="Sherman, Texas" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="411" end="417" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818234" start="565" end="580" title="U.S. Route 82 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="585" end="601" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708363" start="876" end="882" title="Texoma" label="Texoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="909" end="936" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1070" end="1095" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1385" end="1398" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2525" end="2542" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="2738" end="2752" title="David Crockett" label="David Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708336" start="2832" end="2842" title="Texian Army" label="Texas Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2846" end="2857" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="2902" end="2911" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3301" end="3309" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3444" end="3452" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="4250" end="4259" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="4550" end="4559" title="Alamo Mission in San Antonio" label="the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="4645" end="4658" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q202313" start="5004" end="5023" title="Chad Michael Murray" label="Chad Michael Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q206916" start="5025" end="5036" title="Sophia Bush" label="Sophia Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q229054" start="5038" end="5052" title="Hilarie Burton" label="Hilarie Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313095" start="5054" end="5068" title="James Lafferty" label="James Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230424" start="5074" end="5090" title="Bethany Joy Lenz" label="Bethany Joy Lenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893542" start="5552" end="5591" title="Honey Grove Independent School District" label="Honey Grove Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5792" end="5821" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="5841" end="5866" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859961" start="5923" end="5935" title="Tyler Bryant" label="Tyler Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095077" start="5947" end="5979" title="Tyler Bryant &amp;amp; the Shakedown" label="Tyler Bryant &amp;amp; the Shakedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q183101" start="5982" end="5992" title="Bill Erwin" label="Bill Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514568" start="6002" end="6016" title="John Underwood (American football)" label="John Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6025" end="6028" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933900" start="6038" end="6049" title="Mule Wilson" label="Mule Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105187" start="6071" end="6101" title="Bob Goss (Texas Ranger)" label="Robert G. &amp;quot;Bob&amp;quot; Goss"/>
<link wikidata="Q973998" start="6138" end="6145" title="Kilgore, Texas" label="Kilgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="6151" end="6163" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135861" wikidata="Q982416" url="?curid=135861" title="Ladonia, Texas">
<text>Ladonia is a town in Fannin County, Texas, United States. Its population was 597 at the 2020 census.

==History==
The area was first settled around 1840. Originally called McCownville, its name was changed to Ladonia in 1857, supposedly in honor of A. T. Donitz. Its population grew late in the 19th century when the Gulf Colorado Santa Fe Railroad went through Ladonia, making it a shipping point for corn, cotton, and grain crops. Because of this, the population increased rapidly to 1,500 in the 1890s and peaked at over 2,000 by the turn of the 20th century. However, Ladonia suffered during the Great Depression. At a population of 1,199 thereafter, it never recovered, but continued to decrease in population, falling to 658 in 1990 and 612 in 2010.

==Geography==

Ladonia is located in southeastern Fannin County. Texas State Highway 34 passes through the town, leading north to Honey Grove and southwest to Wolfe City. Texas State Highway 50 leads south from Ladonia to Commerce. Ladonia Fossil Park is located north of town on the North Sulphur River.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Ladonia has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 597 people, 304 households, and 219 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 667 people, 266 households, and 188 families were residing in the town. The population density was . The 316 housing units averaged 172.2 per square mile (66.7/km2). The racial makeupof the town was 70.61% White, 25.34% African American, 0.75% Asian, 1.65% from other races, and 1.65% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 2.55% of the population.

Of the 266 households, 28.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.7% were married couples living together, 20.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.3% were not families. About 25.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51, and the average family size was 2.97.

In the town, the population was distributed as 26.4% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 24.4% from 25 to 44, 24.3% from 45 to 64, and 16.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.7 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $26,389, and for a family was $31,591. Males had a median income of $26,806 versus $19,615 for females. The per capita income for the town was $13,851. About 18.9% of families and 24.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.3% of those under age 18 and 30.2% of those age 65 or over.
==Education==
Ladonia is served by the Fannindel Independent School District.

==Parks and recreation==
The Ladonia Fossil Park is often visited by avid fossil hunters and amateurs, with finds ranging from shark teeth to Mosasaur veterbrae. It was temporarily relocated in 2021 due to construction.

== Photo gallery ==
==External links==
* City of Ladonia official website
* Chamber of Commerce of Ladonia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982416" start="0" end="7" title="Ladonia, Texas" label="Ladonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="21" end="41" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503696" start="822" end="844" title="Texas State Highway 34" label="Texas State Highway 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q981126" start="887" end="898" title="Honey Grove, Texas" label="Honey Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q969649" start="916" end="926" title="Wolfe City, Texas" label="Wolfe City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503740" start="928" end="950" title="Texas State Highway 50" label="Texas State Highway 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q979151" start="979" end="987" title="Commerce, Texas" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636531" start="1041" end="1060" title="Sulphur River" label="North Sulphur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1080" end="1107" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1195" end="1220" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1329" end="1335" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1515" end="1528" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2608" end="2625" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2719" end="2731" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433982" start="2845" end="2882" title="Fannindel Independent School District" label="Fannindel Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q729456" start="3027" end="3035" title="Mosasaur" label="Mosasaur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135862" wikidata="Q970983" url="?curid=135862" title="Leonard, Texas">
<text>Leonard is a city in Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population was 1,987 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Leonard is located in southwestern Fannin County. U.S. Route 69 passes along the northern and eastern edges of the city, leading northwest to Denison and southeast to Greenville. Texas State Highway 78 leads northeast to Bonham, the Fannin County seat, and southwest to Farmersville. The center of Dallas is southwest of Leonard via Highway 78.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Leonard has a total area of , all land.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Leonard has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,987 people, 858 households, and 624 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,846 people, 683 households, and 497 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 751 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.99% White, 5.53% African American, 1.90% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 5.69% from other races, and 15.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.85% of the population.

There were 683 households, out of which 39.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.9% were married couples living together, 13.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.2% were non-families. 25.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.9% had no one living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.65 and the average family size was 3.16.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 30.2% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 27.7% from 25 to 44, 19.4% from 45 to 64, and 13.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $34,318, and the median income for a family was $40,461. Males had a median income of $32,071 versus $20,888 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,747. About 12.9% of families and 17.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.5% of those under age 18 and 27.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The city of Leonard is served by the Leonard Independent School District.

==Notable people==
*Polly McLarry, baseball player
*Lori Erica Ruff, identity thief
*Jules V. Sikes, Texas A&amp;M athlete and coach

== Photo gallery ==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Leonard official website
* Leonard Chamber of Commerce
* City-Data.com listing for Leonard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q970983" start="0" end="7" title="Leonard, Texas" label="Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="21" end="34" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="36" end="41" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073665" start="169" end="182" title="U.S. Route 69 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q534669" start="261" end="268" title="Denison, Texas" label="Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="286" end="296" title="Greenville, Texas" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503798" start="298" end="320" title="Texas State Highway 78" label="Texas State Highway 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="340" end="346" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q205272" start="389" end="401" title="Farmersville, Texas" label="Farmersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="417" end="423" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="482" end="509" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="695" end="724" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="747" end="772" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="865" end="890" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1001" end="1007" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1223" end="1228" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1236" end="1252" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1260" end="1275" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1283" end="1288" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1301" end="1312" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1348" end="1356" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1360" end="1366" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1518" end="1533" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2329" end="2346" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2440" end="2452" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525407" start="2579" end="2614" title="Leonard Independent School District" label="Leonard Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225809" start="2637" end="2650" title="Polly McLarry" label="Polly McLarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023128" start="2669" end="2684" title="Lori Erica Ruff" label="Lori Erica Ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003752" start="2702" end="2716" title="Jules V. Sikes" label="Jules V. Sikes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135863" wikidata="Q205755" url="?curid=135863" title="Ravenna, Texas">
<text>Ravenna is a city in Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population was 175 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Ravenna is located in northwestern Fannin County. It is northwest of Bonham, the county seat, northeast of Bells, and southeast of the Red River, the Oklahoma border.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Ravenna has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 215 people, 86 households, and 65 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 94 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 97.67% White, 0.93% from other races, and 1.40% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.40% of the population.

There were 86 households, out of which 32.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.1% were married couples living together, 5.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. 22.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 2.91.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 27.0% under the age of 18, 6.0% from 18 to 24, 27.0% from 25 to 44, 23.3% from 45 to 64, and 16.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.3 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $31,875, and the median income for a family was $42,778. Males had a median income of $33,125 versus $17,500 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,581. About 12.1% of families and 17.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 28.8% of those under the age of eighteen and 17.1% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
Ravenna is served by the Bonham Independent School District.

==Notable person==
*Mary Lightfoot, painter and printmaker, was born in Ravenna

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205755" start="0" end="7" title="Ravenna, Texas" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="21" end="34" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="36" end="41" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="88" end="99" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="186" end="192" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="198" end="209" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q981977" start="224" end="229" title="Bells, Texas" label="Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="252" end="261" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="267" end="275" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="302" end="329" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="400" end="406" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="617" end="622" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="635" end="646" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="682" end="690" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="694" end="700" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="851" end="866" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1663" end="1680" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1774" end="1786" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941941" start="1910" end="1944" title="Bonham Independent School District" label="Bonham Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q50333875" start="1967" end="1981" title="Mary Lightfoot" label="Mary Lightfoot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135864" wikidata="Q969587" url="?curid=135864" title="Savoy, Texas">
<text>Savoy is a city in Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population is 712 as of the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Savoy is located in western Fannin County. Its western border is the Grayson County line. Texas State Highway 56 passes through the city, leading east to Bonham, the Fannin County seat, and west to Bells. U.S. Route 82 passes north of Savoy, leading east to Bonham and west to Sherman.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Savoy has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 712 people, 303 households, and 231 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 850 people, 305 households, and 214 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 350 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.94% White, 0.47% African American, 0.71% Native American, 0.35% Asian, 1.53% from other races, and 2.00% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.59% of the population.

There were 305 households, out of which 33.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.0% were married couples living together, 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.8% were non-families. 26.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.00.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 23.6% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 21.3% from 45 to 64, and 24.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.0 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 77.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $37,679, and the median income for a family was $41,641. Males had a median income of $31,528 versus $22,188 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,448. About 4.3% of families and 8.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.9% of those under age 18 and 12.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Savoy is served by the Savoy Independent School District.

==Notable people==
* Harold Joe Waldrum, artist
* Ted Wright, NFL player

==References==

==External links==
*City of Savoy official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969587" start="0" end="5" title="Savoy, Texas" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="19" end="32" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="34" end="39" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="88" end="99" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q109457" start="186" end="200" title="Grayson County, Texas" label="Grayson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="207" end="229" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="Texas State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="271" end="277" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q981977" start="315" end="320" title="Bells, Texas" label="Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818234" start="322" end="335" title="U.S. Route 82 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q982379" start="394" end="401" title="Sherman, Texas" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="421" end="448" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="535" end="560" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="669" end="675" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="889" end="894" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="902" end="918" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="926" end="941" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="949" end="954" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="967" end="978" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1014" end="1022" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1026" end="1032" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1184" end="1199" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1997" end="2014" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2106" end="2118" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428438" start="2230" end="2263" title="Savoy Independent School District" label="Savoy Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19538946" start="2287" end="2305" title="Harold Joe Waldrum" label="Harold Joe Waldrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693904" start="2316" end="2326" title="Ted Wright" label="Ted Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="2328" end="2331" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135865" wikidata="Q979435" url="?curid=135865" title="Trenton, Texas">
<text>Trenton is a city in Fannin and Grayson counties, Texas, United States. The population is currently 854.

==History==
Settlers from Tennessee arrived from their home state in 1852. At the time of their arrival, the settlement and surrounding area was known by the colorful name of &quot;Wild Cat Thicket&quot;. With the arrival of the Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad, a townsite was platted by Dr. W. C. Holmes, a pioneer physician and editor of &quot;Trenton Tribune&quot;, and known as &quot;the father of Trenton&quot;. The name &quot;Trenton&quot; was submitted to the postal authorities (after Trenton, New Jersey), and the post office opened under that name in 1881.

The railroad drew people to Trenton from nearby communities, and a depot was built. The first population figures available show 200 people living there in the mid-1880s. Fifteen years later the population was 300 and the town had a school and all essential businesses, including a newspaper, a steam gristmill, a hotel, and a boardinghouse. At that time it became a major shipping origination point for cotton, corn, and oats produced by area farmers. A national bank was opened in Trenton in 1901 and by 1914 was capitalized at $40,000. By the mid-1920s the population had risen to just over 600 people, and the Trenton school system had 300 students enrolled. In the early 1930s farmers in the vicinity, influenced by the success of local farmer P. E. Brown, began large-scale commercial production of onions. This new crop grew rapidly in importance, and production reached a peak in 1933 when 158 rail carloads were shipped from Trenton. The effects of the Great Depression were devastating in the region, and by 1936 Trenton&#x27;s population had declined to less than 500. During this time of economic hardship, the number of businesses serving the community dwindled to 28. With the recovery of the economy, the population also began to rise, with 634 reported in 1948 to an all-time high of 712 by 1967. In 1977 Trenton reported 615 residents and seventeen businesses. By the early 1980s the town had become the third-largest shipping point for onions in North Texas. It had an estimated 682 people and twenty businesses by 1988. In 1990 its population totaled 655, and in 2000 662 people made up the town.
==Geography==

Trenton is located in southwestern Fannin County. U.S. Route 69 passes through the northeastern part of the city, leading northwest to Denison and southeast to Greenville. Texas State Highway 121 passes through the northern part of Trenton, crossing US 69 at a diamond interchange. Highway 121 leads northeast to Bonham, the Fannin County seat, and southwest to Melissa. The center of Dallas is southwest of Trenton via Melissa and McKinney.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Trenton has a total area of , all land. A small portion of the city now extends west along FM 814 into Grayson County.

===Climate===

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Trenton has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 743 people, 259 households, and 180 families residing in the city.

===2007===
As of the census of 2007, there were 750 people, 276 households, and 187 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 313 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.89% White, 6.34% African American, 1.21% Native American, 6.04% from other races, and 1.51% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11.33% of the population.

There were 276 households, out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.4% were married couples living together, 13.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.2% were non-families. 30.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.97.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 26.3% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 28.1% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 15.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $40,066, and the median income for a family was $43,906. Males had a median income of $35,000 versus $26,458 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,129. About 13.4% of families and 15.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.9% of those under age 18 and 17.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Trenton is served by the Trenton Independent School District and is home to the Trenton High School Tigers. Trenton High School is currently four-time UIL district champions as of 2017 and were BEST Robotics Champions in 2017, 2019, 2021.

==Notable people==
* Lloyd Mangrum, professional golfer who was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 1999; born in Trenton

==See also==

* List of municipalities in Texas

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979435" start="0" end="7" title="Trenton, Texas" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="21" end="27" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109457" start="32" end="39" title="Grayson County, Texas" label="Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="50" end="55" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="132" end="141" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q925995" start="335" end="370" title="Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad" label="Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="603" end="622" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="1482" end="1487" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="1639" end="1655" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="2141" end="2152" title="North Texas" label="North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073665" start="2358" end="2371" title="U.S. Route 69 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q534669" start="2443" end="2450" title="Denison, Texas" label="Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="2468" end="2478" title="Greenville, Texas" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503882" start="2480" end="2503" title="Texas State Highway 121" label="Texas State Highway 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q628131" start="2569" end="2588" title="diamond interchange" label="diamond interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="2621" end="2627" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q973781" start="2670" end="2677" title="Melissa, Texas" label="Melissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2693" end="2699" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51697" start="2740" end="2748" title="McKinney, Texas" label="McKinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2768" end="2795" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3049" end="3078" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3101" end="3126" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3219" end="3244" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3346" end="3352" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3566" end="3571" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3579" end="3595" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3603" end="3618" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3631" end="3642" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3678" end="3686" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3690" end="3696" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3849" end="3864" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4661" end="4678" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4772" end="4784" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947954" start="4899" end="4934" title="Trenton Independent School District" label="Trenton Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838578" start="4954" end="4973" title="Trenton High School (Texas)" label="Trenton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356039" start="5135" end="5148" title="Lloyd Mangrum" label="Lloyd Mangrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106973361" start="5262" end="5293" title="List of municipalities in Texas" label="List of municipalities in Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135866" wikidata="Q981652" url="?curid=135866" title="Windom, Texas">
<text>Windom is a town in Fannin County, Texas, United States. The population was 189 at the 2020 census, down from 199 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Windom is located in eastern Fannin County. Texas State Highway 56 runs through the town, leading east to Honey Grove and west to Bonham, the county seat.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Windom has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, 245 people, 97 households, and 71 families were residing in the town. The population density was . The 111 housing units averaged 202.3 per square mile (77.9/km). The racial makeup of the town was 91.43% White, 6.12% African American, 1.22% Native American, and 1.22% from two or more races.

Of the 97 households, 33.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.9% were married couples living together, 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.8% were not families. About 25.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 19.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53, and the average family size was 3.03.

In the town, the population was distributed as 24.5% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 23.7% from 45 to 64, and 18.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 85.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $44,375, and for a family was $50,781. Males had a median income of $31,875 versus $32,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $17,779. About 5.8% of families and 10.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.7% of those under the age of eighteen and 20.0% of those sixty five or over.

The Hindu-Jain spiritual retreat in Windom is called Siddhayatan.

==Education==
Windom is served by the Honey Grove Independent School District. On July 1, 1987, Windom Independent School District merged into Honey Grove ISD. Windom&#x27;s school closed in the late 1980s due to declining enrollment. 

==See also==

* List of municipalities in Texas

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981652" start="0" end="6" title="Windom, Texas" label="Windom"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593" start="20" end="40" title="Fannin County, Texas" label="Fannin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503754" start="194" end="216" title="Texas State Highway 56" label="Texas State Highway 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q981126" start="256" end="267" title="Honey Grove, Texas" label="Honey Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q144856" start="280" end="286" title="Bonham, Texas" label="Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="292" end="303" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="323" end="350" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="420" end="426" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="603" end="616" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1617" end="1634" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1727" end="1739" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508147" start="1884" end="1895" title="Siddhayatan" label="Siddhayatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893542" start="1936" end="1975" title="Honey Grove Independent School District" label="Honey Grove Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q106973361" start="2151" end="2182" title="List of municipalities in Texas" label="List of municipalities in Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135867" wikidata="Q978747" url="?curid=135867" title="Carmine, Texas">
<text>Carmine ( ) is a city in Fayette County, Texas, United States. The population was 244 at the 2020 census.

The Texas Basketball Museum in Carmine is operated by Coach Bob Springer at the corner of Augsburg Avenue and Hauptstrasse Street. The collection highlights players who advance to the professional ranks as well as high school teams of notable achievement.

==Geography==
Carmine is located at the northern end of Fayette County. It is bordered to the northeast by Washington County. U.S. Route 290, a four-lane divided highway, passes through the center of Carmine, leading east to Brenham and west to Giddings. Houston is to the east on US 290, and Austin is to the west.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Carmine has a total area of , all land.

==Climate==
==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 228 people, 91 households, and 60 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 118 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 90.35% White, 1.75% African American, 0.44% Native American, 6.14% from other races, and 1.32% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11.40% of the population.

There were 91 households, out of which 26.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.6% were married couples living together, 4.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.0% were non-families. 31.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 20.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 3.07.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 23.2% under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 22.4% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 21.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 78.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $27,396, and the median income for a family was $49,375. Males had a median income of $30,625 versus $29,063 for females. The per capita income for the city was $34,614. About 15.1% of families and 14.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.7% of those under the age of eighteen and 18.9% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
Carmine is served by the Round Top-Carmine Independent School District.

==References==
==External links==

* Carmine Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978747" start="0" end="7" title="Carmine, Texas" label="Carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110755" start="25" end="39" title="Fayette County, Texas" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="41" end="46" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156444" start="471" end="488" title="Washington County, Texas" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505541" start="490" end="504" title="U.S. Route 290" label="U.S. Route 290"/>
<link wikidata="Q908929" start="589" end="596" title="Brenham, Texas" label="Brenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q732349" start="609" end="617" title="Giddings, Texas" label="Giddings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="619" end="626" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="657" end="663" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="698" end="725" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="808" end="814" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1026" end="1031" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1039" end="1055" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1078" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1091" end="1102" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1138" end="1146" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1150" end="1156" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1308" end="1323" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2119" end="2136" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2230" end="2242" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371148" start="2366" end="2411" title="Round Top-Carmine Independent School District" label="Round Top-Carmine Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135868" wikidata="Q830842" url="?curid=135868" title="BETA (programming language)">
<text>BETA is a pure object-oriented language originating within the &quot;Scandinavian School&quot; in object-orientation where the first object-oriented language Simula was developed. Among its notable features, it introduced nested classes, and unified classes with procedures into so called patterns.

The project is inactive as of October 2020.

==Features==
===Technical overview===
From a technical perspective, BETA provides several unique features. Classes and Procedures are unified to one concept, a Pattern. Also, classes are defined as properties/attributes of objects. This means that a class cannot be instantiated without an explicit object context. A consequence of this is that BETA supports nested classes. Classes can be virtually defined, much like virtual methods can be in most object-oriented programming languages. Virtual entities (such as methods and classes) are never overwritten; instead they are redefined or specialized.

BETA supports the object-oriented perspective on programming and has comprehensive facilities for procedural and functional programming. It has powerful abstraction mechanisms to support identification of objects, classification and composition. BETA is a statically typed language like Simula, Eiffel and C++, with most type checking done at compile-time. BETA aims to achieve an optimal balance between compile-time type checking and run-time type checking.

===Patterns===
A major and peculiar feature of the language is the concept of patterns. In another programming language, such as C++, one would have several classes and procedures. BETA expresses both of these concepts using patterns.

For example, a simple class in C++ would have the form

class point {
 int x, y;

In BETA, the same class could be represented by the pattern
point: (#
 x, y: @integer

That is, a class called &quot;point&quot; will have two fields, &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot;, of type integer. The symbols &quot;(#&quot; and &quot;#)&quot; introduce patterns. The colon is used to declare patterns and variables. The &quot;@&quot; sign before the integer type in the field definitions specifies that these are integer fields, and not, by contrast, references, arrays or other patterns.

As another comparison, a procedure in C++ could have the form

int max(int x, int y)
 if (x &gt;= y)
 return x;
 else
 return y;
}

In BETA, such a function could be written using a pattern
max: (#
 x, y, z: @integer
enter (x, y)
do
 (if x &gt;= y // True then
 x -&gt; z
 else
 y -&gt; z
 if)
exit z

The &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; and &quot;z&quot; are local variables. The enter keyword specifies the input parameters to the pattern, while the exit keyword specifies the result of the function. Between the two, the do keyword prefixes the sequence of operations to be made. The conditional block is delimited by &quot;(if&quot; and &quot;if)&quot;, that is the if keyword becomes part of the opening and closing parenthesis. Truth is checked through &quot;// True&quot; within an if block. Finally, the assignment operator &quot;-&gt;&quot; assigns the value on its left hand side to the variable on its right hand side.

===Hello world!===
This snippet prints the standard line &quot;Hello world!&quot;:
==Further reading==
*Ole Lehrmann Madsen, Birger Møller-Pedersen, Kristen Nygaard: Object-Oriented Programming in the BETA Programming Language, The Mjølner System: Books
*Bent Bruun Kristensen, Ole Lehrmann Madsen, Birger Møller-Pedersen: The When, Why and Why Not of the BETA Programming Language, ACM History of Programming Languages III, Conference, San Diego 2007, 

==References==
==External links==
*gbeta Generalized BETA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q830842" start="0" end="4" title="BETA (programming language)" label="BETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="15" end="30" title="object-oriented" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q92744" start="63" end="94" title="Kristen Nygaard" label="&amp;quot;Scandinavian School&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="158" end="164" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965861" start="222" end="234" title="nested class" label="nested class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="505" end="512" title="BETA pattern" label="Pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965861" start="704" end="716" title="nested class" label="nested class"/>
<link wikidata="Q732089" start="1243" end="1249" title="Eiffel (programming language)" label="Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1254" end="1257" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1538" end="1541" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="1919" end="1926" title="integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="3206" end="3230" title="Hello world program" label="&amp;quot;Hello world!&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135870" wikidata="Q981727" url="?curid=135870" title="Fayetteville, Texas">
<text>Fayetteville is a city in Fayette County, Texas, United States. The population was 246 at the 2020 census.

==History==
The town is located in an area that was originally granted to Alex Thompson and George Cumberland. Fayetteville&#x27;s first immigrant settlers were the families headed by John Crier, James Cummins, and James J. Ross, three of the Old Three Hundred. The settlement began at the location of a stagecoach stop on an old road between San Felipe and Bastrop.

Even though Fayette County was named after General Lafayette, the Revolutionary War hero, the community was named in 1844 after Fayetteville, North Carolina, the birthplace of Philip J. Shaver, a prominent citizen who had surveyed the community, named its streets, and donated lots for the Fayetteville Academy and the town&#x27;s multidenominational Union Church.
Fayetteville was incorporated in 1882.

The town made national news during World War I. As reprinted by &quot;Stars and Stripes&quot; in its March 15, 1918 issue, the town&#x27;s mayor, W. C. Langlotz, and ten of the town&#x27;s citizens were charged with espionage. They were arrested following the display of the flag of the German Empire over the entryway of the Germania club in Fayetteville. The mayor said the flag had been displayed by mistake and the group pleaded &quot;not guilty&quot;.

The majority of the area within the town boundaries was designated the Fayetteville Historic District and listed on the National Register of Historic Places on July 10, 2008.

==Geography==

Fayetteville is located in eastern Fayette County. Texas State Highway 159 passes through the center of town, leading northeast to Industry and northwest, then southwest a total of to La Grange, the county seat. Houston is to the east via secondary highways and Interstate 10, while Austin is to the northwest via highways 159 and 71.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , none of which is covered with water. Lake Fayette, a reservoir constructed adjacent to Fayette Power Project, is west of town and features LCRA&#x27;s Oak Thicket and Park Prairie Parks.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 261 people, 120 households, and 71 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 183 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.55% White, 3.07% African American, and 0.38% Asian. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.53% of the population.

There were 120 households, out of which 20.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.3% were married couples living together, 10.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.8% were non-families. 35.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 24.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.89.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 19.5% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 20.7% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 27.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46 years. For every 100 females, there were 74.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 72.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $27,639, and the median income for a family was $31,667. Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $18,125 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,916. About 8.0% of families and 13.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.5% of those under the age of eighteen and 12.7% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
The city is served by the Fayetteville Independent School District.

==References==
==External links==
* City of Fayetteville official website
* Fayetteville Chamber of Commerce
* Day trip to Fayetteville, from the February 25, 2000 issue of the &quot;Austin Chronicle&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981727" start="0" end="12" title="Fayetteville, Texas" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q110755" start="26" end="40" title="Fayette County, Texas" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="42" end="47" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="94" end="105" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350218" start="351" end="368" title="Old Three Hundred" label="Old Three Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="412" end="422" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q981206" start="451" end="461" title="San Felipe, Texas" label="San Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q810678" start="466" end="473" title="Bastrop, Texas" label="Bastrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="519" end="536" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="General Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="604" end="632" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="858" end="870" title="Municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="916" end="927" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813221" start="951" end="968" title="Stars and Stripes (newspaper)" label="Stars and Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="1084" end="1106" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="charged with espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48160" start="1156" end="1160" title="Flag of Germany" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1168" end="1181" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891238" start="1410" end="1440" title="Fayetteville Historic District (Fayetteville, Texas)" label="Fayetteville Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1459" end="1495" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503972" start="1581" end="1604" title="Texas State Highway 159" label="Texas State Highway 159"/>
<link wikidata="Q979263" start="1661" end="1669" title="Industry, Texas" label="Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q974145" start="1714" end="1723" title="La Grange, Texas" label="La Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="1729" end="1740" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="1792" end="1805" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503788" start="1861" end="1863" title="Texas State Highway 71" label="71"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1883" end="1910" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439019" start="1980" end="1992" title="Fayette County Reservoir" label="Lake Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439027" start="2030" end="2051" title="Fayette Power Project" label="Fayette Power Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155608" start="2082" end="2086" title="Lower_Colorado_River_Authority" label="LCRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2159" end="2165" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2378" end="2383" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2391" end="2407" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2419" end="2424" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2426" end="2434" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2438" end="2444" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2596" end="2611" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3408" end="3425" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3518" end="3530" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439056" start="3655" end="3695" title="Fayetteville Independent School District" label="Fayetteville Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="3881" end="3897" title="Austin Chronicle" label="Austin Chronicle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135871" wikidata="Q974825" url="?curid=135871" title="Flatonia, Texas">
<text>Flatonia is a town in southwestern Fayette County, Texas, United States. Located on Interstate 10 and the Union Pacific Railroad, west of Schulenburg, the population was 1,308 at the 2020 census.

==History==

Established on April 8, 1874, on land that the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway acquired from William Alexander Faries (the family name is also spelled &quot;Ferris&quot; and &quot;Farris&quot;), the community was named after F. W. Flato, a local merchant and one of the first settlers, of whom most were Anglo American. Residents placed their homes in the former Flatonia settlement, one mile southeast of the current Flatonia, and in the community of Oso, northeast, on wagons and moved to the new location. The post office, established in the former Flatonia in 1870, moved to the new Flatonia with the same name. Flatonia was incorporated on November 10, 1875, and held its first election on December 6 of that year. In 1878, the town had 800 residents and an economy dependent on cattle and cotton.

The location of the railway and inexpensive real estate led to the arrival of Arab, Bohemian, German, Greek, and Italian immigrants in several waves. The north-south line of the Waco branch of the San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway opened in the mid-1880s, leading to new settlements of Muldoon and Moulton. Competition from the settlements, respectively north and south of Flatonia, and an agricultural depression damaged Flatonia&#x27;s economy. By 1900, Flatonia experienced a significant decline in population.

During the first half of the 20th century, Flatonia&#x27;s prospects increased and decreased according to the national economy and cattle and cotton markets. In 1950 Flatonia had 1,024 residents, 50 businesses, and a wide farm and ranch service area. By the 1960s, cotton no longer was a substantial aspect of the area economy; therefore many area farms began to ranch cattle. During that time the population was between 1,000 and 1,500. Interstate 10 (I-10) opened in the 1970s, leading many tourist businesses to move from U.S. Highway 90 to I-10, one mile north of Highway 90. In 1985, Flatonia had 69 businesses. In 1990, Flatonia had 1,295 residents.

==Geography==
Flatonia is located in southwestern Fayette County. U.S. Route 90 passes through the center of town as Main Street, leading east to Schulenburg and west 12 miles to Waelder. Texas State Highway 95 intersects US 90 in the center of Flatonia, entering from the south as Faires Street and from the north as Penn Street. Highway 95 leads south to Shiner and north to Smithville. Interstate 10 passes through the northern side of Flatonia, with access from Exit 661 (Highway 95). I-10 leads east to Houston and west to San Antonio.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Flatonia has a total area of , of which , or 1.01%, is water.

==Climate==
Flatonia has hot, dry summers and mild, wet winters. Summers range in the 90s with a few days in July and August reaching 100. Winters can be chilly but rarely reach below freezing; low winter temperatures are mostly in the fifties or forties. Snow is rare.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,308 people, 496 households, and 412 families residing in the town.

As of the census of 2000, there were 1,377 people, 504 households, and 347 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 568 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 74.07% White, 7.48% African American, 0.94% Native American, 16.85% from other races, and 0.65% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 36.17% of the population.

There were 504 households, out of which 33.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.4% were married couples living together, 11.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.0% were non-families. 27.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.21.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 26.9% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 25.4% from 25 to 44, 20.5% from 45 to 64, and 19.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $27,000, and the median income for a family was $31,471. Males had a median income of $23,700 versus $16,429 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,329. About 18.9% of families and 23.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 33.4% of those under age 18 and 27.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Arts and culture==

===Annual cultural events===
Many residents of Flatonia are of Czech, Slovak, German, or other Central European heritage. The local &quot;Czhilispiel&quot; festival is named for Czech people and their popular chili.

===Museums and other points of interest===
The abandoned Flatonia Railroad Tower, in use from 1902 to 1996, was one of Texas&#x27; longest standing, manually-operated railroad switching towers with north-south and east-west cross rails. The tower was damaged in an automobile accident on January 9, 2014.

The E. A. Arnim Archives and Museum has a collection of antique furniture, household items, clothing and historical documents used by the early settlers of Flatonia. There is a livery stable behind the museum with wagons, buggies, and vintage tack and farm implements.

==Education==
The town is served by the Flatonia Independent School District. Campuses include the Flatonia Elementary School and Flatonia Secondary School.

==Photo gallery==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Flatonia official website
* Chamber of Commerce
* Czhilispiel Festival
* &quot;The Flatonia Argus&quot;, local newspaper
* Flatonia in 1881
* Flatonia Independent School District
* City-Data.com
* ePodunk: Profile for Flatonia, Texas </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974825" start="0" end="8" title="Flatonia, Texas" label="Flatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110755" start="35" end="49" title="Fayette County, Texas" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="51" end="56" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="84" end="97" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="106" end="128" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q944612" start="138" end="149" title="Schulenburg, Texas" label="Schulenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="183" end="194" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927632" start="257" end="302" title="Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway" label="Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="347" end="358" title="family name" label="family name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="528" end="542" title="English Americans" label="Anglo American"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1106" end="1110" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1112" end="1119" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1122" end="1128" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1130" end="1135" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1141" end="1148" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="1206" end="1210" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471349" start="1225" end="1261" title="San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway" label="San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711092" start="1317" end="1324" title="Muldoon, Texas" label="Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q961291" start="1329" end="1336" title="Moulton, Texas" label="Moulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="1984" end="1997" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818277" start="2071" end="2086" title="U.S. Route 90 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q410756" start="2269" end="2282" title="U.S. Route 90" label="U.S. Route 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q944612" start="2349" end="2360" title="Schulenburg, Texas" label="Schulenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980211" start="2382" end="2389" title="Waelder, Texas" label="Waelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503835" start="2391" end="2413" title="Texas State Highway 95" label="Texas State Highway 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q977222" start="2560" end="2566" title="Shiner, Texas" label="Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q981456" start="2580" end="2590" title="Smithville, Texas" label="Smithville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="2592" end="2605" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2711" end="2718" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2731" end="2742" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2762" end="2789" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3152" end="3177" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3270" end="3276" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3492" end="3497" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3505" end="3521" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3529" end="3544" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3558" end="3569" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3605" end="3613" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3617" end="3623" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3776" end="3791" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4588" end="4605" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4699" end="4711" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="4987" end="4999" title="Czech people" label="Czech people"/>
<link wikidata="Q863794" start="5018" end="5023" title="chili con carne" label="chili"/>
<link wikidata="Q82818" start="5193" end="5208" title="railroad switch" label="railroad switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061338" start="5509" end="5522" title="livery stable" label="livery stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457952" start="5642" end="5678" title="Flatonia Independent School District" label="Flatonia Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135873" wikidata="Q982031" url="?curid=135873" title="Round Top, Texas">
<text>Round Top is a town in Fayette County, Texas, United States. The population was 87 at the 2020 census.

==History==
As a part of the Stephen F. Austin colony, James Winn acquired in 1831; the present townsite was included in this tract. The community was originally known as &quot;Townsend&quot;, after early settler Nathaniel Townsend (whose original house still exists as the Texana Lodge). Later the town was renamed &quot;Round Top&quot;, since the postmaster lived in a house with a round tower. Portions of Nassau Plantation were purchased by the &quot;Adelsverein&quot;, and settlement by German immigrants began 1845 to 1847; these settlers began buying up the local farms and the town lots.

The Bethlehem Lutheran Church in Round Top is the oldest active Lutheran church in Fayette County, and the oldest Lutheran church sanctuary in Texas.

==Geography==

Round Top is located in northeastern Fayette County. It sits on a hill between Cummins Creek to the southwest and Rocky Creek to the east, tributaries of the Colorado River. The elevation in the center of Round Top is above sea level. Texas State Highway 237 passes through the center of town, leading northeast to Brenham and southwest to La Grange, the Fayette County seat.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Round Top has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2010, there were 90 people, 43 households, and 22 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 58 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.70% White, 1.30% from other races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.19% of the population.

There were 43 households, out of which 9.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.5% were married couples living together, 4.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.8% were non-families. 44.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 37.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.79 and the average family size was 2.41.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 10.4% under the age of 18, 11.7% from 25 to 44, 37.7% from 45 to 64, and 40.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 58 years. For every 100 females, there were 57.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 68.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $43,125, and the median income for a family was $50,625. Males had a median income of $42,500 versus $41,875 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,488. There were no families and 4.8% of the population living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and 6.1% of those over 64.

==Arts and culture==
Round Top is the home of three visitor-drawing programs:
* Round Top Antiques Fair, outdoor gathering of antiques dealers drawing enormous crowds each spring and fall
* Round Top Festival Institute, music institute for young musicians and faculty
* Shakespeare at Winedale, Shakespeare-in-Performance study program administered by the University of Texas at Austin English Department

Round Top is the home of the oldest building in Fayette County, Moore&#x27;s Fort, which was moved there from nearby La Grange.

==Education==
The town is served by the Round Top-Carmine Independent School District.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

* Round Top Area Chamber of Commerce
* &quot;Round Top Register&quot;
* Round Top Family Library
* &quot;Round Top, TX&quot; article, Texas State Historical Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982031" start="0" end="9" title="Round Top, Texas" label="Round Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q110755" start="23" end="37" title="Fayette County, Texas" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="39" end="44" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="133" end="150" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967578" start="513" end="530" title="Nassau Plantation (Texas)" label="Nassau Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885712" start="559" end="570" title="Adelsverein" label="Adelsverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551259" start="596" end="613" title="German Texan" label="German immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898056" start="705" end="730" title="Bethlehem Lutheran Church (Round Top, Texas)" label="Bethlehem Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="765" end="780" title="Lutheran church" label="Lutheran church"/>
<link wikidata="Q847785" start="1025" end="1039" title="Colorado River (Texas)" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504124" start="1102" end="1125" title="Texas State Highway 237" label="Texas State Highway 237"/>
<link wikidata="Q908929" start="1182" end="1189" title="Brenham, Texas" label="Brenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q974145" start="1207" end="1216" title="La Grange, Texas" label="La Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1261" end="1288" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1373" end="1379" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1589" end="1594" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1607" end="1618" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1620" end="1628" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1632" end="1638" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1788" end="1803" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2579" end="2596" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2690" end="2702" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108463" start="2841" end="2864" title="Round Top Antiques Fair" label="Round Top Antiques Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="2887" end="2895" title="antiques" label="antiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371152" start="2951" end="2979" title="Round Top Festival Institute" label="Round Top Festival Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462829" start="3031" end="3054" title="Shakespeare at Winedale" label="Shakespeare at Winedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="3117" end="3146" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908098" start="3231" end="3248" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s Fort" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q974145" start="3284" end="3293" title="La Grange, Texas" label="La Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371148" start="3336" end="3381" title="Round Top-Carmine Independent School District" label="Round Top-Carmine Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135875" wikidata="Q976964" url="?curid=135875" title="Roby, Texas">
<text>Roby is a city in and the county seat of Fisher County, Texas, United States. The population was 591 at the 2020 census.

== History ==

In 1885, shortly after Fisher County was organized, a dispute arose between business partners from Mississippi and a town called Fisher. Both wanted their land to host the courthouse. The partners were M.L. and D.C. Roby, and the town of Fisher is now called North Roby.

In 1886, construction was begun on the new courthouse and a school and post office opened. The community had 13 houses by that summer. In 1890, the population was estimated to be 300 people and the town had a hotel, two general stores, Baptist and Methodist churches, a restaurant, and a weekly newspaper, the &quot;Fisher County Call&quot;.

Roby had no jail until 1892, when one was constructed out of stone. A new jail was built in 1926 out of brick, and remained in use until 2016. In 2016, a new jail was built and the brick jailhouse was declared a historic landmark.

It has had three different courthouses during its existence, unlike many Texas county seats, which have preserved and restored original courthouses. The most recent courthouse was built in 1972, and is strikingly modern in comparison to those found in many Texas counties.

In 1898, the first bank was chartered and the Roby school district was formed. The area covered by the school district grew slowly over the years as it absorbed rural schools in the vicinity, including those of Longworth and McCaulley.

By 1900, the population had grown to 712 residents. By 1914, it had Baptist, Methodist, Presbyterian, and Nazarene churches. Telephone service was also established as of 1914.

Roby received its first railroad in 1907 (the Texas Central), and in 1915, the Roby and Northern laid 4.4 miles of track to connect Roby proper with North Roby. It actually increased during the Great Depression—reaching 904 for the 1940 Census. The Roby and Northern line was scrapped during World War II and its rails went to the war effort.

Roby incorporated in 1915, and its population grew to 801 in 1930 and 904 in 1940. The population peaked in 1950 with 1,040 people calling Roby and North Roby home, and 60 businesses. The city was plagued by insufficient water throughout its life and finally in 1953 during a long period of drought, water from Oak Creek Lake at Blackwell was piped in. By 1970, the population had fallen below 800 with 22 businesses in operation. It further declined to 616 in 1990 before rebounding to 673 in 2000, and as of the 2010 Census, the population had fallen to 643.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land. Roby is surrounded by wide cotton fields.

===Climate===
Roby&#x27;s climate type occurs primarily on the periphery of the true deserts in low-latitude semiarid steppe regions. The Köppen climate classification subtype for this climate is &quot;BSk&quot; (tropical and subtropical steppe climate).
==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, 591 people, 306 households, and 216 families were residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 673 people, 264 households, and 175 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 312 housing units averaged 434.0 per square mile (167.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 86.18% White, 3.27% African American, 0.45% Native American, 8.32% from other races, and 1.78% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 22.14% of the population.

Of the 264 households, 31.1% had children under 18 living with them, 53.4% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.7% were not families. About 31.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 20.8% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.45, and the average family size was 3.13.

In the city, the age distribution was 27.8% under 18, 6.2% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 20.2% from 45 to 64, and 20.7% who were 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 80.4 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 78.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $27,031, and for a family was $34,632. Males had a median income of $27,500 versus $19,286 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,926. About 14.8% of families and 15.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.9% of those under age 18 and 14.7% of those age 65 or over.

==The Roby 42==

Forty-two lucky residents of Roby put $10 each in a lottery pool in 1996 and won the $46,000,000 jackpot on Thanksgiving of that year, making 6–7% percent of the population millionaires instantly (before taxes).

==Education==
The City of Roby is served by the Roby Consolidated Independent School District and is home to the Roby High School Lions.

==References==

==External links==
* History of Roby Court Houses
* Handbook of Texas Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q976964" start="0" end="4" title="Roby, Texas" label="Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="26" end="37" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975" start="41" end="54" title="Fisher County, Texas" label="Fisher County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="56" end="61" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="108" end="119" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056543" start="396" end="406" title="North Roby, Texas" label="North Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2610" end="2637" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="2832" end="2847" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semiarid steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2861" end="2890" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3023" end="3048" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3151" end="3157" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3331" end="3344" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4374" end="4391" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4485" end="4497" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353559" start="4851" end="4896" title="Roby Consolidated Independent School District" label="Roby Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302914" start="4916" end="4932" title="Roby High School" label="Roby High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135876" wikidata="Q979599" url="?curid=135876" title="Rotan, Texas">
<text>Rotan is a city in Fisher County, Texas, United States. The population was 1,332 at the 2020 census, down from 1,508 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==
Texas State Highway 70 passes through the city, leading north to Jayton and south to Roby, the Fisher County seat, and to Sweetwater and Interstate 20. Texas State Highway 92 leads east from Rotan to Hamlin.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Rotan has a total area of 2.0 mi2 (5.2 km2), all land.

===Climate===
Rotan&#x27;s climate type occurs primarily on the periphery of the true deserts in low-latitude semiarid steppe regions. The Köppen climate classification subtype for this climate is &quot;BSh&quot; (tropical and subtropical steppe climate).

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,332 people, 594 households, and 364 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 1,611 people, 665 households, and 442 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 841 housing units averaged 413.1 per square mile (159.2/km). The racial makeup of the city was 72.44% White, 5.59% African American, 0.25% Native American, 0.19% Asian, 19.49% from other races, and 2.05% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 32.90% of the population.

Of the 665 households, 28.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.6% were married couples living together, 11.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.5% were not families; 32.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 21.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.95.

In the city, the population was distributed as 24.6% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 22.2% from 25 to 44, 21.7% from 45 to 64, and 23.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $21,638, and for a family was $29,038. Males had a median income of $25,688 versus $17,045 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,097. About 16.6% of families and 22.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 39.0% of those under age 18 and 11.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The city is served by the Rotan Independent School District.

==Notable people==

* Sammy Baugh, quarterback for the Washington Redskins, had a ranch in Rotan.
* Ella Hudson Day, composer and ragtime musician was one of the earliest residents

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979599" start="0" end="5" title="Rotan, Texas" label="Rotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975" start="19" end="39" title="Fisher County, Texas" label="Fisher County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="88" end="99" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="124" end="135" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503785" start="152" end="174" title="Texas State Highway 70" label="Texas State Highway 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q981529" start="217" end="223" title="Jayton, Texas" label="Jayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q976964" start="237" end="241" title="Roby, Texas" label="Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q981845" start="274" end="284" title="Sweetwater, Texas" label="Sweetwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442860" start="289" end="302" title="Interstate 20 in Texas" label="Interstate 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503828" start="304" end="326" title="Texas State Highway 92" label="Texas State Highway 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q980335" start="352" end="358" title="Hamlin, Texas" label="Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="378" end="405" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="573" end="588" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semiarid steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="602" end="631" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="765" end="790" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="901" end="907" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1083" end="1096" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2194" end="2211" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2305" end="2317" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370223" start="2433" end="2466" title="Rotan Independent School District" label="Rotan Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q372640" start="2491" end="2502" title="Sammy Baugh" label="Sammy Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="2504" end="2515" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="2524" end="2543" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051331" start="2569" end="2584" title="Ella Hudson Day" label="Ella Hudson Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135877" wikidata="Q975828" url="?curid=135877" title="Floydada, Texas">
<text>Floydada ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Floyd County, Texas, United States. This rural community lies on the high plains of the Llano Estacado in West Texas and is sometimes referred to as the Pumpkin Capital of Texas. The population was 2,675 at the 2020 census, down from 3,038 at the 2010 census and 3,676 at the 2000 census.

==History==
According to the Texas State Historical Association, the community of Floydada was originally named &quot;Floyd City&quot;. It was established in 1890 on of land donated by James B. and Caroline Price of Jefferson City, Missouri. Floydada won the election as county seat over Della Plain. When a post office opened, the name was changed to &quot;Floydada&quot;. The meaning of the name is disputed. Some claim it was meant to be &quot;Floydalia&quot; but was garbled in transmission to the U.S. Postal Service, while others insist it is a combination of the county&#x27;s name and that of James Price&#x27;s mother, Ada. A third view is that it was formed from Caroline Price&#x27;s parents, Floyd and Ada.

Floydada became an important railroad junction in 1928, when the Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway reached the town.

==Geography==

Floydada is located southwest of the center of Floyd County at (33.983771, –101.337259). U.S. Route 62 enters from the southwest as Ralls Highway and leads east out of town as Houston Street, while U.S. Route 70 enters from the north as Second Street and joins US 62 to exit town on Houston Street. Via US 62 it is southwest to Lubbock, while US 70 leads northwest to Plainview. The two highways lead east together to Matador. Texas State Highway 207 leads north from Floydada to Silverton.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Floydada has a total area of , all of it land.

Floydada lies on the High Plains of the Llano Estacado around west of the Caprock Escarpment. Blanco Canyon, a scenic canyon carved by the White River, is to the south. The terrain surrounding Floydada consists of level plains that at one time were covered with grassland vegetation and populated with bison. The bison were extirpated, and with the exception of Blanco Canyon, the shortgrass prairie has been replaced by plowed cropland, where cotton, grain sorghum, wheat, and pumpkins are grown.

==Climate==
The city of Floydada and Floyd County experience all four seasons of weather. Winters are cool and windy with little or no precipitation with the exception of snowfall. Summers experience a more mild wind and moderately high temperatures.

The following is a list of average climate data to give a general idea of the weather in the area. Note these values are averages and estimates. They are not intended to provide precise data in a given time frame.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,675 people, 1,104 households, and 789 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,676 people, 1,304 households, and 980 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,507 housing units at an average density of 742/sq mi (287/km). The racial makeup of the city was 70.35% White, 4.13% African American, 1.09% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 22.20% from other races, and 2.09% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 51.63% of the population.

There were 1,304 households, out of which 38.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.8% were married couples living together, 12.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.8% were non-families. 23.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.24.

In the city the population was spread out, with 31.6% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 23.6% from 25 to 44, 20.6% from 45 to 64, and 16.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $25,429, and the median income for a family was $30,038. Males had a median income of $25,179 versus $17,381 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,431. About 24.7% of families and 26.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 36.2% of those under age 18 and 19.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

The city is served by the Floydada Independent School District. Apple Inc. has teamed up with Floydada to distribute laptop computers to the students and staff of Floydada&#x27;s Jr. High and High School. In 2007–2008, Floydada was the only town in Texas to be an Apple distinguished school.

==Workforce development==
Floydada has a number of free training programs provided by the Floydada Professional Development Center and the Floydada Economic Development Corporation (EDC). Employers can access financial assistance for training through the Skills Development Fund and the Self-Sufficiency Fund administered by the Texas Workforce Commission. Local training facilities include Caprock Community Action and the Floydada Technology Center.

The Floydada Technology Center (FTC) began in 2003 and is provided by the Floydada EDC and is housed in the EDC offices at 105 South 5th Street. The Center itself was designed to provide workforce development to both citizens and businesses upon request. It houses a twelve student capacity classroom with an instructor&#x27;s podium and computer that is attached to a projector. Caprock Community Action was opened in 2002 and operates a learning lab that offers citizens the opportunity to earn their GED. They are located at 701 E. Lee Street.

==Coronado site==
Archaeologists from Wichita State University excavated in Blanco Canyon, south of Floydada. They discovered significant evidence that Spanish explorer Francisco Vázquez de Coronado established a major camp there during his search for Quivira, one of the legendary Seven Cities of Gold. The Floyd County Historical Museum in downtown Floydada displays some of the significant artifacts from Coronado&#x27;s campsite. Also, an historical marker in Blanco Canyon tells of Coronado&#x27;s expedition, which led through the canyon.

==Wind energy development==
Floydada is located in what many call the wind corridor of the United States. The wind corridor stretches through the Great Plains from the Texas Panhandle up into Minnesota, including some of the most wind-rich states in the country.

The region is ideal for wind development because of its wind quality, the potential to connect into two different electric grid systems, and the plan scheduled for transmission build-out in the area.

The quality of wind is ranked on a scale of one to seven. In Floyd County the wind ranking is class 4, which is considered good for wind energy development. Texas is served by several electric grid operators. Those operating in the Floyd County area are the Southwest Power Pool (SPP) and the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT). It is beneficial for the area to be in such close vicinity to both grids, because it allows for the opportunity to send electricity generated from wind farms either direction. Even though Floyd County is located primarily in the SPP grid, lines can be built in the area that connect to the ERCOT grid. In January 2009 the Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT) chose several transmission service providers (TSPs) to construct a build-out of transmission lines across the state of Texas. The purpose of the transmission overhaul was to help harness the wind-rich regions of West Texas and the Texas Panhandle in order to send the energy generated into more populated areas of Texas where the energy can be used. Two TSPs have Floyd County included in their study area, Sharyland Utilities and Wind Energy Transmission Texas (WETT). The Competitive Renewable Energy Zones (CREZ) project in Texas has the potential to help spur wind energy development in Floyd County. Xcel Energy is also making plans to construct a transmission line through Floyd County.

==Economy==
The region&#x27;s economy is based on agriculture, but local companies provide services such as custom-built, metal-assembly, irrigation-motor development, efficient rock-crushing systems, and a product called the &quot;Row Stalker&quot;.

==Notable people==

* Price Brookfield (1920–2006), college and professional basketball player
* Max F. Crawford (1938–2010), author
* H. Jeff Kimble, professor of physics at Caltech
* Joe D. Montgomery, Alaska educator and legislator
* Don Williams (1939–2017), country music performer and songwriter
* L. G. Wilson (1924–2001), noted football coach

==Nuclear test==
As part of the Department of Energy Operation Sculpin, &quot;Floydada&quot; was the code name for a 3 kiloton nuclear test conducted at the Nevada Test Site on August 15, 1991. The town&#x27;s name inaccurately had been among several western ghost towns comprising the set of code names.

==See also==
*Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway
*Llano Estacado
*Mount Blanco
*Running Water Draw
*White River (Texas)

==References==

==External links==
*Floydada Chamber of Commerce
*Floydada Independent School District
*Photos of West Texas and the Llano Estacado 
*Floyd County Historical Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975828" start="0" end="8" title="Floydada, Texas" label="Floydada"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="34" end="45" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110528" start="49" end="61" title="Floyd County, Texas" label="Floyd County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="63" end="68" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="70" end="83" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="137" end="151" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="155" end="165" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="260" end="271" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="296" end="307" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="325" end="336" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="368" end="402" title="Texas State Historical Association" label="Texas State Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="555" end="579" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412858" start="1124" end="1156" title="Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway" label="Quanah, Acme and Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q409975" start="1280" end="1293" title="U.S. Route 62" label="U.S. Route 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q410063" start="1389" end="1402" title="U.S. Route 70" label="U.S. Route 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="1519" end="1526" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q982448" start="1559" end="1568" title="Plainview, Texas" label="Plainview"/>
<link wikidata="Q981834" start="1609" end="1616" title="Matador, Texas" label="Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504077" start="1618" end="1641" title="Texas State Highway 207" label="Texas State Highway 207"/>
<link wikidata="Q972949" start="1671" end="1680" title="Silverton, Texas" label="Silverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1700" end="1727" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="1817" end="1831" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q939487" start="1851" end="1869" title="Caprock Escarpment" label="Caprock Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924948" start="1871" end="1884" title="Blanco Canyon" label="Blanco Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995275" start="1916" end="1927" title="White River (Texas)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="2079" end="2084" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2788" end="2813" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2926" end="2932" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3170" end="3175" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3183" end="3199" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3207" end="3222" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3230" end="3235" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3249" end="3260" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3296" end="3304" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3308" end="3314" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3469" end="3484" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4108" end="4121" title="median income" label="median income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4280" end="4297" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4391" end="4403" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462582" start="4520" end="4556" title="Floydada Independent School District" label="Floydada Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="4558" end="4568" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7708214" start="5116" end="5142" title="Texas Workforce Commission" label="Texas Workforce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="5826" end="5850" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924948" start="5864" end="5877" title="Blanco Canyon" label="Blanco Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="5957" end="5986" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065451" start="6040" end="6047" title="Quivira" label="Quivira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567934" start="6070" end="6090" title="Seven Cities of Gold" label="Seven Cities of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="6480" end="6492" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="6502" end="6517" title="Texas Panhandle" label="Texas Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="6526" end="6535" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571339" start="7057" end="7077" title="Southwest Power Pool" label="Southwest Power Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357475" start="7092" end="7129" title="Electric Reliability Council of Texas" label="Electric Reliability Council of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257657" start="7461" end="7495" title="Public Utility Commission of Texas" label="Public Utility Commission of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486956" start="8108" end="8119" title="Xcel Energy" label="Xcel Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911367" start="8471" end="8487" title="Price Brookfield" label="Price Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794734" start="8546" end="8561" title="Max Crawford (writer)" label="Max F. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562594" start="8584" end="8598" title="H. Jeff Kimble" label="H. Jeff Kimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="8624" end="8631" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993304" start="8634" end="8651" title="Joe D. Montgomery" label="Joe D. Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q908569" start="8686" end="8698" title="Don Williams" label="Don Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="8712" end="8725" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456463" start="8753" end="8765" title="L. G. Wilson" label="L. G. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387860" start="8854" end="8871" title="Operation Sculpin" label="Operation Sculpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="8958" end="8974" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="9060" end="9070" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="9121" end="9158" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="9160" end="9174" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5817315" start="9176" end="9188" title="Mount Blanco" label="Mount Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379996" start="9190" end="9208" title="Running Water Draw" label="Running Water Draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995275" start="9210" end="9229" title="White River (Texas)" label="White River (Texas)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135878" wikidata="Q976784" url="?curid=135878" title="Lockney, Texas">
<text>Lockney is a town in Floyd County, Texas, United States. The population was 1,498 at the 2020 census, down from 1,842 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Lockney is located in northwestern Floyd County at (34.122961, –101.443414). U.S. Route 70 passes through the town, leading southeast to Floydada, the county seat, and northwest to Plainview.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Lockney has a total area of , all of it land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,498 people, 554 households, and 379 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,056 people, 690 households, and 540 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 791 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 72.62% White, 2.53% African American, 0.24% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 22.81% from other races, and 1.56% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 51.90% of the population.

There were 690 households, out of which 44.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.2% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.7% were non-families. 20.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.92 and the average family size was 3.40.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 33.5% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 24.6% from 25 to 44, 18.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $29,074, and the median income for a family was $35,469. Males had a median income of $25,673 versus $18,063 for females. The per capita income for the town was $13,528. About 14.5% of families and 17.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.8% of those under age 18 and 17.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The town is served by the Lockney Independent School District and is home to the Lockney High School Longhorns.

==Films==

* 2002 – &quot;Larry v. Lockney&quot;. Directed by Mark Birnbaum and Jim Schermbeck.
* 2021 – Lockney is one of the filming locations for Destination Marfa

==Notable people==

* George Eade, 4-Star General, born in Lockney in 1921
* Maurice Ewing, a geophysicist and oceanographer, born in Lockney in 1906
* Marsha Sharp, first gained recognition for her coaching skills while coaching the Lady Longhorns in Lockney, Texas. She coached six years on the high school level at Lockney
* Andy Stapp, reality TV personality on the TV Series Overhaulin, Car Warriors, and Search and Restore. His car building and custom paint has been featured on Speed Channel, Velocity Channel, Spike Channel, and Discovery Channel. Andy is also the writer and director of the award winning film titled DESTINATION MARFA
* Garry Templeton, Major League Baseball player, born in Lockney in 1956
* Arland Thompson, born in Lockney Texas September 19, 1957, Thompson is a former NFL player who turned scientist after his retirement
* Damon Washington, NFL running back, born in Lockney in 1977
* Louie Welch, mayor of Houston from 1964 to 1973, born in Lockney in 1918
* Lucy Dean Record is a nationally recognized professional musician

==Climate==
According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Lockney has a semi-arid climate, abbreviated &quot;BSk&quot; on climate maps.

==See also==
*South Plains Wind Farm

==References==

==External links==
*
*Photos of the Llano Estacado</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q976784" start="0" end="7" title="Lockney, Texas" label="Lockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q110528" start="21" end="33" title="Floyd County, Texas" label="Floyd County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="35" end="40" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="89" end="100" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="125" end="136" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q410063" start="231" end="244" title="U.S. Route 70" label="U.S. Route 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q975828" start="291" end="299" title="Floydada, Texas" label="Floydada"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="305" end="316" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q982448" start="335" end="344" title="Plainview, Texas" label="Plainview"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="364" end="391" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="485" end="510" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="621" end="627" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="843" end="848" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="856" end="872" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="880" end="895" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="903" end="908" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="916" end="932" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="946" end="957" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="993" end="1001" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1005" end="1011" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1164" end="1179" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1975" end="1992" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2086" end="2098" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665700" start="2214" end="2249" title="Lockney Independent School District" label="Lockney Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302774" start="2269" end="2288" title="Lockney High School" label="Lockney High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107072049" start="2450" end="2467" title="Destination Marfa" label="Destination Marfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540993" start="2491" end="2502" title="George Eade" label="George Eade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561583" start="2546" end="2559" title="Maurice Ewing" label="Maurice Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773399" start="2621" end="2633" title="Marsha Sharp" label="Marsha Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166430" start="2797" end="2807" title="Andy Stapp" label="Andy Stapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535696" start="2849" end="2859" title="Overhaulin" label="Overhaulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037244" start="2861" end="2873" title="Car Warriors (TV series)" label="Car Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712505" start="2954" end="2967" title="Speed (TV network)" label="Speed Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="2987" end="3000" title="Paramount Network" label="Spike Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="3006" end="3023" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107072049" start="3095" end="3112" title="Destination Marfa" label="DESTINATION MARFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524232" start="3115" end="3130" title="Garry Templeton" label="Garry Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792093" start="3188" end="3203" title="Arland Thompson" label="Arland Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216831" start="3323" end="3339" title="Damon Washington" label="Damon Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972655" start="3385" end="3396" title="Louie Welch" label="Louie Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131157" start="3398" end="3414" title="List of mayors of Houston" label="mayor of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3556" end="3585" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="3608" end="3625" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120759" start="3687" end="3709" title="South Plains Wind Farm" label="South Plains Wind Farm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135879" wikidata="Q958976" url="?curid=135879" title="Crowell, Texas">
<text>Crowell ( ) is a city and the county seat of Foard County, Texas, United States. The population was 769 at the 2020 census, down from 948 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Crowell is located near the center of Foard County and U.S. Route 70 passes through the city as Commerce Street, leading east to Vernon and west to Paducah. Texas State Highway 6 (Main Street) crosses US 70 in the center of Crowell, leading north to Quanah and south to Benjamin. Wichita Falls is to the east via US 70 and US 287.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Crowell has a total area of , all of it land.

The elevation at the center of town is above sea level. The terrain is varied, but mostly level with rolling hills. Soil varies from slightly sandy loam to mostly sandy. Soil and meteorological conditions make the area suitable for growing wheat, cotton, and hay crops (alfalfa and cane). Little of the area immediately around Crowell has underground water in amounts suitable for irrigation. The majority of the area immediately east of Crowell is dedicated to cultivated crops. The majority of the area immediately west of Crowell is dedicated to raising beef cattle.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 769 people, 298 households, and 169 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 1,141 people, 465 households, and 292 families were residing in the city. The population density was 604.6 people/sq mi (233.1/km2). The 568 housing units averaged 301.0/sq mi (116.0/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 83.26% White, 3.07% African American, 0.70% Native American, 11.13% from other races, and 1.84% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 17.62% of the population.

Of the 465 households, 29.7% had children under 18 living with them, 50.3% were married couples living together, 10.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.0% were not families. About 34.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 21.7% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.36, and the average family size was 3.08.

In the city, the age distribution was 26.8% under 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 21.9% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 23.0% who were 65 or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 82.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 79.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $22,214, and for a family was $30,667. Males had a median income of $21,141 versus $16,184 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,965. About 11.4% of families and 16.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.1% of those under age 18 and 19.6% of those age 65 or over.

==History==
Located between the Pease River to the north and the North Wichita River to the south, the area has long been home to a variety of hardy animal and plant species. Native grasses tend to be hardy and drought-tolerant. Tree varieties include bush juniper, mesquite, hackberry, mulberry, and pecan, in addition to several imports that thrive in the warm, semiarid conditions. Native animals species include coyotes, squirrels, badgers, raccoons, and foxes. Deer have also become plentiful in recent decades, as have feral pigs. Bird species include quail, dove, and several types of migratory waterfowl. Crowell is on the migration path of the monarch butterfly.

Crowell is only a few miles from the recapture location of Cynthia Ann Parker. Known locally as the Pease River battleground, Cynthia Ann, captured as a child by raiding Indians, was recaptured here as an adult by U.S. soldiers. Cynthia Ann was the mother of Quanah Parker, considered the last great chief of the Comanche.

Though few notables and celebrities call Crowell home, some worth mentioning remain. Former football star Dick Todd set long-standing records as a running back for Texas A&amp;M University. He then went on to play for, and eventually coach, the Washington Redskins. Todd&#x27;s son, Denny, died as a teenager from injuries sustained on the football field. His memory is honored each year with an award in his name. The award is presented to the football team member who shows the greatest personal contribution to the team, both on and off the field.

The remote, rural location minimizes light pollution, making for an excellent view of the night sky. As a result, Crowell is home to Comanche Springs Astronomy Campus, a observatory built by the Three Rivers Foundation for the Arts and Sciences. The economy is almost solely agrarian. Beef cattle, wheat, and cotton are the primary sources of income and employment. Hunting leases are quickly becoming a notable contributor to the local economy. The single manufacturing industry is a cap factory. Formerly owned by the DeLong company, the factory is now owned by a group of local investors.

Though a small, rural community, Crowell still has interests. In addition to the observatory, a museum was built by the Foard County Historical Society. Housed in the former firehouse, the museum boasts artifacts from the history of Crowell and environs. Most notable is the one-of-a-kind scale town. The diorama-style exhibits are designed to reflect the historically notable businesses in city history. Just across the street from the Firehall Museum is the Farm Implement Museum.

==Education==
The city is served by the Crowell Independent School District and home to the Crowell High School Wildcats.

==Climate==
According to the Köppen climate classification, Crowell has a semiarid climate, &quot;BSk&quot; on climate maps.

==References==

==External links==

*City of Crowell unofficial website
*Crowell ISD
*Crowell Community Page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q958976" start="0" end="7" title="Crowell, Texas" label="Crowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="30" end="41" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110750" start="45" end="64" title="Foard County, Texas" label="Foard County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="111" end="122" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="145" end="156" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q410063" start="229" end="242" title="U.S. Route 70" label="U.S. Route 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q979546" start="303" end="309" title="Vernon, Texas" label="Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q982382" start="322" end="329" title="Paducah, Texas" label="Paducah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="331" end="352" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q974733" start="424" end="430" title="Quanah, Texas" label="Quanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q817379" start="444" end="452" title="Benjamin, Texas" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="454" end="467" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139467" start="497" end="503" title="U.S. Route 287" label="US 287"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="523" end="550" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1215" end="1240" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1349" end="1355" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1443" end="1461" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1558" end="1571" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2606" end="2623" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2717" end="2729" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158436" start="2837" end="2848" title="Pease River" label="Pease River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372502" start="2876" end="2889" title="Wichita River" label="Wichita River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581505" start="3578" end="3602" title="Battle of Pease River" label="Pease River battleground"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="3791" end="3799" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273459" start="3908" end="3917" title="Dick Todd (American football)" label="Dick Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="3966" end="3990" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="4047" end="4066" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="5252" end="5259" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189223" start="5471" end="5506" title="Crowell Independent School District" label="Crowell Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189219" start="5523" end="5542" title="Crowell High School" label="Crowell High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5583" end="5612" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="5628" end="5644" title="semiarid climate" label="semiarid climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135880" wikidata="Q969898" url="?curid=135880" title="Arcola, Texas">
<text>Arcola is a city in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. The population was 2,034 as of the 2020 census, an increase over the figure of 1,642 tabulated by the 2010 census, which represented, in turn, an increase over the 2000 figure of 1,048.

Arcola incorporated in 1986.

==Geography==
Arcola is located near the eastern edge of Fort Bend County at (29.501339, –95.463760). Texas State Highway 6 passes through the city, leading northwest to Sugar Land and southeast 14 miles to Alvin. Downtown Houston is to the north.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Arcola has a total area of , of which , or 0.98%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,034 people, 596 households, and 487 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2010, there were 1,640 people, 295 households, and 233 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 324 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 34.26% White, 34.16% African American, 0.38% Native American, 2.19% Asian, 27.10% from other races, and 1.91% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 51.91% of the population.

There were 295 households, out of which 46.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.6% were married couples living together, 18.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.7% were non-families. 16.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.55 and the average family size was 4.06.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 37.4% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 16.0% from 45 to 64, and 8.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.9 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $31,607, and the median income for a family was $32,500. Males had a median income of $26,818 versus $21,172 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,735. About 24.3% of families and 26.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.3% of those under age 18 and 26.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
Law enforcement is provided by the Arcola Police Department, The Police Chief is Michael V. Ellison. Fire protection is provided by the Fresno Fire Department. Emergency medical service is provided by Fort Bend County EMS.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

== Education ==
Arcola pupils attend schools in Fort Bend Independent School District (FBISD). FBISD formed in 1959 by the consolidation of Missouri City Independent School District and the Sugar Land Independent School District.

The community is within the East Division, controlling school board slots 5 through 7. Most of the city is zoned to Heritage Rose Elementary School, Thornton Middle School, and Almeta Crawford High School.&gt; The section north and east of Texas State Highway 6 and north and west of Farm to Market Road 521 is zoned to Burton Elementary School, Lake Olympia Middle School, and Hightower High School.

The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, Arcola is in neither location. Arcola is in HCC.

===History of schools===

At the time FBISD formed, in 1959, there was one school for black students in Arcola, Oaklane Elementary School, serving grades 1–8. Black students in grades 9–12 were assigned to M.R. Wood School in Sugar Land. White students, at the time, were assigned to an elementary school in Missouri City, a junior high school in Sugar Land, and a high school in Missouri City. Those sites now house E. A. Jones Elementary School, Lakeview Elementary School, and Missouri City Middle School, respectively. Dulles High School became established as the white high school of FBISD. Desegregation occurred in 1965, and Oaklane closed at that time. Oaklane students were reassigned to Blue Ridge Elementary School in Blue Ridge, now a part of Houston. Dulles Junior High School served as FBISD&#x27;s sole junior high school from March 1965 to August 1975. After desegregation, Dulles High was the only zoned high school in the district until Willowridge High School in Houston opened in 1979.

Previously all pupils north of State Highway 6 attended Burton Elementary School in unincorporated Fort Bend County. Some pupils south of Highway 6 attended Sienna Crossing Elementary School, and other pupils south of Highway 6 attended Schiff Elementary School in unincorporated Fort Bend County.

Prior to the opening of Hightower in 1998, Elkins High School served Arcola. After 1998 and prior to 2010 all Arcola pupils were zoned to Hightower. Prior to 2018, most of Arcola was zoned to Baines MS. In 2018 much of Arcola was rezoned to Thornton Middle School. Prior to 2023, portions of Arcola south of Highway 6 were zoned to Ridge Point High School; that year, they were rezoned to Crawford.

==Transportation==
Houston Southwest Airport, a general aviation airport, is in the Arcola city limits.

==References==

==External links==

* City of Arcola official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969898" start="0" end="6" title="Arcola, Texas" label="Arcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="20" end="36" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="38" end="43" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="71" end="97" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="152" end="163" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="436" end="457" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="504" end="514" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q449033" start="541" end="546" title="Alvin, Texas" label="Alvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="557" end="564" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="600" end="627" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="718" end="743" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="836" end="842" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1058" end="1063" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1072" end="1088" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1096" end="1111" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1119" end="1124" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1138" end="1149" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1185" end="1193" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1197" end="1203" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1356" end="1371" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2167" end="2184" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2278" end="2290" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2657" end="2674" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2676" end="2698" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2727" end="2743" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="2826" end="2863" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2918" end="2959" title="Missouri City Independent School District" label="Missouri City Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083086" start="2968" end="3006" title="Sugar Land Independent School District" label="Sugar Land Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245205" start="3186" end="3213" title="Almeta Crawford High School" label="Almeta Crawford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="3249" end="3270" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949004" start="3293" end="3316" title="Farm to Market Road 521" label="Farm to Market Road 521"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759722" start="3387" end="3408" title="Hightower High School" label="Hightower High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="3415" end="3432" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="3452" end="3477" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="3609" end="3647" title="Wharton County Junior College District" label="Wharton County Junior College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046886" start="4095" end="4111" title="M.R. Wood School" label="M.R. Wood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313451" start="4412" end="4430" title="Dulles High School (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Dulles High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929686" start="4618" end="4628" title="Blue Ridge, Houston" label="Blue Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022436" start="4844" end="4867" title="Willowridge High School (Houston)" label="Willowridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="4927" end="4942" title="State Highway 6 (Texas)" label="State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364330" start="5238" end="5256" title="Elkins High School (Texas)" label="Elkins High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332692" start="5527" end="5550" title="Ridge Point High School" label="Ridge Point High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207537" start="5614" end="5639" title="Houston Southwest Airport" label="Houston Southwest Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135881" wikidata="Q980852" url="?curid=135881" title="Beasley, Texas">
<text>Beasley is a city in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land metropolitan area. The city&#x27;s population was 641 at the 2010 census, up from 590 at the 2000 census. State Highway Loop 540 goes straight through the city from the northeast to the southwest while U.S. Route 59, the Southwest Freeway, passes to the south of Beasley. The Union Pacific Railroad tracks run parallel with Loop 540.

==Geography==
Beasley is located in west-central Fort Bend County at (29.496435, –95.917297). US 59 leads northeast to Sugar Land and to the center of Houston, while in the other direction leading southwest to Victoria. Rosenberg is to the northeast via US 59 and Texas State Highway Spur 529.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Beasley has a total area of , of which , or 0.25%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 590 people, 216 households, and 155 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 232 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 77.97% White, 6.61% African American, 12.71% from other races, and 2.71% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 30.68% of the population.

There were 216 households, out of which 35.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.9% were married couples living together, 10.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.2% were non-families. 24.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.73 and the average family size was 3.28.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 28.3% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 28.3% from 25 to 44, 23.4% from 45 to 64, and 11.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $35,000, and the median income for a family was $47,625. Males had a median income of $30,139 versus $29,107 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,984. About 5.7% of families and 16.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.9% of those under age 18 and 24.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
The United States Postal Service Beasley Post Office is located at 7031 Loop 540. Kansas City Southern and CenterPoint Properties jointly own the 689-acre CenterPoint Intermodal Center-Houston Metro (CIC-HM), which opened in 2009.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Economy==

The largest employer in the Beasley area is Hudson Products Corporation, which established manufacturing operations in 1973 on approximately 260 acres, located two miles west of Beasley.

==Education==
Residents are zoned to Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

Residents are zoned to:
* Beasley Elementary School
** it has about 450 students. Beasley Elementary opened in 1902, with eight students. The parent teacher organization opened in 1918. The school became a part of LCISD in 1947. The building presently in use opened in 1985.
* Navarro Middle School
* George Junior High School
* B. F. Terry High School

The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

==Religion==
The headquarters of the Malankara Orthodox Diocese of Southwest America are in unincorporated Fort Bend County, with a postal address of Beasley.
==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980852" start="0" end="7" title="Beasley, Texas" label="Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="21" end="37" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="39" end="44" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="72" end="90" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113735" start="197" end="219" title="Texas State Highway Loop 540" label="State Highway Loop 540"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505525" start="293" end="306" title="U.S. Route 59 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="367" end="389" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="545" end="555" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="577" end="584" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q784496" start="636" end="644" title="Victoria, Texas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="646" end="655" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619256" start="690" end="718" title="Texas State Highway Spur 529" label="Texas State Highway Spur 529"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="738" end="765" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="857" end="863" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1077" end="1082" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1090" end="1106" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1120" end="1131" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1167" end="1175" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1179" end="1185" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1338" end="1353" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2149" end="2166" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2259" end="2271" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="2385" end="2413" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980898" start="2463" end="2483" title="Kansas City Southern (company)" label="Kansas City Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059256" start="2488" end="2510" title="CenterPoint Properties" label="CenterPoint Properties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2646" end="2663" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2665" end="2687" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2716" end="2732" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="3005" end="3051" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833984" start="3383" end="3406" title="B. F. Terry High School" label="B. F. Terry High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="3454" end="3483" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279009" start="3523" end="3570" title="Malankara Orthodox Diocese of Southwest America" label="Malankara Orthodox Diocese of Southwest America"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="3578" end="3592" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135882" wikidata="Q982850" url="?curid=135882" title="Cumings, Texas">
<text>Cumings is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The population was 2,207 at the 2020 census, significantly up from 981 at the 2010 census.

==History==
The town was established in the early 1990s.

==Geography==

Cumings is located north of the center of Fort Bend County at (29.573483, -95.803286). It is bordered to the south and west by the city of Rosenberg. The southern and eastern edge of Cumings is the Brazos River.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which and , or 4.25%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 683 people, 172 households, and 156 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 186 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 60.76% White, 0.29% Asian, 35.43% from other races, and 3.51% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 91.65% of the population.

There were 172 households, out of which 50.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.9% were married couples living together, 13.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 9.3% were non-families. 8.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.97 and the average family size was 4.16.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 34.8% under the age of 18, 13.0% from 18 to 24, 29.6% from 25 to 44, 16.7% from 45 to 64, and 5.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.6 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $36,316, and the median income for a family was $36,776. Males had a median income of $25,847 versus $16,641 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $10,399. About 24.0% of families and 20.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.7% of those under age 18 and 56.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Cumings is within the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

Zoned schools include:
* Jackson Elementary School
* Briscoe Junior High School
* Foster High School

The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

==References==

==External links==
* CUMINGS, TX at &quot;Handbook of Texas&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982850" start="0" end="7" title="Cumings, Texas" label="Cumings"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="14" end="38" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="43" end="66" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="76" end="92" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="94" end="99" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="148" end="159" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="194" end="205" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="420" end="429" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="479" end="491" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="511" end="538" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="633" end="639" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="851" end="856" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="864" end="869" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="883" end="894" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="930" end="938" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="942" end="948" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1101" end="1116" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1908" end="1925" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2018" end="2030" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="2142" end="2188" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265438" start="2273" end="2291" title="Foster High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Foster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="2339" end="2368" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="2429" end="2446" title="Handbook of Texas" label="Handbook of Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135883" wikidata="Q2140781" url="?curid=135883" title="Fairchilds, Texas">
<text>Fairchilds is a village in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. The population was 864 at the 2020 census.

The center of Fairchilds is located northeast of Needville at the intersection of Farm to Market Road 361 (Fairchilds-Long Point Road) and Needville-Fairchilds Road. The Fairchild Farmer Co-op Gin and a few other businesses can be found near the intersection. Established in 1890 by three men of German descent, the community is named after a man who settled there around 1840.

==Geography==
Fairchilds is located in south-central Fort Bend County at (29.446300, –95.779208). According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , of which , or 0.31%, is water.

FM 361 starts at Farm to Market Road 1994 in Long Point to the southeast of Fairchilds. It runs in a nearly straight line through the center of the village and continues to the northwest where it feeds into Texas State Highway 36 south of Pleak. The Needville-Fairchilds Road goes southwest from the center of Fairchilds toward Needville while the Fairchilds Road heads to the northeast. Most area roads conform to the diagonal road net. The Janda Country Estates and Fairchild Manor subdivisions are located to the northeast. Many local roads bear German names like Hein, Kneitz, Beyer, Roesler and Oberrender, or Czech names such as Chmelik, Janda, Zamanek, Psencik and Vacek.

Big Creek, a tributary of the Brazos River, flows through the area from Pleak to the southeast, passing along the northeast edge of Fairchilds. Nearer to the village is Fairchilds Creek which flows northeast, then southeast and joins Big Creek to the southeast.

==History==
The village is named after Philo Fairchilds, who settled there circa 1840. He built a house approximately one mile south of the present-day community. Theo Aderholz, August Bede and Charles Blohm founded the original settlement in 1890. A group of Mennonites from the north established a colony in 1896 by buying property on Big Creek. Approximately fifty families were soon working the land. They built roads, businesses, and schools, including separate ones for white and black children. After a malaria epidemic swept the area, the Galveston Hurricane of 1900 wrecked most of the town. Most of the Mennonites abandoned the site; only a few stayed. A post office served the village from 1912 to 1918, when it closed. In 1912, Louis Kneitz sold two acres to the city to serve as a dance hall; it was called Fairchild Hall and in 1999 the city tore it down, only leaving a cupola near the site. In 1914, the community had one general store. By 1936, there were four businesses and about 25 people living in Fairchilds. Between 1940 and 1953, the village&#x27;s population grew from 75 to 125. In the 1960s, there were 110 people in the community. In 1990, Fairchilds had 150 inhabitants, with a cafe and three stores selling tires, feed and general goods.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 678 people, 211 households, and 181 families residing in the village. The population density was . There were 226 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 89.97% White, 2.21% African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.29% Asian, 6.05% from other races, and 1.33% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 19.17% of the population.

There were 211 households, out of which 49.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 76.3% were married couples living together, 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 14.2% were non-families. 11.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.21 and the average family size was 3.52.

In the village, the population was spread out, with 32.3% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.5 males.

The median income for a household in the village was $52,500, and the median income for a family was $58,942. Males had a median income of $34,773 versus $26,010 for females. The per capita income for the village was $16,653. About 1.6% of families and 4.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.7% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Fairchilds residents are zoned to schools in the Needville Independent School District. Needville High School serves the community. The Lamar CISD serves a small portion of the community.

==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2140781" start="0" end="10" title="Fairchilds, Texas" label="Fairchilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="27" end="43" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="45" end="50" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="78" end="104" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="154" end="165" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q980838" start="217" end="226" title="Needville, Texas" label="Needville"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949006" start="250" end="273" title="Farm to Market Road 361" label="Farm to Market Road 361"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="662" end="689" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617135" start="774" end="798" title="Farm to Market Road 1994" label="Farm to Market Road 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673076" start="802" end="812" title="Long Point, Texas" label="Long Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503702" start="964" end="986" title="Texas State Highway 36" label="Texas State Highway 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458940" start="996" end="1001" title="Pleak, Texas" label="Pleak"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="1467" end="1479" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="1960" end="1969" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2210" end="2217" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="2247" end="2274" title="Galveston Hurricane of 1900" label="Galveston Hurricane of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2997" end="3003" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3223" end="3228" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3236" end="3252" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3260" end="3275" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3283" end="3288" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3301" end="3312" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3348" end="3356" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3360" end="3366" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3519" end="3534" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4334" end="4351" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4446" end="4458" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986678" start="4595" end="4632" title="Needville Independent School District" label="Needville Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711120" start="4634" end="4655" title="Needville High School" label="Needville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="4682" end="4692" title="Lamar CISD" label="Lamar CISD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135884" wikidata="Q982289" url="?curid=135884" title="Fifth Street, Texas">
<text>Fifth Street is a census-designated place (CDP) located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Stafford within Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The population was 2,284 at the 2020 census. Fifth Street is within the ZIP code 77477. Therefore, residents of Fifth Street have an address of Stafford, Texas.

==History==
By the 1980s, the development or at minimum, the name &quot;Fifth Street&quot; existed. In 2000, it had 2,059 residents. It is a bedroom community of Houston.

==Geography==

Fifth Street is in northeastern Fort Bend County, near the border with Harris County and between Missouri City and Stafford. Downtown Houston is to the northeast.

Fifth Street is located at . According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which , or 1.86%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,059 people, 503 households, and 422 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 537 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 50.90% White, 5.15% African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.10% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 41.23% from other races, and 2.43% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 90.34% of the population.

There were 503 households, out of which 46.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.3% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.1% were non-families. 9.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.09 and the average family size was 4.29.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 34.0% under the age of 18, 13.1% from 18 to 24, 32.3% from 25 to 44, 15.6% from 45 to 64, and 5.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 26 years. For every 100 females, there were 129.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 137.4 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $29,773, and the median income for a family was $34,740. Males had a median income of $26,310 versus $17,500 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $9,697. About 20.4% of families and 21.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.6% of those under age 18 and 22.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==

Fifth Street is within the Fort Bend Independent School District.

Most residents are zoned to: Armstrong Elementary School, while some are zoned to Edgar Glover Elementary School. Two secondary schools in Missouri City, Missouri City Middle School and Thurgood Marshall High School, serve Fifth Street.

Before Armstrong opened in August 2008, Fifth Street was divided between Glover Elementary School, E.A. Jones Elementary School, and Quail Valley Elementary School. In 2008 Armstrong took most of Fifth Street.

Prior to April 18, 1959 an elementary school in Missouri City, now E. A. Jones, existed. Quail Valley Elementary School had been occupied by August 1975. Missouri City Junior High School opened in October 1975. Glover opened on August 17, 1994. Marshall High School opened on August 15, 2002. The rebuilt E. A. Jones opened on August 27, 2007. Armstrong opened on August 25, 2008. The rebuilt Missouri City Middle School opened in August 2008.

The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, and Fifth Street is not in the Sugar Land ETJ (it is in the Stafford ETJ). Fifth Street is in HCC.

==Parks and recreation==
Fort Bend County operates the Stafford Community Center in Fifth Street.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982289" start="0" end="12" title="Fifth Street, Texas" label="Fifth Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="18" end="41" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="63" end="92" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="96" end="104" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="112" end="128" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="130" end="135" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="184" end="195" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="224" end="232" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="455" end="472" title="bedroom community" label="bedroom community"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="476" end="483" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="533" end="549" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676" start="572" end="585" title="Harris County, Texas" label="Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="598" end="611" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="616" end="624" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="711" end="738" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="830" end="836" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1050" end="1055" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1079" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1087" end="1102" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1110" end="1115" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1123" end="1139" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1153" end="1164" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1200" end="1208" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1212" end="1218" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1371" end="1386" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2181" end="2198" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2290" end="2302" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2445" end="2462" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2464" end="2486" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2515" end="2531" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="2608" end="2645" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799289" start="2834" end="2863" title="Marshall High School (Missouri City, Texas)" label="Thurgood Marshall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="3546" end="3563" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="3583" end="3608" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="3740" end="3778" title="Wharton County Junior College District" label="Wharton County Junior College District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135885" wikidata="Q982136" url="?curid=135885" title="Four Corners, Texas">
<text>Four Corners is a census-designated place (CDP) within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Houston in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The population was 12,103 at the 2020 census, up from 2,954 at the 2000 census.

==History==
Four Corners began as a community of extended families. By 2011 it had become a rapidly suburbanizing area.

==Geography==

Four Corners is located near the northeastern border of Fort Bend County at (29.669366, -95.659147). It is bordered to the north by the Mission Bend CDP and to the east, south, and west by small units of the city of Houston.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.12%, is water.

The original community was centered on the four-way intersection of Boss Gaston, Old Richmond, and Richmond Gaines roads. The census-designated place as of 2011 includes the crossroads and several new houses west of Texas State Highway 6, north of McKaskle Road, and south of Riverside Grove Drive and Stanbridge Drive. Journalist Jeannie Kever said that the community, once &quot;isolated&quot;, had become &quot;something bigger and harder to define, its aging small frame houses and mobile homes engulfed by the omnivorous spoils of growth.&quot;

Carmen Martinez, the president of the Fort Bend Freshwater Supply District No. 2 and a Four Corners resident who lived there since 1966, said in a &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; article that at one time residents had to go to Houston or Rosenberg to get groceries. As of 2011 residents can go to local area stores to shop.

==Demographics==


As of the 2020 United States census, there were 12,103 people, 3,012 households, and 2,908 families residing in the CDP.

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,954 people, 775 households, and 702 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 824 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 42.76% White, 18.96% African American, 0.64% Native American, 15.94% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 18.82% from other races, and 2.84% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 41.16% of the population.

There were 775 households, out of which 57.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 74.3% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 9.4% were non-families. 7.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.81 and the average family size was 4.02.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 36.7% under the age of 18, 10.0% from 18 to 24, 29.1% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 4.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $63,534, and the median income for a family was $65,200. Males had a median income of $34,821 versus $40,272 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $19,826. About 12.1% of families and 16.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.4% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.

From the 2000 census to the 2010 census, the population increased to 12,382, about four times the population in 2000. As of 2011 90% of the residents are Asian Americans, African-Americans, and Latino Americans. Between the 2000 and 2010 censuses, the number of White Americans increased while the percentage of Whites decreased. Jeannie Kever of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said that &quot;not all of the newcomers identify with the old neighborhood and its inhabitants, even those living just a block away.&quot;

Karl Eschbach, a former demographer for the state of Texas, said that many people moved from Houston neighborhoods and communities with distinct racial and socioeconomic identities, like the East End, Sunnyside, and the Third Ward, to areas too new to have racial identities. Eschbach explained that &quot;as a large minority middle class started to emerge, Fort Bend was virgin territory that all groups could move to.&quot; When explaining why many of the new residents were of minority groups rather than white Americans, Eschbach added, &quot;Many minorities are looking for mixed communities, where whites might feel it&#x27;s more optimal to live in a subdivision that&#x27;s more homogeneous with their own group.&quot;

Kever said that in previous eras, &quot;Four Corners has always been a multicultural mashup, its residents united by poverty and an appreciation for life in the slow lane.&quot; By 2011 many newer residents were wealthier than the original residents.

==Government and infrastructure==
As of 2011 the original section of Four Corners is serviced by a water system of the Fort Bend Freshwater Supply District No. 2 and individual septic systems. Newer areas have municipal utility districts, which provide sewer and water services.

Originally residents of the original section used individual water wells. Several years prior to 2011, residents of the original section formed the Fort Bend Freshwater Supply District No. 2 and built a water system. Residents still use individual septic systems. According to Carmen Martinez, the president of the supply district, work on a sewer system will start at a later point in 2011.

==Education==
Four Corners is within the Fort Bend Independent School District.

Elementary schools serving the Four Corners CDP and within the Four Corners CDP include Arizona Fleming Elementary and Mary Austin Holley Elementary. Elementary schools outside of the CDP serving sections of Four Corners include Drabek and Oyster Creek. Hodges Bend Middle School, located in the CDP, serves most of Four Corners, while Garcia Middle School and Sugar Land Middle School, both outside of the CDP, serves a small portion of the area. Austin High School, George Bush High School, and Kempner High School, all outside of the CDP, serve sections of Four Corners.

In previous eras, Four Corners residents attended Travis High School in Pecan Grove and Dulles High School in Sugar Land.

The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, and Four Corners is not in the Sugar Land ETJ (it is in the Houston ETJ). Four Corners is in HCC.

==Parks and recreation==
Fort Bend County operates the Four Corners Recreation Center in Four Corners. The park includes a community center, two pavilions, playground equipment, a regulation soccer and softball field, 1/2 mile walking track, and a volleyball court.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982136" start="0" end="12" title="Four Corners, Texas" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="18" end="41" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="59" end="88" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="92" end="99" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="103" end="119" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="121" end="126" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="176" end="187" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q977838" start="496" end="508" title="Mission Bend, Texas" label="Mission Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="603" end="630" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="820" end="843" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="910" end="931" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="1398" end="1415" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1481" end="1490" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1597" end="1622" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1719" end="1725" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1939" end="1944" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1953" end="1969" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1977" end="1992" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2001" end="2006" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2014" end="2030" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2044" end="2055" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2091" end="2099" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2103" end="2109" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2262" end="2277" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3070" end="3087" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3180" end="3192" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="3422" end="3436" title="Asian American" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3439" end="3455" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="3462" end="3477" title="Latino American" label="Latino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="3530" end="3544" title="White American" label="White American"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="3625" end="3642" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328286" start="3981" end="3989" title="East End, Houston" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640843" start="3991" end="4000" title="Sunnyside, Houston" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784997" start="4010" end="4020" title="Third Ward, Houston" label="Third Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="4980" end="5006" title="municipal utility district" label="municipal utility district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="5484" end="5521" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421364" start="5612" end="5627" title="Arizona Fleming" label="Arizona Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296141" start="5643" end="5661" title="Mary Austin Holley" label="Mary Austin Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823127" start="5972" end="5990" title="Austin High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537487" start="5992" end="6015" title="George Bush High School" label="George Bush High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387103" start="6021" end="6040" title="Kempner High School" label="Kempner High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836269" start="6149" end="6167" title="Travis High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Travis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q978511" start="6171" end="6182" title="Pecan Grove, Texas" label="Pecan Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313451" start="6187" end="6205" title="Dulles High School (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Dulles High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="6209" end="6219" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="6226" end="6243" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="6263" end="6288" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="6420" end="6458" title="Wharton County Junior College District" label="Wharton County Junior College District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135886" wikidata="Q74394" url="?curid=135886" title="Fresno, Texas">
<text>Fresno is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The local population was 24,486 as of the 2020 census, an increase over the figure of 19,069 tabulated in 2010 census, and 6,603 at the 2000 census.

Fresno is located in the extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of Houston, which is the fourth largest city in the nation in population.

Fresno is bordered by Houston to the north, the suburban Fort Bend County cities of Missouri City to the west and northwest, Arcola to the south and southwest, and the Brazoria County city of Pearland to the east.

==Geography==

Fresno is located in eastern Fort Bend County at (29.526728, -95.459849). The eastern edge of Fresno is the Brazoria County line. Downtown Houston is to the north, the center of Missouri City is to the northwest, the center of Pearland is to the east, and Manvel is to the southeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Fresno CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.35%, is water.

==History==
A settler from Fresno, California, reportedly chose the name. The town is on land patented in 1880 once surrounded by cotton plantations. Fresno acquired a post office in 1910. In 1914 it had a telephone connection, a general store, a hardware store, and a population of 32. By 1933 the town had only ten inhabitants and one business. In 1936 it had three rows of dwellings on both sides of a paved highway (old Hwy 288, present day FM 521) and was served by the International-Great Northern Railroad. By 1946 the population had risen to 100, a level maintained throughout the 1960s. In 1970 the figure had increased to 120; two years later it had grown to 161. During the 1970s and 1980s the population of Fresno increased more rapidly as the area was affected by growth of Houston.

=== Growth in the 1990s and 2000s ===
With its prime location on FM 521 and north of State Highway 6 in unincorporated Fort Bend County, developers have recently built large bedroom communities over what was once forest and grazing land, and a number of first-time homeowners have made the Fresno area home.

The demographics in the Fresno area have changed dramatically since the last United States Census in 2000 due to a large increase in home building.

The area is heavily Democratic in nature, and due to population increases in the area, Fresno was switched from Fort Bend County Precinct Two jurisdiction in 2003 and is now located within Fort Bend County Precinct One, which is located primarily on the western side of Fort Bend County, some away from Fresno, which is located in far eastern Fort Bend County.

Among the largest communities in Fresno are the six neighborhoods that make up the Fort Bend MUD #23 area. Teal Run, the oldest of the neighborhoods, was originally started in the 1980s, and development stopped with the Houston oil crash in the late 1980s. Construction in the subdivision started again in 1992.

The Estates of Teal Run, located at the intersection of Raab and Sycamore Road, was started in 1999.

Teal Run North (Villages of Teal Run and Teal Run Meadows), located just off Teal Bend Boulevard, directly adjacent to both Teal Run and Teal Run Estates, was started in 2001. There are over 3,100 total homes in the Fort Bend MUD #23 area in 2006.

NewPoint Estates, located across from Teal Run on Highway 6 and Darby Road, is an area for acreage-type home sites, stables and expensive properties. Winfield Lakes, which is located on Trammel Fresno Road, was started in 2004. Andover Farms, which is located on Highway 6 and South Post Oak Road, was started in 2004. Cambridge Falls started with infrastructure additions (lights, gas, water, sewer lines, streets) in 2005.

The newly built Fort Bend Tollway has given eastern Fort Bend County residents another option of travel into the city of Houston, as the Tollway is long from Highway 6 to U.S. Highway 90 in southwest Houston, and eventually will travel all the way to Loop 610. The average commute time for those living in eastern Fort Bend County using the full route from Highway 6 to Loop 610 (when it opens) should average 20 minutes. A typical trip down FM 521, which turns into Almeda in Houston, or State Highway 288 north into the Texas Medical Center, takes at least 30–45 minutes in rush hour traffic.

A &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; article from February 25, 2007, titled &quot;Straddling urban, rural in Fresno&quot; highlights the unregulated nature of Fresno.

==Demographics==


As of the 2020 United States census, there were 24,486 people, 7,247 households, and 5,789 families residing in the CDP.

As of the census of 2000, there were 6,603 people, 1,881 households, and 1,600 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,002 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 44.36% White, 26.55% African American, 0.41% Native American, 1.08% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 25.23% from other races, and 2.35% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 49.89% of the population.

There were 1,881 households, out of which 54.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.6% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 14.9% were non-families. 12.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.51 and the average family size was 3.83.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 36.1% under the age of 18, 9.0% from 18 to 24, 34.6% from 25 to 44, 16.0% from 45 to 64, and 4.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.7 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $46,290, and the median income for a family was $48,824. Males had a median income of $32,606 versus $30,527 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $14,340. About 10.9% of families and 15.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.6% of those under age 18 and 17.0% of those age 65 or over.
The Fresno area is patrolled by the Fort Bend County Sheriff&#x27;s Office. The Teal Bend subdivision is also patrolled by contract deputies of the Precinct 1 Constable&#x27;s Office. The Fresno Volunteer Fire Department provides fire protection. Fort Bend EMS provides emergency medical services to the area.

==Government and infrastructure==
The United States Postal Service operates the Fresno Post Office at 2723 Farm to Market Road 521.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

== Education ==
School age children in Fresno attend schools in the Fort Bend Independent School District.

The community is within the East Division, controlling school board slots 5 through 7. 

School zones are as follows: Two elementary schools, Lula Belle Goodman Elementary School and Burton Elementary School are located in Fresno&#x27;s Teal Run neighborhood. A third elementary school, Rosa Parks Elementary School, is in Fresno. A small portion is zoned to Heritage Road Elementary School, outside of Fresno. Some middle school students (grades 6–8) attend Lake Olympia Middle School in Missouri City, while other Fresno students attend Billy Baines Middle School. Most of Fresno is zoned to Hightower High School in Missouri City, while some of it is zoned to Willowridge High School in Houston.

Prior to the opening of Hightower, Elkins High School served Fresno. For a period, the majority of Fresno was in the Hightower zone. Prior to 2023, portions of Fresno were zoned to Ridge Point High School in Sienna (formerly Sienna Plantation).

The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, and Fresno is not in the Sugar Land ETJ. Fresno is in HCC.

== Parks and recreation ==
Fort Bend County operates the Mustang Community Center in Fresno. The community center includes one baseball field, benches, one meeting room, two pavilions, one play area, tables, and one walking trail.

==References==

==External links==
* 1990 U.S. Census block maps (had a different shape before Pearland annexations):
** Overall of Fort Bend County
** Parcel 30
** Parcel 31
** Parcel 39
** Parcel 40
* 2000 Census block map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74394" start="0" end="6" title="Fresno, Texas" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="13" end="37" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="42" end="65" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="75" end="91" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="93" end="98" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="157" end="168" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="290" end="320" title="extra-territorial jurisdiction" label="extra-territorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="330" end="337" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="486" end="499" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q969898" start="527" end="533" title="Arcola, Texas" label="Arcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q27034" start="570" end="585" title="Brazoria County, Texas" label="Brazoria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q982550" start="594" end="602" title="Pearland, Texas" label="Pearland"/>
<link wikidata="Q981784" start="888" end="894" title="Manvel, Texas" label="Manvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="934" end="961" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="1071" end="1089" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q655994" start="1519" end="1556" title="International-Great Northern Railroad" label="International-Great Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="1926" end="1941" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="2227" end="2247" title="United States Census" label="United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2319" end="2329" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="2881" end="2898" title="1980s oil glut" label="Houston oil crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818277" start="3922" end="3937" title="U.S. Route 90 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="4002" end="4010" title="Loop 610" label="Loop 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504189" start="4240" end="4257" title="Texas State Highway 288" label="State Highway 288"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="4273" end="4293" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="4355" end="4372" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4539" end="4564" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4661" end="4667" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4887" end="4892" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4901" end="4917" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4925" end="4940" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4948" end="4953" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4961" end="4977" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4991" end="5002" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5038" end="5046" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5050" end="5056" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5211" end="5226" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6020" end="6037" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6130" end="6142" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="6566" end="6594" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949004" start="6635" end="6658" title="Farm to Market Road 521" label="Farm to Market Road 521"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6694" end="6711" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6713" end="6735" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6764" end="6780" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="6883" end="6920" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q41921" start="7210" end="7220" title="Rosa Parks" label="Rosa Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="7412" end="7425" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759722" start="7517" end="7538" title="Hightower High School" label="Hightower High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022436" start="7586" end="7609" title="Willowridge High School (Houston)" label="Willowridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364330" start="7658" end="7676" title="Elkins High School (Texas)" label="Elkins High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332692" start="7804" end="7827" title="Ridge Point High School" label="Ridge Point High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q981608" start="7831" end="7837" title="Sienna, Texas" label="Sienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="7873" end="7890" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="7910" end="7935" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="8067" end="8105" title="Wharton County Junior College District" label="Wharton County Junior College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="8631" end="8642" title="U.S. Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135887" wikidata="Q920528" url="?curid=135887" title="Fulshear, Texas">
<text>Fulshear ( ) is a city in northwestern Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, and is located on the western edge of the metropolitan area. The population was 16,856 as of the 2020 census, and according to 2023 census estimates, the city is estimated to have a population of 43,317.

==History==
===Before Texas Independence===
The history of Fulshear is closely intertwined with the historical events leading up to Texas Independence and eventual statehood within the United States of America. The small agricultural community traces its origins to the arrival of Churchill Fulshear, one of Stephen F. Austin&#x27;s original Old Three Hundred. He moved from Tennessee to Texas in the summer of 1824 with his wife, Betsy Summers, daughter, Mary, and three sons, Benjamin, Graves, and Churchill Fulshear, Jr.

As a man with considerable wealth and property, Churchill Fulshear Sr. obtained on July 16, 1824, a land grant from the Mexican government and Stephen F. Austin that allowed him and his family to settle in Austin&#x27;s colony. He established a slave plantation that raised cotton, corn, rice, pecans and livestock. Churchill Fulshear Sr. died on January 18, 1831, with the plantation ownership passed onto his youngest son, Churchill Fulshear, Jr., who added a cotton gin and flour mill which flourished well into the late 1880s.

During the Texas Revolution, Churchill Jr. and his two brothers, Graves and Benjamin, served as scouts for the Texan army as the Mexican army under the command of Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna pursued Sam Houston&#x27;s army and civilians who fled after Santa Anna&#x27;s victory at the 1836 Battle of the Alamo. The Fulshear area was on the route of both the Mexicans and the Texan soldiers. Churchill and his brothers scouted Santa Anna&#x27;s army as they crossed the Brazos River near their plantation on April 14, 1836.

According to one account, the Texan army trying to prevent Santa Anna and the Mexican army from crossing the Brazos River camped on the Fulshear plantation. They retreated when they learned that:1,500 Mexican soldiers had crossed nearby at Thompson&#x27;s Ferry, they, too, had to retreat. Randolph Foster was one of the Old 300 settlers whose plantation was in the John Foster grant that lay between what is now FM 359 and FM 723 just south of Fulshear. He was a member of Martin&#x27;s Company and, from William Harris Wharton&#x27;s account, we ascertain that the Company &quot;camped on the night of the 11th at Churchill Fulshear&#x27;s.&quot; Churchill Fulshear&#x27;s plantation lay on the north side of the Brazos River in what is now Fulshear township.

===Texas Independence to the early 20th century===
In the years after Texas Independence, Churchill Jr. expanded the plantation and commercial interests. This included a horse race track called &quot;Churchill Downs&quot; (not the same as the present-day Churchill Downs, which is in Kentucky) that he operated during the 1850s to 1870s in Pittsville, located several miles north of Fulsher. One of the most famous horses bred by Churchill Jr. was &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; (known as &quot;Old Get&quot;), which raced on numerous tracks throughout the United States and Europe. He also actively sold and purchased real estate, including the 654 acres sold to John Randon on May 10, 1844, for $4,000.

The old tombstones in the Fulshear Cemetery (previously called Union Chapel Cemetery Grounds) identify the names of some of the original pioneers who settled the Fulshear area: Andrews, Avery, Avis, Bains, Bond, Boone, Brasell, Bulwinkel, Cooper, Davis, Dozier, Edmonson, Everett, Gibson, Foster, Harris, Holmes, Hoskins, Huggins, Hunter, Jager, Kemp, Lovelace, Mayes, McElwee, McJunkin, McLeod, Miller, Nesbitt, Parker, Patton, Quinn, Rowles, Sass, Shieve, Sheriff, Simonton, Sparks, Thompson, Utley, Wade, Walker, Wilson, Wimberly, and Winner.Mention must be made of several men who made outstanding contributions to the Fulshear community and who are buried in this cemetery. They are: (l) Randolph Foster - an &quot;Old 300&quot; Settler of the area, (2) Rev. John Patton - the first Methodist Minister connected to Union Chappel, and (3) Dr. Robert Locke Harris - a Confederate War Surgeon who visited after the War in 1865 and remained to become a prominent doctor of the area.A significant historical development occurred in 1888 when Churchill Jr. granted the San Antonio and Aransas Pass (SA &amp; AP) Railroad (SA&amp;AP) the right of way through his plantation. The town of Fulshear grew around the railroad in the 1890s, a period that also saw the demise of other local communities which, like Pittsville, had rejected the SA &amp; AP Railroad the right of way on their lands.

Churchill Fulshear Jr. died in 1892. In the same year, the Southern Pacific Railroad gained ownership of the SA &amp; AP Railroad. In the decades following, the town established a public school district (1893), a Methodist church (1894) and business establishments that included a barber shop, doctor, drug store, blacksmith, saloon, hotel, and post office.

A Texas Historical Marker located in downtown Fulshear succinctly summarizes its 19th Century history:

===American Civil War, slavery and sharecropping===
While few historical records exist on the American Civil War and the people of Fulshear, there are accounts that local landowners, surgeons, and commercial business men actively supported and enrolled in the Confederate Army during the Civil War.

Two of the three active Fulshear cemeteries provide insights into the history of the non-white racial minorities. As was common practice prior to the Civil War, plantation owners like Churchill Fulshear would build separate cemeteries based on race. In addition to farm labor, &quot;Churchill Fulshear&#x27;s slaves were put to work making the bricks for the Fulshear plantation mansion, called Lake Hill.&quot; Since the mid-1800s, minority families were buried either in the Fulshear Black Cemetery or the Fulshear Spanish Cemetery, which were originally part of the Fulshear family plantation. This includes many of the black sharecroppers who worked the land after the end of slavery in the United States. A Texas Historical Marker here gives the historical information of the Black Cemetery:
After the abolition of slavery with defeat of the Confederacy, many of the emancipated slaves became sharecroppers, which meant they rented land to farm it. Many grew cotton and potatoes, and supplemented their livelihood by raising chickens, eggs, and pigs as well as helping other farmers pick beans, potatoes, and peanuts. Many of these sharecroppers are buried in the Fulshear Black Cemetery. In 1995, Fulshear Mayor Viola Randle won a class-action lawsuit to legally define the Fulshear Black Cemetery as belonging to the Fulshear Black Cemetery Association and to prevent an attempt by a local property owner to restrict more burials in the cemetery.

The Spanish Cemetery, which was often referred to as the &quot;Catholic Cemetery,&quot; is just south of the Fulshear Cemetery and has an estimated 300 grave sites.

Like elsewhere in Texas and the American South, the schools segregated based on race. The original &quot;white-only&quot; school house was built in 1893 and was expanded into a two-story building in 1912. The segregated school for Mexican students was located nearby. Two &quot;black-only&quot; school houses were built in rural areas several miles to the south and northwest of town. These Fulshear schools were merged into the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District in 1948.

===Boom and bust, 1900s–1970s===
By 1898 a thriving population of 250 residents supported eleven stores, three saloons, a school and a hotel. A block of businesses was destroyed by a fire in 1910 but the town recovered quickly and soon downtown consisted of several general stores, a drug store, a doctor&#x27;s office, a post office, a millinery shop, three churches, an undertaker&#x27;s supply store, a depot, a grist mill, a cotton gin, a blacksmith shop, a barber shop, six saloons, four schools, a boarding house, a hotel and a local telephone system. On Saturdays, when the local hands were paid, Fulshear was so busy that residents complained that the sidewalks were too crowded to walk on. The town had 300 residents and ten stores in 1929. But the population fell to 100 in 1933, around the time that the Fulshear plantation house was torn down. The Depression and a changed lifestyle caused residents to leave Fulshear. Fulshear did her share toward the war effort during WWII. Not only did she contribute men and women for the armed forces and war industries but an airplane lookout station was also manned daily on the roof of one of the brick buildings.Fulshear remained a rural agricultural town with population ranging from 300 to 700 into the 1970s.

===Incorporated city, 1977–present===
The city was incorporated in 1977. The town served as a marketing center for locally produced rice, cotton, soybeans, corn, poultry, sorghum, pecan, horses and cattle. Growth in Fulshear exploded in the 2000s, due to its proximity to Houston. &quot;Circa&quot; 2008, the community had approximately 700 residents. In October 2013, the population rose to over 5,000. By that time, traffic was commonplace while historically it had not been. In May 2017, Fulshear was listed the richest small town in Texas on MSN.com.

==Geography==

Fulshear is located in northwestern Fort Bend County at (29.6899563, -95.8996757), 60 miles inland from the Gulf of Mexico. It is located at the intersection of FM 359 and FM 1093. Downtown Houston is to the east, and Wallis is to the west. Interstate 10 at Brookshire is to the north.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.

Fulshear has an extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of . Of the general-law cities in Texas, Fulshear has one of the largest ETJs.

Sediments deposited over time by the Brazos River have created rich soil, enabling many native trees to grow in the area, including oak, cottonwood, ash, and pecan. The growing season is very long (296 days) thanks to the county&#x27;s geographical proximity to the Gulf Coast, and temperatures are mild year-round. April, October and November are the most pleasant months in Fulshear; July and August are the least comfortable.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 census, there were 16,856 people, 4,990 households, and 4,482 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 5,353 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 59.5% White, 6.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 13.6% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 4.8% from some other races and 15.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 19.7% of the population. 32.6% of residents were under the age of 18, 4.1% were under 5 years of age, and 8.9% were 65 and older.

==Government and infrastructure==
Fulshear is incorporated as a general law city. As of 2015 the taxation rate is 0.161631% per $100 valuation. Of the taxation rates in Fort Bend County, Fulshear&#x27;s is among the lowest.

Mayor Don McCoy was elected mayor in 2024 and has also served as President of the Fulshear Regional Chamber of Commerce since its inception in 2013.
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

===Postal service===
The United States Postal Service operates the Fulshear Post Office at 8055 Farm to Market Road 359 South.

===Public libraries===
Fulshear&#x27;s Bob Lutts Fulshear/Simonton Branch Library is a part of the Fort Bend County Libraries system. The branch, which opened in May 1998, was the third branch built with 1989 bond funds. The land currently occupied by the library was previously the Fort Bend County Precinct 4 headquarters. Bob Lutts, the precinct commissioner, offered the land to the library system. The Fulshear City Council asked the county to name the library after Lutts. The library is now within Precinct 3.

==Education==
===Public schools===
Fulshear is zoned in separate portions to schools in the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District (LCISD) and the Katy Independent School District (KISD).

====LCISD portion====
* The LCISD portion is served by (all in Fulshear):
**Huggins Elementary School – The elementary school is named after John Huggins who won world fame by training the first horse to win the English Derby.
**Leaman Junior High School – The junior high school is named after Dean Leaman, the owner of Allied Concrete. 
**Fulshear High School – The high school is named after the city founder, Churchill Fulshear Jr

The LCISD portion was formerly zoned to John and Randolph Foster High School.
====Katy ISD portion====
The KISD portion is served by:

* James Randolph Elementary (Fulshear)
* Campbell Elementary
* Adams Junior High School 
* Jordan High School

===Private schools===
 the British International School of Houston in Greater Katy has a school bus service to Fulshear.

===Colleges and universities===
The LCISD portion is zoned to Wharton County Junior College while the Katy ISD portion is zoned to Houston Community College.

==Transportation==
Airports near Fulshear, located in unincorporated Fort Bend County, include Cardiff Brothers Airport and Dewberry Heliport.

Area airports with commercial airline service include George Bush Intercontinental Airport and William P. Hobby Airport, both of which are in Houston.

==Arts and culture==
In 2011, the Fulshear Art Council (FAC), a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization, was created to encourage and support the arts and arts education in Fulshear and the surrounding areas. The council began showcasing local artists and their artwork at events hosted in downtown Fulshear. These showcases now occur the first Tuesday of the month and are referred to as Arts and Drafts events. FAC changed its name to Arts Fulshear in 2012, and the organization began providing art and theater classes to local youth. In 2013, Arts Fulshear added adult art classes, and it began hosting the annual Fulshear Art Walk.

In 2020, the Fulshear Historical Association (FHA), a non-profit 501c3 organization, was formed to preserve and share the history and heritage of Fulshear, Texas. It continues this work today by encouraging community collaboration through public opportunities for historical documentation and learning.

==Documentaries==
The documentary &quot;The Heart of Texas&quot; was filmed partly in Fulshear.

==References==

==Further reading==
* &quot;City of Fulshear Update&quot; (Archive), Fort Bend Economic Development Council.
*&quot;FULSHEAR, TX,&quot; &quot;Handbook of Texas Online&quot;, Ann Fears Crawford, accessed April 26, 2020.
*Fulshear Black Cemetery, Fort Bend County

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q920528" start="0" end="8" title="Fulshear, Texas" label="Fulshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="39" end="55" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="57" end="62" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="176" end="187" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="469" end="493" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="592" end="609" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350218" start="626" end="643" title="Old Three Hundred" label="Old Three Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350218" start="1015" end="1035" title="AUSTIN&amp;#x27;S COLONY" label="Austin&amp;#x27;s colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="1054" end="1070" title="Plantation" label="slave plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="1271" end="1281" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="1352" end="1368" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="1504" end="1531" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="1540" end="1551" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="1631" end="1650" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="Battle of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748049" start="2883" end="2898" title="Churchill Downs" label="Churchill Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199514" start="2968" end="2978" title="Pittsville, Texas" label="Pittsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397965" start="5076" end="5099" title="Texas Historical Marker" label="Texas Historical Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5272" end="5290" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="6376" end="6389" title="sharecroppers" label="sharecroppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="9125" end="9132" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="9532" end="9546" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435580" start="9585" end="9591" title="Farm to Market Road 359" label="FM 359"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977293" start="9596" end="9603" title="Farm to Market Road 1093" label="FM 1093"/>
<link wikidata="Q981741" start="9642" end="9648" title="Wallis, Texas" label="Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="9665" end="9678" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q929839" start="9682" end="9692" title="Brookshire, Texas" label="Brookshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9728" end="9755" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="9836" end="9865" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="10428" end="10439" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="10530" end="10548" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10627" end="10632" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10639" end="10655" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10662" end="10677" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10685" end="10690" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10697" end="10713" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="10776" end="10794" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="11112" end="11128" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11350" end="11367" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11369" end="11391" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11420" end="11436" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="11496" end="11524" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435580" start="11567" end="11590" title="Farm to Market Road 359" label="Farm to Market Road 359"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="11698" end="11724" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="12209" end="12255" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378510" start="12272" end="12304" title="Katy Independent School District" label="Katy Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097997" start="12455" end="12467" title="John Huggins (racehorse trainer)" label="John Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230310" start="12655" end="12675" title="Fulshear High School" label="Fulshear High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265438" start="12790" end="12826" title="John and Randolph Foster High School" label="John and Randolph Foster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384728" start="12976" end="12994" title="Jordan High School (Fulshear, Texas)" label="Jordan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971008" start="13023" end="13062" title="British International School of Houston" label="British International School of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="13180" end="13209" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="13249" end="13274" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="13475" end="13511" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="13516" end="13540" title="William P. Hobby Airport" label="William P. Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="13648" end="13657" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135888" wikidata="Q969235" url="?curid=135888" title="Greatwood, Sugar Land, Texas">
<text>Greatwood is a neighborhood within the city of Sugar Land in the state of Texas, United States. It was formerly a census-designated place located in Fort Bend County. The population was 11,538 at the 2010 census, up from 6,640 at the 2000 census. It was annexed into the City of Sugar Land on December 12, 2017.

==History==
American General started development of Greatwood in 1989. Newland Communities later took control of the rebuilding. By 2008, Greatwood was built-out.

In November 2016, the Sugar Land city council voted in favor of the city annexing Greatwood and New Territory by the end of 2017. The annexation was effective December 12, 2017.

==Geography==

Greatwood is located in eastern Fort Bend County at (29.553813, -95.675319). It is bounded on the north by Interstate 69/U.S. Route 59, on the west by Crabb River Road, and on the north by the city of Sugar Land. The community is south of the Brazos River. The southern edge of the CDP runs generally along Rabbs Bayou, though parts of the sections known as Greatwood Knoll and Greatwood Crossing lie south of Rabbs Bayou. Four homes along Macek Road are on the north side of the bayou across a private bridge and are not part of the master-planned community. North of Rabbs Bayou, a watercourse known as Middle Bayou runs from west to east through Greatwood to the Brazos River. Both Rabbs and Middle Bayous are channelized.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.93%, is water.

Greatwood is southwest of the city of Sugar Land. The Telfair community of Sugar Land is about northeast of Greatwood.

Greatwood has 4,167 houses in 29 neighborhoods.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 6,640 people, 2,250 households, and 2,034 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,338 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 84.29% White, 4.74% African American, 0.14% Native American, 7.50% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 1.37% from other races, and 1.90% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.57% of the population.

There were 2,250 households, out of which 50.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 86.1% were married couples living together, 2.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 9.6% were non-families. 7.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 1.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.94 and the average family size was 3.10.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 30.8% under the age of 18, 2.2% from 18 to 24, 39.6% from 25 to 44, 22.9% from 45 to 64, and 4.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.3 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $107,917, and the median income for a family was $110,818. Males had a median income of $80,260 versus $49,471 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $45,609. About 0.8% of families and 0.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 0.9% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
The City of Sugar Land Fire Station No. 6 provides fire services to the community. Homeowners in Greatwood paid for this service separately prior to the annexation. In the pre-annexation era Fort Bend County Sheriff&#x27;s Office and the county constables provided police services to Greatwood.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==
Residents are zoned to the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

Zoned schools within Greatwood include:
* Bess Campbell Elementary School
* Susanna Dickinson Elementary School

The LCISD established a middle school and a high school south of Greatwood as part of a bond program designed to serve the community. They are Reading Junior High School and George Ranch High School. Reading JHS, and George Ranch HS are the respective zoned schools. Polly Ryon Middle School, a sixth grade-only school next to George Ranch, opened in 2013.

Prior to the opening of the George Ranch schools, Greatwood was zoned to Lamar Consolidated High School.

In 2009, LCISD proposed rezoning houses containing 366 students from Campbell Elementary students to Dickinson Elementary in order to relieve Campbell Elementary. This plan also called for rezoning some areas in the Canyon Gate at Brazos neighborhood, adjacent to Greatwood, from Dickinson to Williams Elementary School. Several residents of Canyon Gate protested the rezoning. Joshua Winata of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; wrote that it resulted in a &quot;reluctant rivalry&quot; between Canyon Gate and Greatwood.

The Texas Legislature designated Wharton County Junior College as the college for the city and extraterritorial jurisdiction of Sugar Land as well as for LCISD.

==Parks and recreation==
There are 12 community parks in Greatwood. The community has playgrounds, ballfields, swimming pools, and clubhouses. There is also an assisted living facility and a privately operated public golf course.
==References==

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Annexation of Greatwood &amp; New Territory .&quot; City of Sugar Land.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="0" end="9" title="Greatwood, Sugar Land, Texas" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="47" end="57" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="74" end="79" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="114" end="137" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="149" end="165" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115803672" start="325" end="341" title="American General" label="American General"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="384" end="403" title="Newland Communities" label="Newland Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="573" end="586" title="New Territory, Texas" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q94624" start="778" end="791" title="Interstate 69" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="792" end="805" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="914" end="926" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1415" end="1442" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="1572" end="1579" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1714" end="1720" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1940" end="1945" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1953" end="1969" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1977" end="1992" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2000" end="2005" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2013" end="2029" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2042" end="2053" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2089" end="2097" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2101" end="2107" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2261" end="2276" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3068" end="3085" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3176" end="3188" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3625" end="3642" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3644" end="3666" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3695" end="3711" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="3787" end="3833" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648655" start="3912" end="3929" title="Susanna Dickinson" label="Susanna Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543705" start="4123" end="4147" title="George Ranch High School" label="George Ranch High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="4380" end="4410" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="4818" end="4835" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="4940" end="4957" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="4969" end="4998" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q315412" start="5258" end="5273" title="assisted living" label="assisted living"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="5447" end="5465" title="City of Sugar Land" label="City of Sugar Land"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135889" wikidata="Q981272" url="?curid=135889" title="Kendleton, Texas">
<text>Kendleton is a city in western Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, located southwest of Sugar Land. It was established by emancipated slaves after the Civil War. The population was 343 at the 2020 census. As of 2011, Darryl Humphrey was the mayor of the city.

==History==
What is now Kendleton was a part of William E. Kendall&#x27;s plantation. In the 1860s Kendall divided his property into various small farms and sold the plots to African Americans who were former slaves. The community of the farms became known as Kendleton.

In 1882, the New York, Texas and Mexican Railway Company established a railroad track between Rosenberg and Victoria, which passed through Kendleton. In 1884, a post office opened. In 1890, Kendleton had 25 inhabitants and a general store. In 1896, the community had two additional general stores and two churches; one was Baptist and one was Methodist. In 1900, 116 people lived in Kendleton. In 1933, Kendleton had 36 residents. By the late 1940s, Kendleton had approximately 100 residents. In the 1960s and 1970s, the population fluctuated between 150 and 200 people. In 1973, voters approved the incorporation of Kendleton as a city. After incorporation, the population increased to over 600. In 1990, Kendleton had 496 residents. In 2000, Kendleton had 466 residents. According to the &quot;Handbook of Texas&quot;, area residents estimated that about 2,200 people lived in Kendleton and surrounding areas.

==Geography==
Kendleton is located in western Fort Bend County at (29.447872, –95.999806). Its western boundary is the San Bernard River, the Fort Bend/Wharton County line.

U.S. Route 59, a four-lane divided highway, runs through the city, closely bypassing the original town center which is now served by Texas State Highway Loop 541. Farm to Market Road 2919 runs north from Kendleton to East Bernard. Via US 59 the city is southwest of Rosenberg and northeast of Hungerford.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Kendleton has a total area of , of which , or 0.45%, is water.

==Demographics==

===2020 census===
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 466 people, 178 households and 116 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 209 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 12.45% White, 78.97% African American, 0.21% Pacific Islander, 5.15% from other races, and 3.22% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 15.24% of the population.

There were 178 households, of which 27.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.8% were married couples living together, 21.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.3% were non-families. 33.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62, The average family size was 3.27.

Age distribution was 29.4% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 26.0% from 25 to 44, 23.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 77.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 72.3 males.

The median household income was $21,563, and the median family income was $35,795. Males had a median income of $34,167 versus $21,964 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,196. About 14.6% of families and 19.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.7% of those under age 18 and 28.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==

The United States Postal Service 
A post office opened in Kendleton in 1884, shortly after Kendleton&#x27;s founding. Kendleton Post Office is located at 13635 Willie Melton Boulevard. Benjamin F. Williams was the first postmaster and also served in the state legislature. In July 2011 the USPS announced that the post office may close. The nearest available post office to Kendleton is over from the city. Darryl Humphrey, the mayor of Kendleton, criticized the proposed closing. Cindy Horswell and Megan Ryan of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said that Humphrey &quot;feels like his community will be erased from society if the post office is removed, too.&quot;

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary schools===

====Public schools====

Kendleton is served by the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District (LCISD). Students are zoned to Beasley Elementary School in Beasley, Wright Junior High School (grades 6-8), and Randle High School.

Historically the Kendleton area schools served Kendleton and surrounding communities. In 1903 the school system had 202 African-American students in three schools, and 12 White students in two schools. Previously primary school students attended the Kendleton Independent School District (KISD)&#x27;s Powell Point Elementary School, located Powell Point, an unincorporated area north of Kendleton. In 1985 LCISD began serving secondary school students in the KISD territory, while primary school students went to Powell Point.

On March 25, 2010, Texas Education Agency (TEA) Commissioner Robert Scott announced that he was closing the Kendleton Independent School District. The closing is effective July 1, 2010. Kendleton ISD will be merged with Lamar Consolidated Independent School District. Commissioner Scott&#x27;s statement was, &quot;While it saddens me to close a school district, years of effort, including reconstituting its school, have failed to turn this district around. I believe students would be ill-served if Kendleton is allowed to continue to operate. The Texas Education Agency pledges to work with the citizens of Kendleton and Lamar Consolidated to make this transition as smooth as possible.&quot; As a result of the closure, students at Powell Point were rezoned to Beasley and Wessendorf. LCISD, for a two-year period, was to operate its head start program at Powell Point. In July 2011 mayor Darryl Humphrey said that his community was still recovering from the closing of Powell Point Elementary.

Previously Kendleton was zoned to Wessendorff Middle School, Lamar Junior High School, and Lamar Consolidated High School of LCISD. Wright and Randle opened in 2021.

===Colleges and universities===

The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

Bay Ridge Christian College was located north of Kendleton in an unincorporated section of Fort Bend County.

==Parks and recreation==
Fort Bend County owns and operates the Bates M. Allen Park, located just outside the city limits of Kendleton. The park includes a canoe ramp, a fishing pier, grills, a historical site, a lake, an observation deck, two pavilions, a play area, a sand volleyball court, tables, toilet facilities, walking trails and wetlands.

In 2023 the county stated it would add a memorial to African-American settlements, which would mean much of the park would be revamped. The cost would be $4,000,000.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

* Kendleton, Texas – Handbook of Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981272" start="0" end="9" title="Kendleton, Texas" label="Kendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="31" end="47" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="49" end="54" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="92" end="102" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="155" end="164" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="196" end="207" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="339" end="349" title="plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="440" end="457" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="474" end="480" title="slavery in the United States" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829585" start="550" end="593" title="New York, Texas and Mexican Railway Company" label="New York, Texas and Mexican Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="631" end="640" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q784496" start="645" end="653" title="Victoria, Texas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244860" start="762" end="775" title="general store" label="general store"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="860" end="867" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="880" end="889" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="1333" end="1350" title="Handbook of Texas" label="Handbook of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413417" start="1569" end="1586" title="San Bernard River" label="San Bernard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q483916" start="1602" end="1616" title="Wharton County, Texas" label="Wharton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="1624" end="1637" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113735" start="1757" end="1785" title="Texas State Highway Loop 541" label="Texas State Highway Loop 541"/>
<link wikidata="Q25215609" start="1787" end="1811" title="Farm to Market Road 2919" label="Farm to Market Road 2919"/>
<link wikidata="Q974279" start="1841" end="1853" title="East Bernard, Texas" label="East Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1890" end="1899" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q982118" start="1917" end="1927" title="Hungerford, Texas" label="Hungerford"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1947" end="1974" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2118" end="2124" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2329" end="2334" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2343" end="2359" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2367" end="2383" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2396" end="2407" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2443" end="2451" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2455" end="2461" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2610" end="2625" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3219" end="3242" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3367" end="3384" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3478" end="3490" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="3605" end="3633" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975439" start="3786" end="3806" title="Benjamin Franklin Williams" label="Benjamin F. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="4125" end="4142" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4303" end="4320" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4322" end="4344" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4373" end="4389" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="4527" end="4573" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q980852" start="4634" end="4641" title="Beasley, Texas" label="Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434306" start="4687" end="4705" title="Randle High School" label="Randle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388983" start="4958" end="4995" title="Kendleton Independent School District" label="Kendleton Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236089" start="5050" end="5062" title="Powell Point, Texas" label="Powell Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="5256" end="5278" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="6328" end="6358" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="6483" end="6512" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874074" start="6515" end="6542" title="Bay Ridge Christian College" label="Bay Ridge Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519353" start="7210" end="7227" title="Handbook of Texas" label="Handbook of Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135890" wikidata="Q981413" url="?curid=135890" title="Meadows Place, Texas">
<text>Meadows Place is a city located in Fort Bend County in the U.S. state of Texas within the metropolitan area. As of the 2020 U.S. Census, the city population was 4,767.

Meadows Place was part of Stafford&#x27;s extraterritorial jurisdiction prior to incorporation on November 14, 1983. Meadows Place was incorporated as Meadows, but this was changed to &quot;Meadows Place&quot; in 1997 due to postal conflicts with a city of a similar name, Meadow, Texas.

==History==

Meadows Place began as the Meadows Municipal Utility District, which had been established in 1967.The Meadows Place development farmland was purchased by Ayrshire Corporation. In 1968, the first houses were constructed by Ayrshire Corporation, a second-generation family-owned company founded in 1946. Ayrshire has developed mix use property throughout the United States and Australia. The Meadows place development is representative of their development capabilities. Meadows incorporated on November 14, 1983, to avoid being annexed by Houston. In 1990, the city had 4,606 residents. The population in 2010 was listed as 4,660 residents. In June 2012, Meadows Place received an award from Keep Texas Beautiful for a water reuse project that culminated in a beautiful new lake in the center of the city which, in addition to recreation, is used for irrigation of most of the city&#x27;s parks land and baseball complex. So dramatic was the transformation, Meadows Place was asked to make a poster presentation at the 28th annual Water ReUse Symposium in Denver, Colorado. The presentation—&quot;No City is Too Small to Receive Benefits from Water Reuse&quot;—met with such acclaim they were invited to share their story at an international water convention. Hundreds of people from the US, Canada, Mexico, even Sweden and Norway, have come to see how a small city with limited resources could bring such a project to fruition.

==Geography==
Meadows Place is located along the northeast border of Fort Bend County at (29.649599, –95.588747). It is bordered by the city of Sugar Land to the west, Stafford to the south, and Houston to the northeast in Harris County. Downtown Houston is to the northeast via Interstate 69, the Southwest Freeway.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

The city is located between West Bellfort Avenue, U.S. Route 59/I-69, Dairy Ashford Road, and West Airport Boulevard. Meadows Place is southwest of Houston&#x27;s Beltway 8.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,767 people, 1,775 households, and 1,274 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 4,912 people, 1,598 households, and 1,358 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,616 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 71.82% White, 6.09% African American, 0.22% Native American, 15.72% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 3.24% from other races, and 2.81% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11.46% of the population.

There were 1,598 households, out of which 43.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.9% were married couples living together, 10.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 15.0% were non-families. 12.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.01 and the average family size was 3.28.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 27.9% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 26.5% from 25 to 44, 29.7% from 45 to 64, and 9.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $73,180, and the median income for a family was $75,708. Males had a median income of $51,173 versus $35,929 for females. The per capita income for the city was $27,134. About 1.7% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.8% of those under age 18 and 14.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

Meadows Place has a mayor-alderman form of government. The city council consists of the mayor and five aldermen.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.


==Infrastructure==

===Water System===
The City of Meadows Place operates its own water system consisting of three water wells around the city. 

==Education==

===Primary and secondary schools===

Meadows Place residents are within the Fort Bend Independent School District. Children attend Meadows Elementary School (located in the city of Meadows Place), Dulles Middle School (in Sugar Land), and Dulles High School (also in Sugar Land). Dulles Junior and Dulles High School were already built as Meadows Place opened. Meadows Elementary was occupied in August 1973. Dulles Junior High School reopened and was reoccupied in 1983.

In 2018 the FBISD administration proposed closing Meadows Elementary. In response parents from the community advocated for keeping the school open. An area resident quoted by KTRK-TV, stated that the members of the community believed that if Meadows Elementary was shut down, their property values would decline.

Sugar Grove Christian School, a preschool and elementary school, is in Meadows Place. It was founded in 1969, as the Sharpstown Christian School.

===Colleges and universities===
Community college facilities in proximity to Meadows Place are Houston Community College facilities and the Wharton County Junior College (HCC) facilities. Colleges and universities in proximity to Meadows Place include Houston Baptist University and the University of Houston Sugar Land campus.

The Texas Legislature specifies that the HCC boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, Meadows Place is in neither location. Meadows Place is in HCC.

==Parks and recreation==
Meadows Place has six parks within the city: Mark McGrath Municipal Park, Jim McDonald Park, Brighton Lane Park, Meadow Glen Park, Meadow Valley Park, and Kangaroo Court Park. 

The city also has a Discovery &amp; Nature Center, that offers up-close experiences with several different species of animals. The center is open to residents and non-residents for a fee. It can also be rented for birthday parties and special occasions.

In addition, the city has a community center, community swimming pool, tennis courts, pickleball courts, baseball fields, splash pad, walking trails, and a running path. Both the community center and swimming pool are available for rental.

In 2011, the city built a lake complex in the middle of their park using Type 1 reclaimed water. This facility is used for fishing, hiking, and birdwatching year round. The lake is used as source of water for irrigation of city parks, saving the city money on subsidence fees. This project was recognized as the number two top environmental project in the State of Texas by Keep Texas Beautiful in 2012 and has had visitors from around the country.

==Gallery==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Meadows Place official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981413" start="0" end="13" title="Meadows Place, Texas" label="Meadows Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="35" end="51" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="59" end="69" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="73" end="78" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="124" end="135" title="U.S. Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="195" end="203" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="211" end="240" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q981413" start="320" end="327" title="Meadows Place, Texas" label="Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q972571" start="442" end="455" title="Meadow, Texas" label="Meadow, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1009" end="1016" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267830" start="1189" end="1200" title="water reuse" label="water reuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1526" end="1532" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="2044" end="2054" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="2068" end="2076" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2095" end="2102" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676" start="2123" end="2136" title="Harris County, Texas" label="Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446872" start="2179" end="2192" title="Interstate 69 in Texas" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2235" end="2262" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="2356" end="2369" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505727" start="2469" end="2478" title="Beltway 8" label="Beltway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2509" end="2534" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2631" end="2637" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2859" end="2864" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2872" end="2888" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2896" end="2911" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2920" end="2925" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2933" end="2949" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2962" end="2973" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3009" end="3017" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3021" end="3027" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3182" end="3197" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3992" end="4009" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4101" end="4113" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="4230" end="4238" title="alderman" label="alderman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4351" end="4368" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4370" end="4392" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4421" end="4437" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="4710" end="4747" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="4856" end="4866" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313451" start="4873" end="4891" title="Dulles High School (Sugar Land)" label="Dulles High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q381717" start="5282" end="5289" title="KTRK-TV" label="KTRK-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490440" start="5538" end="5548" title="Sharpstown" label="Sharpstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="5663" end="5688" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="5708" end="5737" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916417" start="5820" end="5846" title="Houston Baptist University" label="Houston Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="5855" end="5876" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="5901" end="5918" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135891" wikidata="Q980838" url="?curid=135891" title="Needville, Texas">
<text>Needville is a city in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. It is within the metropolitan area. The population was 3,089 at the 2020 census.

==History==

August Schendel founded the town of Schendelville in 1891 that contained his house, a store and a cotton gin. In 1894, he applied for a post office using the name &quot;Needmore&quot; as a joke, since they always needed more of everything. Due to Needmore, Texas already existing, the post office amended the name to &quot;Needville&quot;.

By 1898, Schendel had officially platted a town and begun selling lots. A school had been constructed in 1897. By 1903, Needville had a school for white children with one teacher and 97 pupils, and one school for black children with one teacher and 45 pupils. The Round Hall building had been built about 1910 for dances and other social activities, and remained in this service until the 1950s.

Needville had three general stores, two cotton gins, a movie theater, and a population of 100 in 1914. Telephone service arrived in 1916. In 1918, the Needville State Bank opened and the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway built a line through the town. In 1920, Needville reported having a population of 500. It also reported having 12 general stores, four churches, four gins, and an electric power generation plant. 

From 1927 through 1931, the Fort Bend county fair was held in Needville. It was then discontinued because of the Great Depression, which caused the fair to run heavily into debt. Natural gas was piped into town in 1929. FM 36 was completed in 1932, allowing all-weather access to Needville. Thereafter, a local school bus transported high school students to schools in Richmond and Rosenberg. Needville formed its own Independent School District (I.S.D.) in 1946 and opened its own high school in 1948. Needville I.S.D. opened a new elementary school in 1960. Integration of black and white schools was completed in 1966.

==Geography==

Needville is located in southern Fort Bend County at (29.398232, –95.839880). Texas State Highway 36 passes through the city, leading north to Rosenberg and southeast to West Columbia. Downtown Houston is to the northeast. Farm to Market Road 360 starts at SH 36 and heads northwest to Beasley, while Farm to Market Road 1236 goes southwest, then southeastward. Needville-Fairchilds Road connects with the community of Fairchilds to the northeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Needville has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,089 people, 1,245 households, and 929 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,609 people, 926 households, and 688 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 979 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 74.09% White, 13.19% African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 10.23% from other races, and 2.11% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 23.96% of the population.

The median income for a household in the city was $41,202, and the median income for a family was $48,824. Males had a median income of $35,200 versus $26,389 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,802. About 8.9% of families and 11.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.8% of those under age 18 and 18.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
The United States Postal Service Needville Post Office is located at 3000 School Street.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital with which the county contracts.

EMS is provided through Fort Bend County, and has one station that houses Squad 601, located at 3743 School St.

Fire is provided through Needville Fire Department, contracted by Fort Bend ESD #9. Needville Fire Station 1 is located at 3323 Richmond St.

==Events==

* The Needville Harvest Festival, founded in 1983, is held every October. The festival is organized by NHF, Inc. to draw visitors to Needville in the hope of stimulating local business, to raise funds for community development, and to fund annual scholarships for local high school students. 2006 performance by Aaron Watson.
* The Needville Citywide Garage Sale is held in March and September each year. There is no website as the participants are homeowners and businesses. Information with a map is normally available at Kinfolks Antiques at (979) 793-7200. Dates can be found on the Chamber of Commerce calendar of events.

==Education==

Needville is zoned to schools in the Needville Independent School District. High school students go to Needville High School. Needville&#x27;s Albert George Branch Library is a part of the Fort Bend County Libraries system.

Some addresses not in Needville with &quot;Needville, TX&quot; addresses are zoned to B.F. Terry High School in Rosenberg, a part of Lamar CISD.

The designated community college for Needville ISD (as well as LCISD) is Wharton County Junior College.

===Public libraries===
Albert George Branch Library of Fort Bend County Libraries is in Needville. The library, which opened in November 1974, was named after Fort Bend County philanthropist Albert George. The Needville Chamber of Commerce and the Needville Lion&#x27;s Club donated the land for the library. Originally the library, with its first portion designed by Wylie W. Vale &amp; Associates, had of space. In 1997 the library system used bond funds to expand and renovate the library; the library gained a new entrance, a meeting room, and new toilet facilities. The library now has of space.

==Parks and recreation==
Fort Bend County operates the Barbara Jordan Park in Needville.

Nearby:
* George Ranch Historical Park, educational center
* Brazos Bend State Park and George Observatory

==Business==
==Notable people==
*Dennis Gaubatz, NFL linebacker
*Earnest Jackson, NFL running back

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Needville official website
* Needville Area Chamber of Commerce
* George Ranch Historical Park photos, hosted by The Portal to Texas History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980838" start="0" end="9" title="Needville, Texas" label="Needville"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="23" end="39" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="41" end="46" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="131" end="142" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986668" start="405" end="420" title="Needmore, Texas (disambiguation)" label="Needmore, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927632" start="1083" end="1128" title="Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway" label="Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="1696" end="1704" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1709" end="1718" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503702" start="2043" end="2065" title="Texas State Highway 36" label="Texas State Highway 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="2108" end="2117" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q979926" start="2135" end="2148" title="West Columbia, Texas" label="West Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2159" end="2166" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949006" start="2188" end="2211" title="Farm to Market Road 360" label="Farm to Market Road 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q980852" start="2251" end="2258" title="Beasley, Texas" label="Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617128" start="2266" end="2290" title="Farm to Market Road 1236" label="Farm to Market Road 1236"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140781" start="2384" end="2394" title="Fairchilds, Texas" label="Fairchilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2431" end="2458" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2543" end="2568" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2663" end="2669" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2885" end="2890" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2899" end="2915" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2923" end="2938" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2946" end="2951" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2965" end="2976" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3012" end="3020" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3024" end="3030" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3251" end="3268" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3361" end="3373" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="3487" end="3515" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986678" start="4674" end="4711" title="Needville Independent School District" label="Needville Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711120" start="4740" end="4761" title="Needville High School" label="Needville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="4826" end="4852" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833984" start="4948" end="4970" title="B.F. Terry High School" label="B.F. Terry High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="4974" end="4983" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="4995" end="5005" title="Lamar CISD" label="Lamar CISD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="5081" end="5110" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="5168" end="5194" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13504955" start="5866" end="5911" title="Brazos Bend State Park" label="Brazos Bend State Park and George Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q895826" start="5946" end="5960" title="Dennis Gaubatz" label="Dennis Gaubatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326934" start="5978" end="5993" title="Earnest Jackson" label="Earnest Jackson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135892" wikidata="Q979806" url="?curid=135892" title="New Territory, Sugar Land, Texas">
<text>New Territory is a master-planned community within the city of Sugar Land, Texas, United States. It was formerly a census-designated place (CDP) and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Sugar Land, in unincorporated Fort Bend County. It was annexed into Sugar Land on December 12, 2017. The population was 15,186 at the 2010 census, up from 13,861 at the 2000 census.

==History==
New Territory opened in 1989. In November 2016 the Sugar Land city council voted in favor of the city annexing New Territory, along with Greatwood, by the end of 2017. The annexation was effective December 12, 2017.

==Geography==

New Territory is located in eastern Fort Bend County at (29.594657, -95.677561). It is bordered to the east and south by the city limits of Sugar Land. The Brazos River forms part of the southern boundary of the CDP. U.S. Route 90 forms the northern edge of the CDP.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the New Territory CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 2.96%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 13,861 people, 3,708 households, and 3,422 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 2,746.1 person per square mile (1,059.8/km2). There were 3,805 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 57.56% White, 10.02% African American, 0.22% Native American, 26.07% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 3.14% from other races, and 2.94% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.35% of the population.

There were 3,708 households, out of which 67.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 85.9% were married couples living together, 4.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 7.7% were non-families. 6.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 0.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.47 and the average family size was 3.63.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 34.8% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 39.3% from 25 to 44, 16.3% from 45 to 64, and 2.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 117.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 120.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $93,972, and the median income for a family was $96,863. Males had a median income of $71,250 versus $46,537 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $29,341. About 1.3% of families and 2.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.1% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 o

==Culture==
New Territory has a club with a gymnasium and an exercise room.

A large portion of the independent comedy &quot;The Legend of Action Man&quot; was shot in and around New Territory. It was where the creators of Dingoman productions (Andy Young, Derek Papa &amp; James McEnelly) lived and met before they formed the sketch group and made their feature film.

==Government and infrastructure==
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==

New Territory is within the Fort Bend Independent School District. The community is within the West Division, controlling school board slots 1 through 3.

Some of New Territory is zoned to Walker Station Elementary School, and some is zoned to Brazos Bend Elementary School.

All of New Territory is zoned to Sartartia Middle School.

Prior to 2001, Garcia Middle School served all of New Territory.

Some of New Territory is zoned to Austin High School, other parts are zoned to Travis High School. Prior to 2006 all territory was zoned to Austin; in the fall of that year Travis opened. At the time of the rezoning, the present 11th and 12th graders remained at Austin, while 9th and 10th graders were immediately rezoned; the Travis zoning was phased in each year.

The Texas Legislature designated Wharton County Junior College as the college for the city and extraterritorial jurisdiction of Sugar Land.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* New Territory Residential Community Association
* &quot;Annexation of Greatwood &amp; New Territory .&quot; City of Sugar Land.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="0" end="13" title="New Territory, Sugar Land, Texas" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="19" end="43" title="master-planned community" label="master-planned community"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="63" end="73" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="75" end="80" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="115" end="138" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="156" end="185" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="204" end="218" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="219" end="235" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="521" end="530" title="Greatwood, Texas" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="772" end="784" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818277" start="833" end="846" title="U.S. Route 90 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="901" end="928" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1045" end="1051" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1149" end="1167" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1316" end="1321" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1330" end="1346" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1354" end="1369" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1378" end="1383" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1391" end="1407" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1420" end="1431" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1467" end="1475" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1479" end="1485" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1639" end="1654" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2446" end="2463" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2554" end="2566" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3070" end="3087" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3089" end="3111" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3140" end="3156" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="3234" end="3271" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="3515" end="3538" title="Sartartia Middle School" label="Sartartia Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823127" start="3641" end="3659" title="Austin High School (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836269" start="3686" end="3704" title="Travis High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Travis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="3979" end="3996" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="4008" end="4037" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="4284" end="4302" title="City of Sugar Land" label="City of Sugar Land"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135893" wikidata="Q981681" url="?curid=135893" title="Orchard, Texas">
<text>Orchard is a city in western Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. The community is located along State Highway 36 (SH 36) and the BNSF Railway between Rosenberg in Fort Bend County and Wallis in Austin County. The population was 313 at the 2020 census, down from 352 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Orchard is located at (29.602015, –95.968821). Most of the city is north of the BNSF Railway tracks, with its streets laid out north-south and east-west. Missouri Street is the major north-south artery, intersecting SH 36 and crossing the railroad. Missouri Street goes north as far as Brazos Elementary School. Kibler Road is an important east-west artery on which the town center is situated. Kibler Road starts at FM 1489 to the west of Orchard and ends at Long Lane to the east. FM 1489 intersects SH 36 to the west and goes south toward Tavener and north toward Simonton. Wallis is to the northwest on SH 36, while Rosenberg is to the southeast on the same highway.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 408 people, 147 households, and 110 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 156 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 76.47% White, 8.09% African American, 1.47% Native American, 12.50% from other races, and 1.47% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any national origin were 22.55% of the population.

There were 147 households, out of which 39.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.2% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.5% were non-families. 21.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.78 and the average family size was 3.26.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 28.4% under the age of 18, 11.5% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 20.1% from 45 to 64, and 8.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $47,000, and the median income for a family was $59,063. Males had a median income of $40,089 versus $27,396 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,329. About 7.3% of families and 8.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.8% of those under age 18 and 17.1% of those age 65 or over.

== Government and infrastructure ==
The United States Postal Service operates the Orchard Post Office at 218 Missouri Street.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==
Orchard is served by the Brazos Independent School District (formerly Wallis-Orchard Independent School District). Students attend Brazos Elementary School (in the Orchard city limits), Brazos Middle School, and Brazos High School.

The designated community college for Brazos ISD is Wharton County Junior College (the legislation still states &quot;Wallis-Orchard&quot;).

==References==
==External links==

* City of Orchard official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981681" start="0" end="7" title="Orchard, Texas" label="Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="29" end="45" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="47" end="52" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="80" end="106" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503702" start="157" end="173" title="Texas State Highway 36" label="State Highway 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="190" end="202" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="211" end="220" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q981741" start="245" end="251" title="Wallis, Texas" label="Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108386" start="255" end="268" title="Austin County, Texas" label="Austin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="300" end="311" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="334" end="345" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379501" start="780" end="787" title="Farm to Market Road 1489" label="FM 1489"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689051" start="905" end="912" title="Tavener, Texas" label="Tavener"/>
<link wikidata="Q979525" start="930" end="938" title="Simonton, Texas" label="Simonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1052" end="1079" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1151" end="1157" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1371" end="1376" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1384" end="1400" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1408" end="1423" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1437" end="1448" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1484" end="1492" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1496" end="1502" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1666" end="1681" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2478" end="2495" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2587" end="2599" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="2714" end="2742" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2834" end="2851" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2853" end="2875" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2904" end="2920" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710356" start="2994" end="3028" title="Brazos Independent School District" label="Brazos Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959010" start="3181" end="3199" title="Brazos High School (Wallis, Texas)" label="Brazos High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="3253" end="3282" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135894" wikidata="Q978511" url="?curid=135894" title="Pecan Grove, Texas">
<text>Pecan Grove is a census-designated place and master-planned community within the extraterritorial jurisdictions of Houston and Richmond in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The population was 22,782 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Pecan Grove is located northeast of the center of Fort Bend County at (29.626060, -95.731591). It is bordered to the southwest by the Brazos River. The city limits of Richmond forms a convoluted pattern in the southern part of the CDP, and the northern part is bordered by an exclave of the city of Houston. Downtown Richmond is southwest of the center of Pecan Grove, and downtown Houston is to the northeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Pecan Grove CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.69%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 22,782 people, 6,515 households, and 5,485 families residing in the CDP.

As of the census of 2000, there were 13,551 people, 4,516 households, and 3,847 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 4,662 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 91.29% White, 3.29% African American, 0.19% Native American, 1.34% Asian, 2.51% from other races, and 1.38% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 9.08% of the population.

There were 4,516 households, out of which 52.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 76.3% were married couples living together, 7.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 14.8% were non-families. 12.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.00 and the average family size was 3.29.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 33.4% under the age of 18, 5.3% from 18 to 24, 31.9% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 4.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $83,515, and the median income for a family was $91,059. Males had a median income of $62,213 versus $37,658 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $33,816. About 0.6% of families and 1.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 0.5% of those under age 18 and 2.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
Pecan Grove Volunteer Fire Station #1 is in the CDP, and Pecan Grove Volunteer Fire Station #2 is adjacent to the CDP. Additionally, the City of Richmond maintains its Fire Station #3 adjacent to the CDP.

A portion of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice Jester State Prison Farm property is located in Pecan Grove.

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==
===Fort Bend Independent School District===

Most of the students who live in Pecan Grove are zoned to Fort Bend Independent School District (FBISD) schools. The Fort Bend ISD attendance zones for Pecan Grove are:
* Pecan Grove Elementary (Grades PK-5), located in Pecan Grove
* Oakland Elementary School (Grades PK-5) - It was scheduled to open in 2006–2007, and it took territory previously assigned to Pecan Grove Elementary.
* Neill Elementary (Grades PK-5), located adjacent to Travis in Pecan Grove

Secondary schools:
* James Bowie Middle School (Grades 6–8), located in Pecan Grove
* Travis High School (Grades 9–12), located in Pecan Grove

Previously students were divided between Garcia and Hodges Bend middle schools. Bowie Middle School opened in 2007.

Prior to fall 2006 students were divided between Austin High School and George Bush High School. At the time of the rezoning, the present 11th and 12th graders remained at Austin and Bush, while 9th and 10th graders were immediately rezoned; the Travis zoning was phased in each year. Neill opened in 2017, taking territory from Oakland ES and Pecan Grove ES.

===Lamar Consolidated Independent School District===
Other students who live in Pecan Grove area are zoned to Lamar Consolidated Independent School District (LCISD) Schools.

Students zoned to Austin Elementary use the following feeder pattern:
* Austin Elementary (Grades PK-5) - In the CDP
* Wessendorff Middle School (Grade 6)
* Lamar Junior High (Grades 7–8)
* Lamar Consolidated High School (Grades 9–12)
Students zoned to Frost Elementary use the following feeder pattern:
* Frost Elementary (Grades PK-5) - In the CDP
* Wertheimer Middle School (Grade 6)
* Briscoe Junior High (Grades 7–8)
* Foster High School (Grades 9–12)

Foster previously served all of LCISD Pecan Grove.

===Community colleges===
The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, and FBISD Pecan Grove is not in the Sugar Land ETJ. FBISD Pecan Grove is in HCC.

==Notable people==
*W. A. Criswell, two-term president of the Southern Baptist Convention
*Frank Beard, drummer and songwriter for the rock band ZZ Top
==References==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978511" start="0" end="11" title="Pecan Grove, Texas" label="Pecan Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="17" end="40" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="45" end="69" title="master-planned community" label="master-planned community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="81" end="110" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="115" end="122" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="127" end="135" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="139" end="155" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="157" end="162" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="212" end="223" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="375" end="387" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="517" end="524" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="540" end="547" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="614" end="630" title="downtown Houston" label="downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="670" end="697" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="813" end="838" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="935" end="941" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1162" end="1167" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1175" end="1191" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1199" end="1214" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1222" end="1227" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1240" end="1251" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1287" end="1295" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1299" end="1305" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1459" end="1474" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2266" end="2283" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2374" end="2386" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="2631" end="2647" title="Richmond, Texas" label="City of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="2717" end="2753" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187963" start="2754" end="2778" title="Jester State Prison Farm" label="Jester State Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2849" end="2866" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2868" end="2890" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2919" end="2935" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="3087" end="3124" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836269" start="3576" end="3594" title="Travis High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Travis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823127" start="3800" end="3818" title="Austin High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537487" start="3823" end="3846" title="George Bush High School" label="George Bush High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="4222" end="4268" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="4477" end="4507" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265438" start="4711" end="4729" title="Foster High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Foster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="4868" end="4897" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="4904" end="4921" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="4941" end="4966" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945281" start="5430" end="5444" title="W. A. Criswell" label="W. A. Criswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="5472" end="5499" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q716243" start="5501" end="5512" title="Frank Beard (musician)" label="Frank Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="5555" end="5561" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135895" wikidata="Q2458940" url="?curid=135895" title="Pleak, Texas">
<text>Pleak is a village in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. It is on Texas State Highway 36, south of Rosenberg. Its population was 971 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Pleak is south of the center of Fort Bend County, at 29°29&#x27;3&quot; North, 95°48&#x27;36&quot; West (29.484144, –95.810087). From Pleak, Texas Highway 36 leads north to the center of Rosenberg and south to Needville.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Pleak has a total area of , of which , or 1.40%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the 2000 census, 947 people, 318 households and 269 families resided in the village. The population density was . There were 325 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 80.04% White, 4.33% African American, 0.32% Native American, 0.32% Asian, 0.00% Pacific Islander, 13.94% from other races, and 1.06% from two or more races. 29.25% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 318 households, out of which 38.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.1% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 15.1% were non-families. 12.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.98 and the average family size was 3.22.

In the village, the population was spread out, with 27.1% under the age of 18, 8.3% from 18 to 24, 27.9% from 25 to 44, 28.2% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.0 males.

The median income for a household in the village was $52,188, and the median income for a family was $56,364. Males had a median income of $35,313 versus $25,625 for females. The per capita income for the village was $20,773. 4.5% of the population and 3.4% of families were below the poverty line. 6.0% of those under the age of 18 and 0.0% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

==Government and infrastructure==
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==
Most of Pleak is a part of the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District while a small portion is in the Needville Independent School District.

The LCISD portion is zoned to Wright Junior High School (grades 6–8), and Randle High School. The LCISD portion was zoned to Meyer Elementary, Navarro Middle School, George Junior High, and B.F. Terry High School. Wright and Randle opened in 2021.

The Needville portion is zoned to Needville High School.

==Gallery==
==References==

==External links==
*Village of Pleak official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2458940" start="0" end="5" title="Pleak, Texas" label="Pleak"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="22" end="38" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="40" end="45" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="73" end="99" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503702" start="128" end="150" title="Texas State Highway 36" label="Texas State Highway 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="161" end="170" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="202" end="213" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q980838" start="441" end="450" title="Needville, Texas" label="Needville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="470" end="497" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="592" end="598" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="797" end="802" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="810" end="826" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="834" end="849" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="857" end="862" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="870" end="886" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="900" end="911" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="977" end="985" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="989" end="995" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1118" end="1133" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1934" end="1951" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2040" end="2052" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2223" end="2240" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2242" end="2264" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2293" end="2309" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="2389" end="2435" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986678" start="2468" end="2505" title="Needville Independent School District" label="Needville Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434306" start="2582" end="2600" title="Randle High School" label="Randle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833984" start="2698" end="2720" title="B.F. Terry High School" label="B.F. Terry High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711120" start="2791" end="2812" title="Needville High School" label="Needville High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135896" wikidata="Q961272" url="?curid=135896" title="Richmond, Texas">
<text>Richmond is a suburb of Houston and the county seat of Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. The city is located within the metropolitan area. As of the 2020 U.S. census, the city population was 11,627. It is home to the founders of the former company Oswego, Nick Mide and Trace.

==History==
In 1822, a group of Austin&#x27;s colonists went up the Brazos River, stopping near present-day Richmond where they built a fort called &quot;Fort Bend&quot;. Named after Richmond, England, the town was among the 19 cities first incorporated by the short-lived Republic of Texas, in 1837. Early residents of the city include many prominent figures in Texas lore such as Jane Long, Deaf Smith, and Mirabeau Lamar, who are all buried in Richmond, as is Walter Moses Burton, the nation&#x27;s first Black elected sheriff. On August 16, 1889, the town was the site of the &quot;Battle of Richmond&quot;, an armed fight culminating the Jaybird–Woodpecker War, a violent feud over post-Reconstruction political control of Fort Bend County. The mayor from 1949 until his death in 2012 was Hilmar Moore.

Historically Richmond had government agencies and nonprofit organizations, while most of the area private businesses were located in Rosenberg.

==Geography==
Richmond is located near the center of Fort Bend County. Most of the city is situated on the southwest side of the Brazos River, with a small portion (Richmond Landing) on the northeast side, connected by US Highway 90A. Richmond is bordered to the southwest by the city of Rosenberg. US 90A leads east to Sugar Land and west through Rosenberg to East Bernard. Downtown Houston is to the northeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Richmond has a total area of , of which are land and , or 8.22%, is covered by water.

In 2003, Jeannie Kever of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said, &quot;Some of the old buildings have been reincarnated as shops or law offices. But in other ways, life in Richmond isn&#x27;t so different from that in the big city, with its Wal-Mart and fast-food joints, check-cashing businesses and strip-center sprawl.&quot; several strip malls are along U.S. Route 59 south of town. During the same year, the community included tack stores, two-lane blacktop roads, and horse ranches. John P. Lopez of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said, &quot;Richmond is a city of contradiction and transition. It&#x27;s as if the place is not sure if it wants to be a part of Houston&#x27;s bustle or remain a slow-paced farm and ranch town. It tries to be both,&quot; and, &quot;It is part Acres Homes, part Fort Bend County Fair.&quot;

===Communities===
The wealthiest neighborhood, as of 2003, in Richmond is Hillcrest. Winston Terrace, another neighborhood, had its first houses built in 1940. Construction increased around the end of World War II. Most of the houses were built between 1940 and 1965. Jeannie Kever of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said that Winston Terrace is &quot;a swath of mid-20th-century America, with sweeping oak trees and colorful brick or wood bungalows, named for the descendants of one of the region&#x27;s most illustrious pioneers.&quot;

&quot;Mud Alley&quot; as of 1985 had older bars and strip clubs. Mud Alley is located in an area which, in 1985, housed most of the African Americans in Richmond. As of 1993 many police raids for drugs occurred in &quot;Mud Alley&quot;. &quot;Mud Alley&quot; was known by several other nicknames, including &quot;Little Boomtown&quot;. Historically, the area had a lot of recreational drugs.

===Unincorporated areas of Richmond===
The proximity to affordable and cheap land located off of the Grand Parkway (SH 99) and the Westpark tollway has allowed for multiple master planned communities to be built and take shape. These communities in the 77406 and 77407 zip codes have Richmond addresses, but are not provided any city services since they are unincorporated and in the Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city of Houston. The respective MUD districts of the neighborhoods provide water, sewer and fire services. Fort Bend County Sheriffs department and local constables provide police support.

These communities include: Pecan Grove, Texas, The lakes of Bella Terra, Long Meadow Farms, Lakemont, Aliana, Grand Mission, Grand Mission Estates, Twin Oaks Village, Fieldstone, Mission Trace, Mission Sierra, Waterside Estates, Candela, Deer Run Meadows, McCrary Meadows, Mandola Farms, and Harvest Green, among others. Multiple mass merchandisers and restaurants have opened locations along the grand parkway and this area continues to grow by leaps and bounds. Estimates are there could be well over 25,000 homes and 10,000 apartment units with a population above 85,000 plus people. 

This area of unincorporated Richmond, in Fort Bend County, is split among precinct 3 and precinct 4 for voting purposes, and also split among US house districts 7 (Lizzie Fletcher, D) and district 22 (Troy Nehls, R)

===Climate===
==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 11,627 people, 4,231 households, and 2,668 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 11,081 people, 3,413 households, and 2,628 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 3,595 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 51.20% White, 10.55% African American, 0.63% Native American, 3.53% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 31.00% from other races, and 3.01% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 58.71% of the population.

There were 3,413 households, out of which 39.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.6% were married couples living together, 16.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.0% were non-families. 18.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.16 and the average family size was 3.60.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 31.6% under the age of 18, 11.0% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 18.7% from 45 to 64, and 10.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $34,888, and the median income for a family was $35,801. Males had a median income of $27,457 versus $22,723 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,195. About 17.0% of families and 20.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.4% of those under age 18 and 12.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
The Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the Jester State Prison Farm units, including the Jester I Unit, the Carol Vance Unit (formerly the Jester II Unit), the Jester III Unit, and the Wayne Scott Unit (formerly the Jester IV Unit), in an unincorporated area east of Richmond.

==Arts and culture==
===Public libraries===
Fort Bend County Libraries operates the George Memorial Library, the central library and the site of the administrative offices of the library system, located along Farm to Market Road 762. Richmond also has the Fort Bend County Law Library.

The Main Library moved from Rosenberg to its current location in Richmond in 1986. The George Foundation funded the library facility, designed by Ronald Wedemeyer Associates and built on of land. When the library opened, it had unfinished areas to facilitate future expansion. In December 1989 the Commissioners Court of Fort Bend County, in accordance with Texas Local Government code §323.021(a), ordered the construction of a law library. The main library expansion and the 1991 installation of an automation system used funds from the 1989 bond election, and expansion occurred on 1995 and 2002. The 2002 expansion included the addition of two conference rooms.

==Government==
The United States Postal Service Richmond Post Office is located at 5560 Farm to Market Road 1640.

The city is governed by a mayor and four commissioners elected at large for two-year terms. The commission sets policy and the day-to-day management is done by a city manager hired by the commission.

Hilmar G. Moore served as mayor from 1949 until his death on December 4, 2012 and was believed to be the longest-serving mayor in the United States. Rebecca &quot;Becky&quot; Haas is currently the mayor.

==Education==

Children living within the corporate city limits of Richmond are served by Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

Elementary schools within the Richmond city limits include Jane Long, Pink, and Smith.

Wessendorff Middle School, Lamar Junior High School, and Lamar Consolidated High School serve students living within the Richmond city limits. The three schools are in Rosenberg.

Various schools operated by LCISD and neighboring Fort Bend Independent School District bear Richmond addresses, but do not serve the city limits of Richmond. George Ranch High School, Foster High School, Reading Junior High School, and Briscoe Junior High in LCISD and Travis High School and Bush High School in the Fort Bend Independent School District (FBISD) bear &quot;Richmond, Texas&quot; addresses.

The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Fort Bend County Public Transportation provides local bus service in Richmond.

==See also==

*John M. and Lottie D. Moore House

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="0" end="8" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="40" end="51" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="55" end="71" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="73" end="78" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="155" end="171" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="352" end="364" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500974" start="467" end="484" title="Richmond, London" label="Richmond, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="557" end="574" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152373" start="666" end="675" title="Jane Herbert Wilkinson Long" label="Jane Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245784" start="677" end="687" title="Deaf Smith" label="Deaf Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="693" end="707" title="Mirabeau Lamar" label="Mirabeau Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974448" start="747" end="766" title="Walter Moses Burton" label="Walter Moses Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167711" start="927" end="949" title="Jaybird–Woodpecker War" label="Jaybird–Woodpecker War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163519" start="971" end="990" title="post-Reconstruction" label="post-Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764278" start="1078" end="1090" title="Hilmar Moore" label="Hilmar Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1226" end="1235" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="1367" end="1379" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818280" start="1457" end="1471" title="U.S. Route 90 Alternate (Texas)" label="US Highway 90A"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1526" end="1535" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="1558" end="1568" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q974279" start="1599" end="1611" title="East Bernard, Texas" label="East Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1622" end="1629" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1669" end="1696" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="1833" end="1850" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="2039" end="2047" title="Wal-Mart" label="Wal-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="2134" end="2144" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="2156" end="2169" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675101" start="2583" end="2594" title="Acres Homes, Houston" label="Acres Homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2832" end="2844" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3304" end="3321" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q978511" start="4209" end="4227" title="Pecan Grove, Texas" label="Pecan Grove, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="5030" end="5055" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5153" end="5159" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5382" end="5387" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5396" end="5412" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5420" end="5435" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5443" end="5448" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5456" end="5472" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5486" end="5497" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5533" end="5541" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5545" end="5551" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5706" end="5721" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6518" end="6535" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6629" end="6641" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="6733" end="6769" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187963" start="6783" end="6807" title="Jester State Prison Farm" label="Jester State Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187959" start="6829" end="6842" title="Jester I Unit" label="Jester I Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044590" start="6848" end="6864" title="Carol Vance Unit" label="Carol Vance Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187955" start="6900" end="6915" title="Jester III Unit" label="Jester III Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187957" start="6925" end="6941" title="Wayne Scott Unit" label="Wayne Scott Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="6979" end="6998" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="7062" end="7088" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949011" start="7227" end="7250" title="Farm to Market Road 762" label="Farm to Market Road 762"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="7333" end="7342" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="7991" end="8019" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976595" start="8060" end="8084" title="Farm to Market Road 1640" label="Farm to Market Road 1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764278" start="8288" end="8303" title="Hilmar G. Moore" label="Hilmar G. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="8583" end="8629" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="8777" end="8807" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="8950" end="8987" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543705" start="9059" end="9083" title="George Ranch High School" label="George Ranch High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265438" start="9085" end="9103" title="Foster High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Foster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836269" start="9170" end="9188" title="Travis High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Travis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537487" start="9193" end="9209" title="George Bush High School" label="Bush High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="9217" end="9254" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="9354" end="9383" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246025" start="9521" end="9554" title="John M. and Lottie D. Moore House" label="John M. and Lottie D. Moore House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135897" wikidata="Q637444" url="?curid=135897" title="Rosenberg, Texas">
<text>Rosenberg is a city in the U.S. state of Texas, within the Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area and Fort Bend County. Rosenberg was named for Henry Von Rosenberg, who emigrated to Texas from Switzerland in 1843. Von Rosenberg was an important figure in the settlement of Fort Bend County and the Gulf Coast region. The population was 38,282 at the 2020 census, up from 30,618 at the 2010 census. The community holds the Fort Bend County fair in October. Rosenberg is adjacent to the city of Richmond, the Fort Bend County seat.

== History ==
Rosenberg is named after Henry Rosenberg, who migrated from Switzerland to Galveston, Texas in 1843. Rosenberg was the first president of the Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway.

== Geography ==

Rosenberg is located in central Fort Bend County at (29.552388, –95.804899), on the south side of the Brazos River. It is bordered to the northeast by Richmond, to the south by Pleak, and to the southwest by Beasley.

The Southwest Freeway (I-69 and US-59) runs through the south side of Rosenberg, bypassing the city center. The freeway leads northeast to downtown Houston, and US-59 continues southwest to Victoria and beyond.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Rosenberg has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.25%, is water.
=== Climate ===

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Rosenberg has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

== Demographics ==


As of the 2020 United States census, there were 38,282 people, 12,636 households, and 8,613 families residing in the city.

At the 2000 census, there were 24,043 people, 7,933 households and 5,976 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 8,438 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 65.69% White, 8.53% African American, 0.37% Native American, 0.38% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 22.17% from other races, and 2.81% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 54.96% of the population.

There were 7,933 households, of which 41.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.4% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.7% were non-families. 20.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.00 and the average family size was 3.48.

30.9% of the population were under the age of 18, 10.8% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 18.5% from 45 to 64, and 9.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.2 males.

The median household income was $35,510 and the median family income was $39,965. Males had a median income of $28,723 versus $21,945 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,814. About 13.6% of families and 16.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.7% of those under age 18 and 12.9% of those age 65 or over.

== Arts and culture ==
Fort Bend County Libraries operates the George Memorial Library, the main library, in Richmond. The main library was originally located in Rosenberg, near the Polly Ryon hospital. The library moved to Richmond in 1986. The library underwent extensive renovations in 2013 and reopened with new technology, media rooms, and room design.

The Fort Bend Epicenter sports arena, located in Rosenberg, opened on August 26, 2023.

== Parks and recreation ==
The City of Rosenberg operates nine municipal parks within the city limits.

Fort Bend County operates the Bud O&#x27;Shieles Community Center in Rosenberg. The two acre center includes an auditorium, meeting centers, and centers for elderly people.

== Education ==
===Public schools===

Rosenberg is served by the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

Elementary schools in Rosenberg include Arredondo, Bowie, Jackson, Taylor Ray and Travis.

Middle and high schools in Rosenberg include Wessendorf Middle School, Lamar Junior High School, Navarro Middle School, George Junior High School, Lamar Consolidated High School, and B.F. Terry High School.

Additionally Wright Junior High School (grades 6-8), and Randle High School serve sections of Rosenberg; they are in an unincorporated area.

=== Private schools ===

* Holy Rosary Catholic School, a K–8 school operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston.
* Living Water Christian School, an early childhood-grade 11 Christian school in Rosenberg.

== Infrastructure ==

Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital, which the county contracts with.

=== Transportation ===
Fort Bend County Public Transportation provides local bus service and commuter service to Houston.

Greyhound Bus Lines serves the Rosenberg Station at Raceway gas station.

== Notable people ==
*Randal Grichuk, Major League Baseball player who has played for four teams; played on the 2008 Lamar Consolidated Baseball Regional Finalist Team as well as the 2004 Little League World Series team
*John Holiday, operatic countertenor
*Dexter Pittman, professional basketball player, played five seasons in the NBA; attended B. F. Terry High School
*Clymer Wright, former editor of &quot;Fort Bend Reporter&quot;; conservative political activist in Greater Houston

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==
* City of Rosenberg official website
* Rosenberg Convention and Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="0" end="9" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="27" end="37" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="41" end="46" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="59" end="91" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="114" end="130" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="505" end="513" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q94622856" start="582" end="597" title="Henry Rosenberg" label="Henry Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="617" end="628" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="632" end="641" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554270" start="699" end="734" title="Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway" label="Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="856" end="868" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458940" start="931" end="936" title="Pleak, Texas" label="Pleak"/>
<link wikidata="Q980852" start="962" end="969" title="Beasley, Texas" label="Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446872" start="995" end="999" title="Interstate 69 in Texas" label="I-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505525" start="1004" end="1009" title="U.S. Route 59 in Texas" label="US-59"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1120" end="1127" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q784496" start="1162" end="1170" title="Victoria, Texas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1201" end="1228" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1440" end="1469" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1494" end="1519" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1586" end="1611" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1712" end="1718" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1932" end="1937" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1945" end="1961" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1969" end="1984" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1992" end="1997" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2005" end="2021" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2035" end="2046" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2082" end="2090" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2094" end="2100" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2251" end="2266" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2864" end="2887" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3011" end="3028" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3122" end="3134" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="3233" end="3259" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="3319" end="3327" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q130289077" start="3573" end="3592" title="Fort Bend Epicenter" label="Fort Bend Epicenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="4000" end="4046" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="4287" end="4317" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833984" start="4323" end="4345" title="B.F. Terry High School" label="B.F. Terry High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434306" start="4405" end="4423" title="Randle High School" label="Randle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="4468" end="4487" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="4575" end="4622" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4772" end="4789" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4791" end="4813" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4858" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="5017" end="5036" title="Greyhound Bus Lines" label="Greyhound Bus Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16736712" start="5113" end="5127" title="Randal Grichuk" label="Randal Grichuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="5129" end="5150" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="5208" end="5235" title="Lamar Consolidated Baseball" label="Lamar Consolidated Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013818" start="5279" end="5305" title="Little League World Series" label="Little League World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978153" start="5312" end="5324" title="John Holiday" label="John Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q223166" start="5335" end="5347" title="countertenor" label="countertenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q672096" start="5349" end="5363" title="Dexter Pittman" label="Dexter Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="5424" end="5427" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833984" start="5438" end="5461" title="B. F. Terry High School" label="B. F. Terry High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137109" start="5463" end="5476" title="Clymer Wright" label="Clymer Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="5527" end="5539" title="Conservative (politics)" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="5540" end="5558" title="political activist" label="political activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="5562" end="5577" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135898" wikidata="Q981608" url="?curid=135898" title="Sienna, Texas">
<text>Sienna, formerly known as Sienna Plantation, is a census-designated place and master-planned community located in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States. It is mostly in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of Missouri City with the remainder in the ETJ of Arcola. The population was 20,204 at the 2020 census, up from 13,721 at the 2010 census.

==History==
The Sienna subdivision is on land that previously operated as a sugar and cotton plantation, which relied on enslaved labor during the 19th century. The land was purchased in 1840 by Jonathan D. Waters, a South Carolina planter, who developed it into a working plantation along the Brazos River. Like many plantations in Texas at the time, it depended on enslaved people for agricultural production until the abolition of slavery in 1865.

In 1872, Houston businessman Thomas W. House acquired the property, followed by former Houston mayor Thomas H. Scanlan in 1913. The Scanlan family later entrusted the land to the Scanlan Foundation, which benefited the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston. From the 1950s until 1972, the Cenacle Sisters operated the Cenacle Retreat on the property as a religious retreat center.

In the 1970s, developer Larry Johnson founded the Johnson Development Corporation and began planning the transformation of the area into a master-planned community. In 1978, the initial development phase started, including single-family homes, roads, and a 10-mile-long levee for flood protection. However, the project stalled during the economic downturn of the 1980s.

The developer refocused efforts in 1994, with significant investments from Tan Yu, a billionaire developer from the Philippines, who was based in Taiwan at the time. By 2009, 5,000 of the 5,200 planned homes were occupied.

In May 2019, after requests from residents, community groups, and discussions about its historical connotations, the community officially changed its name from &quot;Sienna Plantation&quot; to &quot;Sienna&quot; to distance itself from its past as a site of enslaved labor.
==Geography==

Sienna is located in eastern Fort Bend County at (29.493136, -95.506707). It is bordered to the north and west by Missouri City and to the northeast by Arcola. The Brazos River runs just west of the western border of Sienna, and Oyster Creek flows southwards through the center of the CDP. Downtown Houston is to the north.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 3.05%, is water.

===Cityscape===
The development is south of Texas State Highway 6. Sienna Parkway, the main thoroughfare in Sienna, is located off Highway 6. Sienna has many single-family houses of various designs and styles. In 2009 the prices ranged from $160,000s to the millions. A section of Sienna has custom houses that, as of 2009, were priced in the $500,000s. As of that year a 272-unit apartment complex was under construction at the entrance to Sienna. In January 2009 the H-E-B Sienna Market Place, located at the entrance to the Sienna Plantation community, and a Kroger store located east of Sienna opened; before the openings, Sienna had a lack of proximity to grocery stores.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 20,204 people, 6,089 households, and 5,494 families residing in the CDP.

As of the census of 2010, there were 13,721 people and 4,757 households in the CDP. The population density was . The racial makeup of the CDP was 57.2% White, 29.8% African American, 4.6% Asian, and 4.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 15.7% of the population.

Of the 13,721 people living in the CDP, 32.5% were under 18 years of age, with 4.3% under 5 years of age; 7.2% were age 65 or over.

For the period 2010–14, the estimated median annual income for a household in the CDP was $130,300, and the median income for a family was $130,457. Male full-time workers had a median income of $107,798 versus $74,224 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $46,039. About 7.0% of families and 6.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.6% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
In 1996, Missouri City and Sienna entered a joint development agreement. This stated that when Sienna was about 90% developed and when the City of Missouri City wished to assume the outstanding development debt of Sienna Plantation, the annexation would take place. There are periodic reviews of the annexation proposals. In 2011, one review concluded that due to the municipal utility debt, if residents of Sienna do not wish to pay extra taxes for fire and police services and other city services, then annexation should come about in 2027.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary schools===
Sienna is served by the Fort Bend Independent School District. The community is within the East Division, controlling school board slots 5 through 7.

The community is zoned to Sienna Crossing Elementary School, Scanlan Oaks Elementary School and Jan Schiff Elementary School (three separate attendance zones). The community is also zoned to Baines Middle School and Ronald Thornton Middle School (two separate attendance zones). All of which are located within Sienna. All of Sienna is served by the FBISD Ridge Point High School located in Sienna Plantation on Waters Lake Blvd.

Donald Leonetti Elementary School opened in 2017 and Ronald Thornton Middle School opened in 2018. Both are in Sienna Plantation.

Sienna Lutheran Academy is a private school that caters to the Christian education of children in grades K-8.

====Histories of schools====
Before 2010 the portion east of Sienna Parkway was zoned to Hightower High School in Missouri City, while the portion west of Sienna Parkway was zoned to Elkins High School in Missouri City. In 2007 sections of Sienna were rezoned from Hightower to Elkins.

Lake Olympia Middle School in Missouri City served all of Sienna until fall 2006, when Baines Middle School was built.

===Community colleges===
The Texas Legislature specifies that the Houston Community College (HCC) boundary includes &quot;the part of the Fort Bend Independent School District that is not located in the service area of the Wharton County Junior College District and that is adjacent to the Houston Community College System District.&quot; Wharton College&#x27;s boundary within FBISD is defined only as the City of Sugar Land and the ETJ of Sugar Land, Sienna is not in the Sugar Land ETJ (it is in the Missouri City and Arcola ETJs). Sienna is in HCC.

HCC had a campus in Sienna from the fall of 2008 until May 2016, when the campus was closed and a new campus was built on Texas Parkway.

===Public libraries===
Fort Bend County Libraries operates the Sienna Branch, which opened on April 24, 2010. The $15 million, two story facility, which has of space, was a joint project between the library system and Houston Community College. 
As of May 2016, Houston Community College no longer has a presence in the library building. The Sienna Branch has a 3D printer for the community to use and offers classes on 3D design and printing.

==Parks and recreation==

Zen T. C. Zheng of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said that Sienna has &quot;a natural environment.&quot; The community has lakes, parks, trees, and a trail along of the frontage of the Brazos River. Sienna has a sports complex, an 18-hole championship golf course, recreational centers, an equestrian center, and water parks. The Sienna sports complex is the home to a variety of youth club sports programs, including, the Sienna Panthers Lacrosse Club which has 240 youth lacrosse players ranging from 1st grade to High School. It is also the home field for Team 91 Texas which provides elite Lacrosse for 175 players to compete nationally. The recreational centers include an amphitheater and a fitness room.

In 2019, Sienna announced that they had completed renovations on the tennis center and the Club Sienna recreation complex. Added to the tennis center was outdoor covered seating and a new 1,764-square-foot building that features a tennis pro shop. The refurbished Club Sienna can now accommodate 85 people in its ballroom and offers a conference room for board meetings and a classroom for up to 25 students. Several restrooms were added and the lobby relocated.

==Religion==

As of 2011 many Protestant churches are located in Sienna. On April 30, 2011, an LDS Church meeting house was scheduled to open in the community, serving a 200-member English-speaking ward and a 200-member Spanish-speaking ward.
St. Angela Merici Catholic Church was dedicated in 2017 and seats 2000.

==References==

==External links==
* Sienna, Formerly Sienna Plantation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981608" start="0" end="6" title="Sienna, Texas" label="Sienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q981608" start="26" end="43" title="Sienna, Texas" label="Sienna Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="50" end="73" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="78" end="102" title="master-planned community" label="master-planned community"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="114" end="130" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="132" end="137" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="174" end="203" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="213" end="226" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q969898" start="260" end="266" title="Arcola, Texas" label="Arcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="2192" end="2205" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q969898" start="2230" end="2236" title="Arcola, Texas" label="Arcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116328" start="2307" end="2319" title="Oyster Creek (Texas)" label="Oyster Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="2368" end="2384" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2420" end="2447" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="2567" end="2588" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q830621" start="2992" end="2997" title="H-E-B" label="H-E-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="3085" end="3091" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3229" end="3254" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3351" end="3357" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3493" end="3498" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3506" end="3522" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3529" end="3534" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3569" end="3577" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3581" end="3587" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4000" end="4017" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4108" end="4120" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="4848" end="4885" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332692" start="5331" end="5354" title="Ridge Point High School" label="Ridge Point High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759722" start="5737" end="5758" title="Hightower High School" label="Hightower High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="5762" end="5775" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364330" start="5831" end="5849" title="Elkins High School (Texas)" label="Elkins High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="6084" end="6101" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="6121" end="6146" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="6278" end="6316" title="Wharton County Junior College District" label="Wharton County Junior College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="6770" end="6796" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="6965" end="6990" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="7247" end="7264" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="7407" end="7419" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="8428" end="8438" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="8493" end="8503" title="LDS Church" label="LDS Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135899" wikidata="Q979525" url="?curid=135899" title="Simonton, Texas">
<text>Simonton is a city in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. Simonton is located at the intersection of Farm roads 1093 and 1489, approximately fourteen miles northwest of Richmond and five miles west of Fulshear. As of the 2020 U.S. Census, the city population was 647, down from 814 at the 2010 census.

==History==
=== The Simonton Plantation ===
The first event that shaped Simonton&#x27;s history was when James Simonton and his brother Theophilus bought 4000 acres of land in northwestern Fort Bend County in the 1840s. The two Simonton brothers built a plantation next to the Brazos River, on which they raised cotton. The year 1850 is officially designated as the founding year for Simonton, since the 1850 US Census showed the two brothers, their mother, Mary, and Theophilus&#x27;s wife and two sons residing on the property. Another brother, Joseph, and his family moved to the plantation in the 1850s. In 1857, Theophilus helped charter the Richmond Masonic Hall Association, symbolizing the elite status of the Simonton family in Fort Bend County. The town of Simonton joined Fulshear and Pittsville as the main rural towns in northwestern Fort Bend County.

=== American Civil War ===
At the onset of the Civil War, the 1860 US Census showed that the Simontons owned one of the largest and most prosperous plantations in Fort Bend County, with a real property value at $200,000 and personal property valued at $155,000. The Simonton brothers have been identified as among the largest slaveholders in Texas. According to the 1860 US census and a subsequent research, there were 105 slaves on the Simonton plantation on the eve of the Civil War. This census also revealed that their plantation had 975 improved acres that produced 11,000 bushels of corn and 600 bales of cotton. Like many Texas plantation owners, they supported the Confederacy.On January 4, 1864, Joseph, James, and Theo Simonton wrote General J.B. Magruder that they were about to place in Confederate service about 40 [slaves]... The three brothers did not enlist in the Confederate army, but this donation of slaves to the Confederate cause was certainly a material contribution to the cause. After the war, on July 18, 1965 [sic], James Simoton [sic] signed an amnesty oath to the United States of America.&quot;

=== Post-Civil War Reconstruction ===
The plantation was broken up and sold after the war. Tracts of land were sold to incoming settlers. The Simontons actively resisted the post-Civil War Reconstruction efforts. During the Fort Bend Jaybird-Woodpecker political battles during post-Civil War Reconstruction, the Simonton brothers joined the Jaybirds, a faction within the Democratic Party, who wanted to oust the Woodpeckers, primarily blacks and their white allies, from the county administration. In October 1888 in nearby Pittsville, Theophilus Simonton Jr. was arrested by the county sheriff for fatally shooting a local black leader, Lamar Johnson, and injuring his half-brother, Taylor Randonan. This incident gained regional and national attention for the deep racial divisions of the Jaybird-Woodpecker War raging throughout Fort Bend County.

=== End of the Pioneer Era ===
The Simonton family&#x27;s position and presence gradually dwindled after the deaths of the pioneer brothers and the influx of European immigrants who passed through Galveston during the late 19th and early 20th Century.Theophilus Simonton died by February 2, 1867, the date on which his will was probated. Although he had lost his slaves by the time of his death, his estate was valued at $1,311,010, a considerable sum by the standards of Reconstruction Texas. James died before June 2, 1892, when his will was probated. His estate was valued at $9,014 at that time.Their deaths accompanied by the industrial revolution that was sweeping the United States drastically altered the economic means, and thus the social and political roles, in Simonton as well as throughout Fort Bend Country.

According to oral history documentation, the Ku Klux Klan was present in Simonton from the early 20th Century, as they were in many Texas small towns, and were especially active due to the influx of foreign-born immigrants, who moved to Simonton to work as farm and ranch help for the local cattle ranches and pecan groves.

=== From Busy Town to Quiet Crossroads Community ===
The next event shaping Simonton history was the advent, around 1888, of the San Antonio and Aransas Pass Railroad. It is said the company wanted the track to run through Pittsville (near what is now Fulshear) where the terrain was more level. However, the landowners in that area refused to sell the railroad a right-of-way because they believed the trains would scare their cattle. The line was therefore laid across the hills and creeks between Fulshear and Simonton. Water was as necessary as coal for the steam-powered locomotives, and Simonton became one of the main watering stops. With the tracks, came the people. With the tracks also came the opportunity to ship the area&#x27;s farm produce to other parts of the country.

In subsequent years, Simonton developed into a robust agricultural community. Snap shots of this history have been noted in several oral historical accounts:

* Red Potato Farming. In 1906, D.H. (Dave) Mullins, who came to Simonton from Kansas, began growing potatoes on a commercial scale – 150 acres that first year. Later he and J.R. Spencer, also from Kansas, working together, planted 1000 acres of red potatoes. Other farmers followed suit; and during one of the best years, 800 railroad cars of potatoes were shipped out of Simonton to places like Chicago, Kansas City, and Cincinnati. The Simonton area became one of the country&#x27;s major producers of red potatoes. Gradually the red potato demand dwindled due to the onset of a disease and Luther Burbank&#x27;s development of the white potato. In its place, alfalfa, cotton, pecans, and pure-bred cattle ranching replaced the acres of potatoes.
* Pure-bred Cattle Ranching. The Simonton-Fulshear-Brookshire became known as the &quot;River Oaks of the pure-bred cattle business&quot; and was tied in closely with the annual Houston Livestock Show. The pure-bred breeders in the community included the Diamond C Ranch (Herefords), Pecan Acres (Brahman cattle), Figure 4 Ranch (Charolais, Brahman, and Charbray), and the Bar C Ranch (Brahman, Charbray, and Charolais).
* Prison farm. From 1898 to 1909, Simonton was the site of a prison farm. A Captain South was in charge of convicts who cleared the land from Simonton to the Brazos River for farming of ribbon cane for syrup. Until very recently, a barn used by these convicts as a mess hall, bars still on the windows, stood near the Simonton crossroads.
* Busy Town. During the years that agriculture output was important, Simonton developed a busy &quot;downtown&quot;. There were as many as three general stores. One, owned by A.A. (Tom) Mullins, offered a hotel on the second floor with potato buyers and railroad men as regular guests. Another hotel located in the Scruggs home, was run by a Mrs. Bentley, whose culinary skills made Simonton a favored meal stop for travelers. There was also a blacksmith shop, two cotton gins, a lumber yard, a post office and the railroad depot.
* Education. In 1893, the first school for white students was established in Simonton. A census of eligible school children taken in 1911 revealed 544 students. In 1925, noted Houston architect Louis Glover designed this two-story school for nine grades. The art deco-style building which exists today has a &quot;stuccoed brick symmetrical façade with porticoes, grouped windows and ornamentation tiles.&quot; In subsequent years in the Great Depression, the facility was used to host dances, suppers, elections, and church services, The school was annexed into the Lamar Consolidated ISD in 1950. The school for black students was also established.
* H. Berkman &amp; Co. General Store. It was built by Hyman &quot;Harry&quot; Berkman, who came to Simonton from Poland in 1913, during the agricultural boom in Simonton in the early 20th century. The store contained the post office, the general store, and butcher shop. Maurice and Flo Berkman (married June 24, 1956), who were members of the now defunct Jewish synagogue in Warton, Texas, operated store for more than 62 years until their retirement and subsequent move to Houston.
*Dwindling Population. As agricultural output declined and railroad traffic dwindled, people started moving away, mostly to Houston with its growing industry and higher wages. The depot closed in 1953; and it wasn&#x27;t long before the last cotton gin closed down. Eventually, what was left was a small café, a pecan barn, the post office, a small liquor store and Berkman&#x27;s general store.

Gradually by 1957, Simonton had changed from a busy small town to a quiet crossroads community. Then came the beginnings of a new stage in the life of the town. Vernon Evans, owner of the nearby Rue Ranch, and his son-in-law, A.E. &quot;Snake&quot; Bailey, bought 850 acres of land along FM 1093 to be developed as a western community with stables and a small arena and club house, the hub around which houses would be built. The development was called Valley Lodge. Valley Lodge subdivision was the first subdivision out of the city of Houston within commuting distance.

=== International VIP – Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s 1979 Visit to the Simonton Rodeo ===

In the months following the Sino-US normalization, China&#x27;s Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping visited the United States for nine days in 1979, visiting Washington, Atlanta, Houston and Seattle. On February 2 during his visit to Houston, he spent an evening in Simonton at the Roundup Rodeo. In 1963 the Round Up was built on FM 1093. Also the brainchild of &quot;Snake&quot; Bailey, it is a large indoor rodeo arena in full swing every Saturday night, drawing people from Houston and elsewhere for a taste of the &quot;real west.&quot; He rode in a stagecoach, and later a barrel racer gave the premier a cowboy-style duster and a ten-gallon hat, both of which he donned and displayed before the crowd.

Deng&#x27;s visit to the Simonton rodeo is considered to be the tipping point in the thaw of US-China relations.

The Simonton Rodeo closed by 1997 when it was bought and restored by Benchmark Wireline, an oil services company. A China Daily Global video captures the memories of this visit, including Katie Van Dries whose father Luke owned the rodeo at that time.

The photographs of Deng in the cowboy hat appeared in American newspapers, displaying a distinctly human side to a previously mysterious Chinese leader. As Ezra F. Vogel, a biographer of Deng, put it, the &quot;photograph of Deng smiling beneath his ten-gallon hat became the symbol of his visit. It signaled to the U.S. public that he was not only good-humored, but, after all, less like one of &#x27;those Communists&#x27; and more like &#x27;us.&#x27;&quot; With live broadcasts back to China, these events made news for Deng&#x27;s home audience, too. 

The Stetson hat is displayed in the National Museum of China in the center of the exhibit hall which focuses on Deng.

This excitement generated change Sino-American perceptions of each other, as exemplified in a Chinese Foreign Ministry video &quot;The Cowboy-Hat and &quot;Deng Whirlwind — The First Visit to the United States by a Leader of New China.&quot;

=== City Incorporated ===
In 1979, the community incorporated as the City of Simonton. The population grew to 603 in 1980 and 718 in 2000. In 2010 the population was 814.

==Geography==
Simonton is located in northwestern Fort Bend County at (29.679783, –95.990302). The center of town is east of the Brazos River and northwest of Rosenberg. Downtown Houston is to the east. According to the United States Census Bureau, Simonton has a total area of , of which , or 0.24%, is water.

Almost all of the City is located within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain of the Brazos River. See the FEMA Preliminary Map 2017.1.30 panel 80 and FEMA Preliminary Map 2017.1.30 panel 90. Real-time river gauges for the Brazos River are available here.

Simonton has been plagued by repeated flooding due to being located one mile east of the Brazos River, and it considered to located in the 100-year floodplain of the Brazos River. The most significant Brazos River flooding recorded were:

* 1913 Major Flood.
*October 1991 with 100 homes flooded
* December 1995 with 125 homes flooded and caused approximately $2.5 million dollars damage
* May 2016 when cows became stranded.
* August 2017 as a result of Hurricane Harvey.

While plagued by flooding, the City of Simonton purchased two drainage pumps for $95,000 that has reduced the impact of the Brazos River flooding. These pumps were partly paid for by a grant from the Federal Emergency Management Agency&#x27;s Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP).

==Demographics==
===2020 Census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 647 people, 229 households, and 188 families residing in the city.

=== 2000 Census ===
As of the census of 2000, there were 718 people, 264 households, and 206 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 282 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 91.64% White, 5.01% African American, 0.28% Asian, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 1.95% from other races, and 0.97% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.13% of the population.

There were 264 households, out of which 34.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.6% were married couples living together, 3.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.6% were non-families. 18.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.07.

The city population is evenly spread: 25.9% is under the age of 18, 4.7% is between 18 and 24, 29.0% is from 25 to 44, 30.4% from 45 to 64, and 10.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.3 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $72,833, and the median income for a family was $81,905. Males had a median income of $51,842 versus $30,333 for females. The per capita income for the city was $30,669. About 2.5% of families and 5.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.9% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.

== Government and infrastructure ==
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

=== Mayor and Council members ===
=== US Post Office ===
The United States Postal Service operates the Simonton Post Office at 35608 Farm to Market Road 1093.

=== Public Library ===
Fulshear&#x27;s Bob Lutts Fulshear/Simonton Branch Library, located in Fulshear, is a part of the Fort Bend County Libraries system. The branch, which opened in May 1998, was the third branch built with 1989 bond funds. The land currently occupied by the library was previously the Fort Bend County Precinct 4 headquarters. Bob Lutts, the precinct commissioner, offered the land to the library system. The Fulshear City Council asked the county to name the library after Lutts. The library is now within Precinct 3.

==Education==
Simonton is zoned to schools in the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District.

;Current zoned schools:
* Huggins Elementary School (Fulshear)
* Leaman Junior High School (Fulshear)
* Fulshear High School (Fulshear)

; Previous zoned schools:
* Foster High School (Richmond postal address)
* Briscoe Junior High School (Richmond postal address)

Private schools
* Simonton Christian Academy (Simonton)

The designated community college for LCISD is Wharton County Junior College.

==Media==
Simonton is one of the key towns featured in the 2009 documentary &quot;The Heart of Texas Movie&quot;

==Notable person==
*Dobie Gray, singer

==References==

==External links==

* City of Simonton official website
*ABC Report (video) &quot;China 1979: Deng Xiaoping visits Texas February 2nd 1979&quot;
*China Daily Global (video) &quot;Texas town remembers Deng&#x27;s 1979 visit&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979525" start="0" end="8" title="Simonton, Texas" label="Simonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="22" end="38" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="40" end="45" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="73" end="99" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="230" end="238" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q920528" start="262" end="270" title="Fulshear, Texas" label="Fulshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="282" end="298" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="641" end="653" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1020" end="1027" title="Masonic" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q920528" start="1147" end="1155" title="Fulshear, Texas" label="Fulshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199514" start="1160" end="1170" title="Pittsville, Texas" label="Pittsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1277" end="1286" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2545" end="2559" title="Reconstruction ear" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167711" start="2590" end="2608" title="Jaybird–Woodpecker War" label="Jaybird-Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199514" start="2882" end="2892" title="Pittsville, Texas" label="Pittsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167711" start="3149" end="3171" title="Jaybird-Woodpecker War" label="Jaybird-Woodpecker War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="3367" end="3386" title="European emigration" label="European immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="3406" end="3415" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="4078" end="4090" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="5305" end="5315" title="Red potato" label="Red Potato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5334" end="5353" title="D.H. (Dave) Mullins" label="D.H. (Dave) Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q333419" start="5896" end="5910" title="Luther Burbank" label="Luther Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="6064" end="6079" title="Cattle ranching" label="Cattle Ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787044" start="6230" end="6252" title="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo" label="Houston Livestock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q737173" start="6324" end="6333" title="Hereford cattle" label="Herefords"/>
<link wikidata="Q897314" start="6349" end="6363" title="Brahman cattle" label="Brahman cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971219" start="6382" end="6391" title="Charolais cattle" label="Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q897314" start="6393" end="6400" title="Brahman cattle" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957685" start="6406" end="6414" title="Charbray cattle" label="Charbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245779" start="6475" end="6486" title="Prison farm" label="Prison farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="7256" end="7271" title="Blacksmith" label="blacksmith shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="7277" end="7287" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436913" start="7292" end="7303" title="lumber yard" label="lumber yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="7327" end="7341" title="Train station" label="railroad depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7781" end="7797" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q329737" start="8251" end="8263" title="butcher shop" label="butcher shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="8357" end="8366" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q970540" start="8370" end="8383" title="Wharton, Texas" label="Warton, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="8602" end="8609" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="9580" end="9601" title="China–United States relations" label="Sino-US normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q508368" start="9616" end="9628" title="Vice Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Vice Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="9629" end="9642" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529836" start="10122" end="10134" title="Barrel racing" label="barrel racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021857" start="10776" end="10789" title="Ezra Vogel" label="Ezra F. Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074318" start="11214" end="11238" title="National Museum of China" label="National Museum of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="11841" end="11853" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="11871" end="11880" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="11891" end="11898" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="11932" end="11959" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="12069" end="12104" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="12400" end="12412" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="12459" end="12469" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="12766" end="12782" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="13114" end="13139" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="13250" end="13256" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13470" end="13475" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13483" end="13499" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13507" end="13512" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13520" end="13536" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13549" end="13560" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13596" end="13604" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13608" end="13614" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="13766" end="13781" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="14579" end="14596" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="14688" end="14700" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14843" end="14860" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14862" end="14884" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14913" end="14929" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="15025" end="15053" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977293" start="15097" end="15121" title="Farm to Market Road 1093" label="Farm to Market Road 1093"/>
<link wikidata="Q920528" start="15218" end="15226" title="Fulshear, Texas" label="Fulshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="15245" end="15271" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="15714" end="15760" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230310" start="15867" end="15887" title="Fulshear High School" label="Fulshear High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265438" start="15928" end="15946" title="Foster High School (Texas)" label="Foster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="16132" end="16161" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q485961" start="16298" end="16308" title="Dobie Gray" label="Dobie Gray"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135900" wikidata="Q93340" url="?curid=135900" title="Sugar Land, Texas">
<text>Sugar Land (sometimes incorrectly spelled as Sugarland) is the largest city in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, located in the southwestern part of the metropolitan area. Located about southwest of downtown Houston, Sugar Land is a populous suburban municipality centered around the junction of Texas State Highway 6 and Interstate 69/U.S. Route 59.

Beginning in the 19th century, the present-day Sugar Land area was home to a large sugar plantation situated in the fertile floodplain of the Brazos River. Following the consolidation of local plantations into Imperial Sugar Company in 1908, Sugar Land grew steadily as a company town and incorporated as a city in 1959. Since then, Sugar Land has grown rapidly alongside other edge cities around Houston, with large-scale development of master-planned communities contributing to population swells since the 1980s.

Sugar Land is one of the most affluent and fastest-growing cities in Texas. The 2020 United States Census reported that the city&#x27;s population had grown more than 40% in the preceding 10 years following the annexation of the Greatwood and New Territory communities in December 2017. Over the same 10-year period, the number of employed persons living in Sugar Land increased by 61%. 

Sugar Land is home to the headquarters of Imperial Sugar; the company&#x27;s main sugar refinery and distribution center were once located in the city. The Imperial Sugar crown logo is featured in the city seal and logo.

==History==

===Sugar Land&#x27;s founding===
Sugar Land has roots in the original Mexican land grant made to Anglo-American Stephen F. Austin. One of the first settlers of the land, Samuel M. Williams, called this area &quot;Oakland Plantation&quot;. Williams&#x27; brother, Nathaniel, purchased the land from Austin in 1838. They developed the plantation by growing cotton, corn, and sugarcane.

During these early years, the plantation was the center of social life along the Brazos River. In 1853, Benjamin Terry and William J. Kyle purchased the Oakland Plantation from the Williams family. Terry is known for organizing a division of Texas Rangers during the Civil War and for naming the town.

Upon the deaths of Terry and Kyle, Colonel E. H. Cunningham bought the plantation soon after the Civil War. He had a sugar-refining plant built here, and developed the town around it in 1879, platting the land and attracting settlers during the post-Reconstruction era.

===Company town===

In 1906, the Kempner family of Galveston, under the leadership of Isaac H. Kempner, and in partnership with Logan J. Copenhaver, purchased the Ellis Plantation, one of the few plantations in Fort Bend County to survive the Civil War. The Ellis Plantation had originally been part of the Jesse Cartwright league; Will Ellis had operated it after the Civil War by a system of tenant farming, made up mostly of African-American families who were previously enslaved on the land.

In 1908, the partnership acquired the adjoining Cunningham Plantation, with its raw-sugar mill and cane-sugar refinery. The partnership changed the name to Imperial Sugar Company; Kempner associated the name &quot;Imperial&quot;, which was also the name of a small raw-sugar mill on the Ellis Plantation, with the Imperial Hotel in New York City.

Around the turn of the 20th century, most of the sugarcane crops were destroyed by a harsh winter. As part of the Kempner-Copenhaver agreement, Copenhaver moved to the site to serve as general manager and build the company-owned town of Sugar Land.

The trains running through Sugar Land are on the route of the oldest railroad in Texas. They run adjacent to the sugar refinery, west of the town, and through the center of what used to be known as the Imperial State Prison Farm. It operated with convict lease labor. Between the end of the Civil War and 1912, more than 3,500 prisoners died in Texas as a result of the racist convict leasing program. Archaeologists have uncovered unmarked graves of African Americans from this period in the region around Sugar Land&#x27;s prison and sugar factory. Since the early 21st century, this area has been largely redeveloped as the suburban planned community of Telfair.

As a company town from the 1910s until 1959, Sugar Land was virtually self-contained. Imperial Sugar Company provided housing for the workers, encouraged construction of schools, built a hospital to treat workers, and provided businesses to meet the workers&#x27; needs. Many of the original houses built by the Imperial Sugar Company remain today in The Hill and Mayfield Park areas of Sugar Land, and have been passed down through generations of family members.

During the 1950s, Imperial Sugar wanted to expand the town by building more houses. It developed a new subdivision, Venetian Estates, which featured waterfront homesites on Oyster Creek and on man-made lakes.

===Development of city===
As the company town expanded, so did the interest of establishing a municipal government. Voters chose to make Sugar Land a general-law city in 1959, with T. E. Harman becoming the first mayor.

In the early 1960s, a new subdivision development called Covington Woods was constructed. Later that year, the Imperial Cattle Ranch sold about to a developer to create what became Sugar Creek in 1968. As a master-planned community, Sugar Creek introduced the concept of country club living to Sugar Land. Custom houses were built to surround two golf courses, and country clubs, swimming pools, and a private home security service were part of the amenities developed.

The success of Sugar Creek, buoyed by the construction of U.S. Highway 59, quickly made Sugar Land&#x27;s vast farmlands attractive to real-estate developers for residential housing. In 1977, development began on First Colony, a master-planned community encompassing . Developed by a Gerald Hines-led consortium that became known as Sugarland Properties Inc., development on First Colony would continue over the next 30 years. The master-planned community offered homebuyers formal landscaping, neighborhoods segmented by price range, extensive green belts, a golf course and country club, lakes and boulevards, neighborhood amenities, and shopping.

Around the same time as First Colony, another master-planned community development called Sugar Mill was started in the northern portion of Sugar Land, offering traditional, lakefront, and estate lots. The master-planned communities of Greatwood and New Territory, at the time situated west of the city in what was then its extraterritorial jurisdiction, also began to be developed by the end of the 1980s.

In addition to the development of master-planned communities targeted at commuters from Houston, Sugar Land began attracting the attention of major corporations throughout the 1980s. Many chose to base their operations in the city. Fluor Daniel, Schlumberger, Unocal, and others began to locate offices and facilities in the city. This resulted in a favorable 40/60 ratio of residential to commercial tax base within the city.

In 1981, a special city election was held for the purpose of establishing a home-rule municipal government. Voters approved the adoption of a home-rule charter, which established a mayor-council form of government, with all powers of the city vested in a council composed of a mayor and five councilmen, elected from single-member districts.

A special city election was held August 9, 1986, to submit the proposed changes to the electorate for consideration. By a majority of the voters, amendments to the charter were approved that provided for a change in the city&#x27;s form of government from that of &quot;mayor-council&quot; (strong mayor) to that of a &quot;council-manager&quot; form of government, which provides for a professional city manager to be the chief administrative officer of the city. Approval of this amendment authorized the mayor to be a voting member of council, in addition to performing duties as presiding officer of the council.

Sugar Land annexed Sugar Creek in 1986, after the latter community was nearly built-out. 
That same year, the city organized the largest celebration in its history, the Texas Sesquicentennial Celebration, celebrating 150 years of Texan independence from Mexican rule (DGA). 

===Suburban expansion===

An amendment on May 5, 1990, changed the composition of the city council, adding a mayor and two council members, each to be elected at-large, to the five-member council. The at-large positions require election by a majority of voters, which reduces representation of any minority interests.

Throughout much of the 1990s, Sugar Land grew rapidly. The majority of residents are white-collar and college-educated, working in Houston&#x27;s energy industry. An abundance of commercial development, with numerous low-rise office buildings, banks, and high-class restaurants, has taken place along both Interstate 69/U.S. Highway 59 and State Highway 6.

Sugar Land added to its tax base with the opening of First Colony Mall in 1996. The more than one-million-square-foot (100,000 m2) mall, the first in Fort Bend County, is located at the busiest intersection of the city: Interstate 69/U.S. 59 and State Highway 6. The mall was named after the master-planned community of First Colony.

In November 1997, Sugar Land annexed the remaining municipal utility districts of the First Colony master-planned community, bringing the city&#x27;s population to almost 60,000. This was Sugar Land&#x27;s largest annexation at the time.

===After 2000===
Sugar Land boasted the highest growth among Texas&#x27; largest cities, per the U.S. Census 2000, when it had a population of 63,328. In 2003, Sugar Land became a &quot;principal&quot; city, recognized in the metropolitan area&#x27;s official title change to Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown, with Sugar Land replacing Galveston as the second-most important city in the metropolitan area after Houston. The metro area is now officially referred to as the Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land metropolitan area.

With its population increase, the city needed to attract higher education facilities. In 2002, the University of Houston System at Fort Bend moved to a new campus located off the University Boulevard and Interstate 69/U.S. 59 intersection. The city helped fund the Albert and Mamie George Building, and as a result, the multi-institution teaching center was renamed as the University of Houston Sugar Land.

In 2003, the Imperial Sugar Company refinery plant and distribution center were closed, but the effect on the local economy was minimal. Sugar Land has become an affluent Houston suburb rather than the blue-collar, agriculture-dependent town it was a generation ago. Many of its lower-income residents, including African American workers who at one time made up the majority working sugarcane, have been displaced and have had to seek work and housing elsewhere. The company maintains its headquarters in Sugar Land.
The Texas Department of Transportation sold of prison land in the western portion of Sugar Land to Newland Communities, a developer, by bid in 2003. The developer announced plans to build a new master-planned community called Telfair in this location. In July 2004, Sugar Land annexed all of this land into the city limits to control the quality of development, extending the city limits westward. This was unusual, since Sugar Land had earlier annexed only built-out areas, not lands prior to development.

In December 2005, Sugar Land annexed the recently built-out, master-planned community of Avalon and four sections of Brazos Landing subdivision, adding about 3,200 residents. The city eventually annexed the communities of River Park, Greatwood, and New Territory, with the latter two being annexed on December 12, 2017, bringing the city proper&#x27;s population to 117,869.

In the 2010s, development began on the Imperial master-planned community, located in undeveloped territory east of Sugar Land Regional Airport and incorporating the former refinery property of Imperial Sugar Company. This development includes Constellation Field, home of the Sugar Land Space Cowboys, originally an independent baseball team but later a member of affiliated Minor League Baseball. Retail needs are to be served in the planned Imperial Market development. In 2017, the 6,400-seat Smart Financial Centre concert hall opened.

==Geography==

Sugar Land is located in northeast Fort Bend County, southwest of downtown Houston. It is bordered by Houston to the northeast, and by Stafford, Missouri City, and Meadows Place to the east. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Sugar Land has a total area of , of which are land and , or 5.7%, are covered by water. The elevation of most of the city is between above sea level. The elevation of Sugar Land Regional Airport (SGR) is .

Sugar Land has two major waterways running through the city. The southwestern and southern portion of the city were developed along the Brazos River, which runs into Brazoria County. Oyster Creek runs from the northwest to the eastern portion of the city limits and into Missouri City. Sugar Land developers have built many artificial lakes connecting to Oyster Creek or the Brazos River, as part of new master-planned communities.

Sugar Land and other surrounding areas are subsiding and the rate of subsidence is increasing. The area sunk about 1 foot between 1943 and 1964, while it sunk over 6 feet between 1988 and 2016 Currently, it is estimated that Sugar Land is subsiding at a rate of between 10 and 25 millimeters per year. The subsidence is exacerbated by Climate Change, increased suburban development, and inadequate replenishment. The subsidence has significant human cost. For example, the historic flooding caused by Hurricane Harvey was worse than it would have otherwise been due to the effect, and houses and buildings in the city are sinking and having their foundations damaged. To manage the rapidly increasing subsidence, the Texas State Legislature created the Fort Bend Subsidence District in 1989. The US Geologic Survey and the US Army Corps of Engineers have performed studies and monitoring of the subsidence.

===Hydrology===
Sugar Land sits atop three aquifers: Chicot, Evangeline, and Jasper. The Chicot and Evangeline Aquifers have been the primary source of municipal water for Sugar Land, Houston, Galveston and other surrounding areas. The Jasper Aquifer is the only one of the three that is not used to extract drinking water. Due to the rapid building of suburbs in the city and surrounding region, aquifer replenishment has significantly decreased. The city government has enacted a program to manage the aquifers.

===Geology===
Underpinning the area&#x27;s land surface are unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands, extending to depths of several miles. The region&#x27;s geology developed from stream deposits from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains. These sediments consist of a series of sands and clays deposited on decaying organic matter that, over time, were transformed into oil and natural gas. Beneath these tiers is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt. The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward. As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into dome shapes, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands.

The region is earthquake-free. While the neighboring city of Houston contains 86 mapped and historically active surface faults with an aggregate length of , the clay below the surface in Sugar Land precludes the buildup of friction that produces ground shaking in earthquakes. These faults move only very gradually in what is termed &quot;fault creep&quot;.

===Climate===
Sugar Land&#x27;s climate is classified as being humid subtropical, featuring two seasons, a wet season from April to October, and a dry season from November to March. The city is located in the Gulf coastal plains biome, and the vegetation is classified as a temperate grassland. The average yearly precipitation is 48 inches. Prevailing winds are from the south and southeast during most of the year, bringing heat and moisture from the Gulf of Mexico.

In the summer, daily high temperatures are in the 95 °F (35 °C) range throughout much of July and August. The air tends to feel still and the abundant humidity, with dewpoints typically in the low to mid 70°Fs, creates a heat index around 100 °F each day. Summer thunderstorms are common with 30 to 50% of the days having thunder. The highest temperature recorded in the area was 109 °F in August 2023.

Winters in the area are cool and mild. The average winter high/low is 62/45 °F (16/7 °C). The coldest period is usually in January, when north winds bring winter rains. Snow is almost unheard of and typically does not accumulate. One such rare snowstorm hit Houston on Christmas Eve 2004. A few inches accumulated, but had melted by the next afternoon. The earliest snowfall to occur in any winter fell on December 4, 2009.

=== Districts and communities ===

Sugar Land has the most master-planned communities in Fort Bend County, which is home to the largest number of master-planned communities in the nation—including First Colony, Greatwood, New Territory, Telfair, Sugar Creek, River Park, Imperial, Riverstone and many others. Many of the communities feature golf courses, country clubs, and lakes. The first master-planned community to be developed in Sugar Land was Sugar Creek. There are now a total of thirteen master-planned communities located in Sugar Land&#x27;s city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction combined.

The northern portion of Sugar Land, sometimes referred to by residents and government officials as &quot;Old Sugar Land&quot;, comprises all the communities north of U.S. Highway 90A, but it also includes the subdivisions/areas of Venetian Estates, and Belknap/Brookside, which is just south of U.S. 90A. Most of this area was the original city limits of Sugar Land when it was incorporated in 1959. Located in this part of town is the former Imperial Sugar Company refinery and distribution center that was shut down in 2003, even though the company&#x27;s headquarters are still located within the city. To the east of northern Sugar Land is the Sugar Land Business Park, the largest business and industrial area in the city. Many of the city&#x27;s electronic and energy companies are located here, including the future North American headquarters of Schlumberger. The Imperial master-planned community, including Constellation Field and the future Imperial Market development, is also located in north Sugar Land.

The largest economic and entertainment activities are in the areas of south and southeastern Sugar Land. Most of the population in the city limits are concentrated here. This area is all master-planned communities and it includes nearly all of First Colony, the largest in Sugar Land encompassing . Other master-planned communities in this area are Sugar Creek, Sugar Lakes, Commonwealth, Avalon, Telfair, and Riverstone. This area is the location of First Colony Mall, Sugar Land Town Square, the new Sugar Land City Hall, and other major commercial areas. This area boasts a wide range of recreational activities including three golf courses and country clubs, including Sweetwater Country Club (the former home of the LPGA), as well as the Sugar Land Ice &amp; Sports Center (formerly Sugar Land Aerodrome).

The southwestern area of Sugar Land was recently annexed into the city limits, and is sometimes referred to as the &quot;other side of the river&quot;. This is due to this area being separated from the rest of Sugar Land by the Brazos River, as well as being served by the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District. The southwest side has two master-planned communities, Greatwood and River Park. Other communities in this area are Canyon Gate on the Brazos and Tara Colony, the latter an older large subdivision which has a Richmond address but is actually in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Sugar Land and up for future annexation.

The western portion of Sugar Land was also fully incorporated into the city limits in 2017. It is home to two master-planned communities, New Territory and Telfair, the latter of which was previously prison farm land owned by the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. It was sold in 2003 and annexed to the city limits by Sugar Land in 2004. A new highway, State Highway 99 (more commonly known as the &quot;Grand Parkway&quot;), opened in 1994 as a major arterial in this area. North of this area and U.S. Highway 90A is the Sugar Land Regional Airport and the recently decommissioned Texas Department of Corrections Central Unit, which in 2011 became the first Texas prison to be closed without a replacement facility and is being targeted by the city for future light industrial development.

==Demographics==

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 111,026 people, 38,852 households, and 31,328 families residing in the city. At the publication of the census of 2010, 78,817 people, 26,709 households, and 21,882 families were residing in the city. The population density was . The 27,727 housing units averaged 855.8 per square mile (330.5/km2).

In 2010, the racial makeup of the city was 52.0% White, 7.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 35.3% Asian, 2.34% other race, and 2.8% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 10.6% of the population. Sugar Land has the highest concentration of Asian Americans in Texas. Altogether in 2010, 10.7% were Indian, 11.5% Chinese, 4.5% Vietnamese, and 2.0% Filipino. There is also a sizable Pakistani community in Sugar Land. As of 2013, about one-third of the Asian population was Indian American, according to Harish Jajoo, a former city council member of Indian origin. The Sugar Land area has Indian grocery stores, temples, several mosques and many Ismaili Jamatkhanas. Sugar Land is the national headquarters for the United States Ismaili Community. Jajoo stated that the quality of the jobs, schools, and parks attracts people of Indian origin to Sugar Land.

Of the 26,709 households, 40.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.0% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.1% were not families. About 15.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.3% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.90, and the average family size was 3.25.

In the city, the age distribution was 24.6% under 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 23.4% from 25 to 44, 34.0% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% who were 65 or older. The median age was 41.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.6 males.

According to the 2014 American Community Survey, the median income for a household in the city was $115,069, and for a family was $132,534. Male full-time workers had a median income of $98,892 versus $60,053 for females. The per capita income for the city was $48,653. About 6.4% of families and 9.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.5% of those under age 18 and 5.5% of those age 65 or over.

===Religion===
====Catholicism====
Catholics account for over 30% of the city population with 11,998 households registered by St. Laurence, St. Thomas Aquinas, and St. Theresa parishes.

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston operates three churches in Sugar Land:
* St. Laurence Church – Its sanctuary had its dedication ceremony in 1992. By 2006 St. Laurence had 4,600 families on its rolls and was oversubscribed. Its service area previously included Sienna Plantation.
* St. Theresa Church – The Imperial Sugar Company donated the land for the church, which opened in 1924. In 1955 the Basilian Fathers began serving as employees. In 2006 it was finalizing expansion plans, which originated from a 2005 survey.
* St. Thomas Aquinas Church

====Hinduism====
The BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston, a Swaminarayan sect Hindu temple, is along Brand Lane in unincorporated Fort Bend County, near Stafford and Sugar Land. The Sri Saumyakasi, a Sugar Land Chinmaya Hindu temple, opened in December 2007. It is the only Hindu temple in the city devoted to Shiva. The Chinmaya Mission Houston started in 1982. Originally classes were held in an apartment. In a ten year period the members raised $2.5 million for the permanent temple. Shri Krishna Vrundavana has a Sugar Land postal address, but is physically in the Alief super neighborhood in the Houston city limits. It occupies the 450-person, former La Festa Hall. It was established in 2011 with about 200 people in its congregation; originally the temple rented its property. In October 2015 the temple organizers bought the current site for $1.3 million. In December 2015 its congregation had numbered over 800.

==== Islam ====
The Islamic Society of Greater Houston operates two mosques in the area, Masjid Maryam (New Territory Islamic Center) and Masjid At-Taqwa (Synott Islamic Center).

==Economy==
As in the rest of the Greater Houston area, the energy industry presence is large, specifically petroleum exploration and refining. Sugar Land holds the headquarters to &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 company CVR Energy, Inc. (), Western Airways, and NalcoChampion&#x27;s Energy Services division. CVR Energy was listed as the city&#x27;s only resident 2012 Fortune 500 company and the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; ranked it the No. 5 public company in the Houston area. Sugar Land also has a large number of international energy, software, engineering, and product firms.

Sugar Land is home to the headquarters of the Imperial Sugar Company. It was once the home of the company&#x27;s main (and sole) refinery and distribution center. The refinery and distribution center have been closed since 2003.

Schlumberger, an oil services company, moved its Houston-area offices from 5000 Gulf Freeway in Houston to a campus in Sugar Land in 1995. This campus is at the northeast corner of U.S. Highway 90A and Gillingham Lane. (The former Gulf Freeway headquarters was repurposed as the University of Houston Energy Research Park after 2009.)

As of 2015, Schlumberger was the second-largest employer in Sugar Land. In 2015, Schlumberger announced that it was moving its U.S. corporate headquarters to the Sugar Land facility from a Houston office building. The company plans to build new buildings with a scheduled completion time of late 2017. They include a total of of class A office space and an &quot;amenities&quot; building with of space.

Fluor Daniel also has a major office in Sugar Land at 1 Fluor Daniel Dr.

Minute Maid opened its headquarters in Sugar Land Town Square in First Colony on February 16, 2009; previously, it was headquartered in 2000 St. James Place in Houston.

In 1991, BMC Software leased about at the Sugar Creek National Bank Building and about in the Fluor Daniel Building, both in Sugar Land. BMC planned to vacate both Sugar Land facilities when its current headquarters, located in Westchase, opened; BMC&#x27;s headquarters were scheduled to open in 1993.

===Largest employers===
According to the city&#x27;s 2019 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the largest employers in the city are:

==Government and infrastructure==
===Local government===
Sugar Land operates under the Council-Manager form of government. Under this system, Council appoints the city manager, who acts as the chief executive officer of the government. The city manager carries out policy and administers city programs. All department heads, including the city attorney, police chief and fire chief, are ultimately responsible to the city manager.

Some of the strengths of the council-manager form of government as opposed to a strong-mayor form of government include - all councilmembers have equal rights, obligations and opportunities, the power is assigned to the council as a whole, and the city manager must be responsive in providing day-to-day services to citizens.

Sugar Land has had four city managers since instituting the council-manager form of government in 1986:

* William H. Lewis (1986–1988)
* David Neeley (1988–2001)
* Allen Bogard (2001–2020)
*Michael Goodrum (2020–Present)

The average tenure nationwide for municipal and county managers is 7.4 years. The City of Sugar Land&#x27;s last two city managers have an average tenure of over 13 years. The longevity of Sugar Land&#x27;s city managers indicates stability in this form of government.

Sugar Land&#x27;s composition of the city council consists of a mayor, four councilmembers to be elected by single-member districts in odd-numbered years and two councilmembers by at-large positions in even-numbered years with the mayor.

The city hall was built as part of the Sugar Land Town Square development in First Colony. Prior to the opening of the current city hall, city hall was located at 10405 Corporate Drive. That space was converted for use by the offices of the Sugar Land Fire Department.

Sugar Land has had nine mayors:
* T. E. Harman (1959–1961)
* Bill Little (1962–1967)
* C. E. McFadden (1968–1972)
* Roy Cordes Sr. (1972–1981)
* Walter McMeans (1981–1986)
* Lee Duggan (1987–1996)
* Dean A. Hrbacek (1996–2002)
* David G. Wallace (2002–2008)
* James A. Thompson (2008–2016)
* Joe R. Zimmerman (2016–Present)

===Politics===
At the start of the 21st century, Sugar Land was well-known as a Republican stronghold. More recently, the city has been trending Democratic in presidential elections; after voting Republican in 2012 and 2016, Sugar Land was won by Joe Biden in 2020.

Sugar Land is located in Texas&#x27;s 22nd congressional district. It is represented in the US House of Representatives by Republican Troy Nehls, a former Fort Bend county sheriff. The district had long elected former House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, who served from here from 1985 until his 2006 resignation. Previously in 1976, Republicans ran a write-in campaign and gained election of Republican Ron Paul, who served briefly in 1976. He ran for a full term in 1978, serving from 1979 until 1985.

In the Texas Legislature, most of Sugar Land is represented in District 17 of the Texas Senate, which is represented by Republican Joan Huffman. Some western segments of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, including the master-planned communities of New Territory, Greatwood, River Park and Telfair, are situated in District 18, represented by Republican Lois Kolkhorst. She succeeded Glenn Hegar in a 2014 special election following the latter&#x27;s election as Texas State Comptroller earlier that year.

In the Texas House of Representatives, most of Sugar Land is located in District 26, which is represented by Republican Rick Miller, a retired United States Navy officer and current Sugar Land businessman. Some parts of the city are also represented by Democrat Ron Reynolds (the Sugar Land Business Park) in District 27 and Republican Phil Stephenson in District 85 (the River Park, Commonwealth and Riverstone communities).

===County government===
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

===State government===
The Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) operates the Jester State Prison Farm complex (Jester I, Vance, Jester III, and Jester IV) in an unincorporated area near Sugar Land.

The TDCJ operated the Central Unit in Sugar Land. The Central Unit was the only state prison within the city limits of Sugar Land. The Sugar Land Distribution Center, a TDCJ men&#x27;s correctional supply warehouse, was inside the Central Unit compound. In 2011 the TDCJ announced that the prison was closing and would be vacant by the end of August of that year. With the prison&#x27;s closing, Sugar Land became the first Texas city to have its state prison close without a replacement facility.

===Post offices===
The United States Postal Service operates the Sugar Land Post Office at 225 Matlage Way and the First Colony Post Office at 3130 Grants Lake Boulevard.

==Culture and sports==
Sugar Land has a largely white-collar, university-educated workforce employed in Houston&#x27;s energy industry.

In 2004, the city was named one of the top 100 places to live, according to HomeRoute, a national real estate marketing company which identifies top American cities each year through its Relocate-America program. Cities are selected based on educational opportunities, crime rates, employment and housing data. The magazine started with statistics on 271 U.S. cities provided by &quot;OnBoard LLC&quot;, a real estate information company.

Sugar Land was awarded the title of &quot;Fittest City in Texas&quot; for the population range 50,000–100,000 in 2004, 2005 (in a tie with Round Rock) and 2006. The &quot;Fittest City in Texas&quot; program is a part of the Texas Roundup program, a statewide fitness initiative.

Local sports are popular both at the recreational and competitive levels. Sugar Land formed its first community swim team, the Sugar Land Sharks, in 1967, and it is still competing as of 2016.

Sugar Land is home to the Smart Financial Centre, an indoor concert hall that is the only such venue of its kind in Greater Houston, and can seat 6,400 seats for multiple events including concerts, cultural events and graduations. An outdoor arts plaza is also being constructed around the concert hall, and will be incorporated with a new mixed-use development that will include two hotels, a conference center, office and ground-level retail, and an age-restricted senior living multifamily complex.

Sugar Land is the home of the Sugar Land Space Cowboys Minor League Baseball team, founded in 2012, who play at Constellation Field in the Imperial master-planned community, located between the Sugar Land Regional Airport and the former Imperial Sugar property. Originally known as the Sugar Land Skeeters, they won the 2016 and 2018 championship in the independent Atlantic League of Professional Baseball. In 2021, the Skeeters joined the Triple-A West as the Triple-A affiliate of the Houston Astros. After the 2021 season, the team rebranded as the Sugar Land Space Cowboys.

In 2014 the Sugar Land Youth Cricket Club, a children&#x27;s cricket club, was established. In 2016 it played its home games at Everest Academy in Stafford.

==Local attractions==

Sugar Land Town Square serves as the primary entertainment district in Sugar Land and Fort Bend County. The district offers an array of restaurants, sidewalk cafes, shopping venues, a Marriott Hotel and conference center, mid-rise offices and homes, a public plaza, and Sugar Land City Hall. Festivals and important events take place in the plaza. The new city hall and public plaza, a cornerstone of Sugar Land Town Square, received the &quot;Best Community Impact&quot; award from the &quot;Houston Business Journal&quot; at the fifth annual Landmark Awards ceremony.

Next door to the district is First Colony Mall, a major regional shopping mall that recently expanded from its original indoor design to include an outdoor lifestyle component, several parking garages, and new signage that blends in with the surrounding area. 

Sugar Land also hosts the Sugar Land Ice and Sports Center (formerly Sugar Land Aerodrome), offers ice skating and hockey lessons. It is open to the public as an ice skating facility. Previously, it served as the practice facility for the Houston Aeros of the American Hockey League. Also Olympic medalist Tara Lipinski trained at the Sugar Land Ice and Sports Center.

In May 2016, two sculptures in the Town Square&#x27;s public plaza were installed as part of a 10-piece collection donated by a Sugar Land resident to the city through the Sugar Land Legacy Foundation. One of the statues, which depicts two girls taking a selfie, has received criticism and acclaim from the media and general public.

Future developments in the city include new mixed-use developments on the grounds of the former Imperial Sugar refinery, Imperial Market, which will incorporate the property&#x27;s 1920s-era char house as a boutique hotel, as well as in the southern part of the Telfair master-planned community with the Smart Financial Centre as an anchor.

==Education==
===Higher education===
A branch campus of Wharton County Junior College and a branch campus of University of Houston are both located in Sugar Land.

Sugar Land is under state law in the service area of Wharton County Junior College, as its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Wharton County College is a comprehensive community college offering a wide range of postsecondary educational programs and services including associate degrees, certificates, and continuing-education courses. The college prepares students interested in transferring to baccalaureate-granting institutions.

===Primary and secondary education===
====Public schools====

All public school systems in Texas are administered by the Texas Education Agency (TEA). The Fort Bend Independent School District (FBISD) is the school district that serves almost all of the city of Sugar Land; it formed in 1959 by the consolidation of Missouri City Independent School District and the Sugar Land Independent School District. The southwest portion of Sugar Land and some very small areas within its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) are in the Lamar Consolidated Independent School District (LCISD).

High schools serving Sugar Land residents in Fort Bend ISD include Clements High School, Dulles High School and Kempner High School, as well as Austin High School and Travis High School north of the city, which both serve students in New Territory, while Lamar Consolidated ISD&#x27;s Lamar Consolidated High School and George Ranch High School, respectively, serve the River Park and Greatwood master-planned communities in Sugar Land.

Dulles, Clements, and Austin have been recognized by &quot;Texas Monthly&quot; magazine in its list of the top high schools in Texas. In addition, Dulles, Clements, and Austin high schools were also ranked among the top 1000 schools in the United States by &quot;Newsweek&quot;&#x27;s 2009 report.
Prior to 1959 Sugar Land High School, which merged into Dulles that year, served the city. At the time FBISD formed, white students attended an elementary school in Sugar Land, a junior high school in Sugar Land, and a high school site in Missouri City. The elementary and junior high campus now houses Lakeview Elementary School and the high school site now houses Missouri City Middle School. Dulles High School became the zoned high school for white students in FBISD. Black students in Sugar Land for grades 1–12 were served by M.R. Wood School, one of FBISD&#x27;s three schools for black children. Following racial desegregation in 1965, Dulles became the only zoned high school for students of all races in FBISD until Willowridge High School opened in 1979.

In addition, the Harmony Public Schools operates three charter schools in the city, the grades K–5 Harmony Science Academy, 6–8 Harmony School of Excellence, and grades 9–12 Harmony School of Innovation.

====Private schools====
Many private schools in Sugar Land and the surrounding area are of all types: nonreligious, nonsectarian, Catholic, and Protestant. The Texas Education Agency has no authority over private-school operations; private schools may or may not be accredited and achievement tests are not required for private school graduating seniors.

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston operates two Catholic K–8 schools in Sugar Land: St. Theresa Catholic School and St. Laurence School, both named for two of the city&#x27;s Catholic parishes. St. Laurence, established in 1992, received additions in 1996 and 2002. St. Theresa was established in 2008. The city government approved the permit for the St. Theresa school building in 2007, and it was dedicated on August 13, 2009. Some high school students attend Pope John XXIII High School in Greater Katy.

The Fort Bend Christian Academy, formerly known as Fort Bend Baptist Academy, was recently named &quot;Best Private School&quot; in Fort Bend County. Logos Preparatory Academy is also located in Sugar Land. The Honor Roll School serves grades PK-8 and offers athletics starting from 5th grade as well as an advanced curriculum that is one year ahead of public schools. The Darul Arqam Schools Southwest Campus is located in Alief, Houston, with a Sugar Land postal address.

 The Village School in the Energy Corridor area; the British International School of Houston in Greater Katy; and Awty International School in Spring Branch, which includes the Houston area&#x27;s French international school, have bus service to Sugar Land.

===Public libraries===
Residents of Sugar Land are served by the Fort Bend County Libraries system, which has 11 libraries. Three branches are within the city: Sugar Land Branch, First Colony Branch, and University Branch on the University of Houston Sugar Land branch campus.

==Media==
===Movie references===
A portion of the 1974 movie &quot;The Sugarland Express&quot; takes place in Sugar Land. Many of the movie&#x27;s earliest scenes were filmed at the nearby Beauford H. Jester prison pre-release center. Other parts of the set were filmed in and around Sugar Land. The movie&#x27;s title parses the name of the city as one word rather than two. It was among Steven Spielberg&#x27;s first films before he became famous. The film was the first theatrical feature film directed by Spielberg.

In 2010, &quot;The Legend of Action Man&quot; was filmed in Sugar Land. The film was produced by Dingoman Productions, a sketch comedy group formed by Sugar Land residents Andy Young, Derek Papa &amp; James McEnelly who got their start attending Austin High School together. The story takes place in the Sugar Land area and makes use of many of the landmarks there. &quot;Action Man&quot; is famous for being one of the least expensive films ever made, made on a budget of $200. Director Andy Young has written about the experience for &quot;Moviemaker&quot; magazine.

===Music references===
Folk musician Lead Belly&#x27;s song &quot;Midnight Special&quot; discusses his arrest in Houston and his stay at the Sugar Land Prison (now the Beauford H. Jester pre-release Center) in 1925.

&lt;poem&gt;If you&#x27;re ever down in Houston,
Boy, you better walk right.
And you better not squabble.
And you better not fight.
Bason and Brock will arrest you.
Payton and Boone will take you down.
You can bet your bottom dollar,
That you&#x27;re Sugar Land bound.&lt;/poem&gt;

Country music band Sugarland gets its name from the city. They reference it in their song &quot;Sugarland&quot;.

Bruce Springsteen recorded but did not release a song called &quot;Sugar Land&quot;, about the economic crisis facing American agriculture in the 1980s.

===Newspapers and magazines===
The primary newspaper serving Sugar Land residents is the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;, which is the only major newspaper in the Greater Houston region. On Thursdays, the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; offers a localized segment covering the Sugar Land area under its &quot;Fort Bend&quot; section. An alternative newspaper, the &quot;Houston Press&quot;, is also offered in this area.

Additionally, Sugar Land residents receive local area news coverage via &quot;Covering Fort Bend&quot;, which covers local news and political happenings in the Sugar Land area. Residents also are served by three free weekly newspapers, the &quot;Fort Bend Independent&quot;, the &quot;Fort Bend Star&quot;, and the &quot;Sugar Land Sun&quot;. The &quot;Fort Bend Herald and Texas Coaster&quot;, a daily newspaper covering primarily the Richmond-Rosenberg area west of Sugar Land, also covers news stories in Sugar Land.

===Television===
Over-the-air television in Sugar Land is broadcast in the Houston television market, which is the seventh-largest market in the United States according to Nielsen Media Research.

The city is also served by a citywide public-access television on cable channel 16, which covers city council meetings, planning and zoning meetings, community events, FBISD board meetings, and Fort Bend County Commissioners&#x27; Court meetings.

The vast majority of cable subscribers in the Sugar Land area are served by Comcast-owned Xfinity, which took over the Houston area&#x27;s dominant cable franchise from Time Warner in 2007. Other cable options in Sugar Land include AT&amp;T U-verse, En-Touch Systems (which covers the River Park West and Telfair areas of the city), Phonoscope, TVMAX, and Ygnition (the latter two of which cover cable subscribers in multifamily housing developments).

Sugar Land is the setting in the new Lifetime series, &quot;The Client List&quot; starring Jennifer Love Hewitt. Hewitt&#x27;s character lives in Beaumont, but commutes to Sugar Land to work at a scandalous massage parlor.

Sugar Land is mentioned in Season 7 of the television series &quot;The Rookie&quot;, where the character Officer Miles Penn, portrayed by Deric Augustine, is said to have worked as a police officer in Sugar Land for two years before transferring to Los Angeles.

==Transportation==

Sugar Land currently does not have a mass transit system. However, this could change as it has been a possible candidate for expansion of Houston&#x27;s METRORail system by means of a planned commuter rail along U.S. Highway 90A. The city is not a participant in the Houston area&#x27;s METRO transit authority; Sugar Land&#x27;s merchants do not collect the sales tax that partially funds that agency. Fort Bend County Public Transit provides commuter service from Sugar Land to Houston.

===Major thoroughfares===
Interstate 69/U.S. Highway 59, the major freeway running diagonally through the city, has undergone a major widening project in recent years to accommodate the region&#x27;s daily commuters. The finished portion of the freeway from east of State Highway 6 to just west of State Highway 99 currently has eight main lanes, with two diamond lanes and six continuous frontage road lanes. The freeway is currently undergoing a major expansion west of the city to accommodate growth in the nearby Richmond/Rosenberg area and western Fort Bend County, as well as upgrading it to federal highway standards to reflect its newfound status as an interstate highway.

U.S. Highway 90 Alternate is another major highway running through Sugar Land from west to east and traverses a historic area of the city, known as &quot;Old Sugar Land&quot;. Originally the main highway in Sugar Land prior to the construction of what is now Interstate 69, U.S. Highway 90A is currently widened to an eight-lane highway with a median between State Highway 6 and Interstate 69/U.S. Highway 59.

State Highway 6 is a major highway running from north to southeast Sugar Land and traverses through the master-planned community of First Colony. There is a freeway section that opened in 2008 from just west of Brooks Street/First Colony Blvd all the way to 3/4 miles north of U.S. Highway 90A.

A segment of State Highway 99/Grand Parkway currently traverses the New Territory and River Park master-planned communities. The original highway opened in 1994, with toll lanes added in 2014. Construction will start soon south of its current terminus at Interstate 69/US 59, which is expected to extend the highway east to Alvin in Brazoria County.

Texas F.M. 1876, widely known as Copenhaver Road, is a north-south state highway in north Sugar Land. It traverses through many established areas and acts as the western border of the Sugar Land Business Park.

===Airport===

Sugar Land Regional Airport (formerly Hull Field, later Sugar Land Municipal Airport) was purchased from a private interest in 1990 by the city of Sugar Land. It is the fourth largest airport within the Greater Houston metropolitan area. The airport handles approximately 250 aircraft operations per day. The airport has an on-field United States Customs office, making this airport attractive to energy companies based in the Houston metropolitan area as this allows flights directly to and from countries wherein overseas operations are located, allowing fliers to avoid the delays inherent in high traffic airports such as George Bush Intercontinental.

The airport today serves the area&#x27;s general aviation (GA) aircraft serving corporate, governmental, and private clientele. A new terminal and a GA complex opened in 2006. Sugar Land Regional briefly handled commercial passenger service during the mid-1990s via a now-defunct Texas carrier known as Conquest Airlines. For scheduled commercial service, Sugar Landers rely on Houston&#x27;s two commercial airports, George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), northeast, and William P. Hobby Airport (HOU), east.

The city of Houston maintains a park that occupies of land directly north of the Sugar Land Regional Airport, and developers have built master-planned communities (Telfair, and the future development of TX DOT Tract 3 immediately east of the airport) around the airport, both factors that block airport expansion.

China Airlines operated private bus shuttle services from Wel-Farm Super Market/Metro Bank on State Highway 6 in Sugar Land to George Bush Intercontinental Airport to feed the flight from Bush Intercontinental to Taipei, Taiwan. The service ended when China Airlines pulled out of Houston on January 29, 2008.

==Notable people==

* Katie Armiger, country singer
* Kevin Bass, former outfielder for the Houston Astros and the San Francisco Giants
* Derek Carr, NFL quarterback
* Tom DeLay, former United States Representative and House Majority Leader
* Ed Fiori, Professional Golfer
* Sean Patrick Flanery, Actor
* Derrick Frazier, NFL cornerback
* Stuart Holden, soccer player
* Jerry Hughes, defensive end for the Buffalo Bills
* George Iloka, NFL player
* Brittney Karbowski, voice actor
* Tara Lipinski, Olympic gold medalist in figure skating
* Diana López, Mark López, and Steven López, Taekwondo athletes
* Casey Luong, known as Keshi, singer, grew up in Sugar Land
* Simone Manuel, Olympic gold medalist in swimming
* Maddie Font, member of country duo Maddie &amp; Tae
* Pete Olson, United States Representative
* Ashley Spillers, actress, grew up in Sugar Land
* Allison Tolman, Emmy-nominated actress
* Ryan Trahan, YouTuber
* Simeon Woods Richardson, MLB pitcher
* Rosé, drag queen, RuPaul&#x27;s Drag Race Season 13 finalist
* Nicholas Alexander Chavez, actor, spent part of his early childhood in Sugar Land

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* City website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="0" end="10" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="45" end="54" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="79" end="102" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="205" end="221" title="downtown Houston" label="downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="302" end="323" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="Texas State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q94624" start="328" end="341" title="Interstate 69" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="342" end="355" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="441" end="446" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="447" end="457" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="482" end="492" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="500" end="512" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006894" start="568" end="590" title="Imperial Sugar" label="Imperial Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="630" end="642" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="647" end="659" title="municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266029" start="736" end="747" title="Edge city" label="edge cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="796" end="822" title="Planned community" label="master-planned communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="955" end="980" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936298" start="1086" end="1096" title="Municipal annexation in the United States" label="annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="1104" end="1113" title="Greatwood, Sugar Land, Texas" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="1118" end="1131" title="New Territory, Sugar Land, Texas" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q227857" start="1346" end="1360" title="sugar refinery" label="sugar refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="1577" end="1587" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="1611" end="1628" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="1832" end="1842" title="plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1854" end="1860" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1862" end="1866" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1872" end="1881" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="2126" end="2139" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2151" end="2160" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="2509" end="2518" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076492" start="2544" end="2560" title="Isaac Herbert Kempner" label="Isaac H. Kempner"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="2852" end="2866" title="tenant farming" label="tenant farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="3518" end="3536" title="Company town" label="company-owned town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061943" start="3755" end="3781" title="Central Unit" label="Imperial State Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561743" start="3800" end="3813" title="convict lease" label="convict lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="4210" end="4217" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116328" start="4858" end="4870" title="Oyster Creek (Texas)" label="Oyster Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="4989" end="5009" title="municipal government" label="municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612423" start="5045" end="5061" title="general-law city" label="general-law city"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="5108" end="5113" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="5142" end="5153" title="Subdivision (land)" label="subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137210" start="5387" end="5399" title="country club" label="country club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="5463" end="5474" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452756" start="5800" end="5812" title="First Colony" label="First Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549048" start="5871" end="5883" title="Gerald D. Hines" label="Gerald Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="6132" end="6142" title="green belt" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q653581" start="6878" end="6890" title="Fluor Corporation" label="Fluor Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425316" start="6892" end="6904" title="Schlumberger" label="Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393497" start="6906" end="6912" title="Unocal" label="Unocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="7150" end="7159" title="home-rule" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="7160" end="7180" title="municipal government" label="municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="7255" end="7268" title="mayor-council" label="mayor-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="7391" end="7414" title="single-member districts" label="single-member districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="7741" end="7756" title="council-manager" label="council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="7817" end="7829" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="7899" end="7908" title="Bill (law)" label="amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="8470" end="8478" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="8715" end="8727" title="White-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="8761" end="8768" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446872" start="8936" end="8949" title="Interstate 69 in Texas" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505525" start="8950" end="8965" title="U.S. Route 59 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="8970" end="8985" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452759" start="9041" end="9058" title="First Colony Mall" label="First Colony Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="9119" end="9123" title="shopping mall" label="mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="9659" end="9670" title="U.S. Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="9892" end="9901" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="10138" end="10154" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="10454" end="10486" title="University of Houston Sugar Land" label="University of Houston Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="10691" end="10702" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10704" end="10715" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="11232" end="11239" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="11748" end="11757" title="Greatwood, Texas" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="11763" end="11776" title="New Territory, Texas" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163924" start="12133" end="12152" title="Constellation Field" label="Constellation Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634855" start="12166" end="12190" title="Sugar Land Space Cowboys" label="Sugar Land Space Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="12265" end="12286" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639365" start="12386" end="12408" title="Smart Financial Centre" label="Smart Financial Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="12581" end="12589" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="12591" end="12604" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City"/>
<link wikidata="Q981413" start="12610" end="12623" title="Meadows Place, Texas" label="Meadows Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="12654" end="12681" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853515" start="12862" end="12889" title="Sugar Land Regional Airport" label="Sugar Land Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27034" start="13068" end="13083" title="Brazoria County, Texas" label="Brazoria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116328" start="13085" end="13097" title="Oyster Creek (Texas)" label="Oyster Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="13378" end="13387" title="subsidence" label="subsiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="13670" end="13684" title="Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="13836" end="13852" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="14286" end="14294" title="aquifers" label="aquifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="14833" end="14837" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="14845" end="14850" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="14873" end="14877" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="14936" end="14943" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="14999" end="15014" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="15022" end="15030" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="15147" end="15150" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="15155" end="15166" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="15218" end="15224" title="halite" label="halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="15469" end="15479" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="15575" end="15581" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="15877" end="15894" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="15921" end="15931" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="15961" end="15971" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="16043" end="16048" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="16098" end="16107" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="16267" end="16281" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="16932" end="16941" title="snowstorm" label="snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602637" start="16957" end="16970" title="2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452756" start="17310" end="17322" title="First Colony" label="First Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="17324" end="17333" title="Greatwood (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="17335" end="17348" title="New Territory" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="17350" end="17357" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338651" start="17394" end="17404" title="Riverstone (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Riverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="17454" end="17465" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137210" start="17468" end="17480" title="country club" label="country club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="17666" end="17677" title="city limits" label="city limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="17686" end="17715" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818280" start="17893" end="17909" title="U.S. Route 90 Alternate (Texas)" label="U.S. Highway 90A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425316" start="18581" end="18593" title="Schlumberger" label="Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452756" start="18990" end="19002" title="First Colony, Sugar Land, Texas" label="First Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="19143" end="19150" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338651" start="19156" end="19166" title="Riverstone (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Riverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804477" start="19419" end="19442" title="Sweetwater Country Club" label="Sweetwater Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="19467" end="19471" title="LPGA" label="LPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="19786" end="19798" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="19831" end="19877" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="20274" end="20285" title="city limits" label="city limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503844" start="20560" end="20576" title="Texas State Highway 99" label="State Highway 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853515" start="20729" end="20756" title="Sugar Land Regional Airport" label="Sugar Land Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061943" start="20821" end="20833" title="Central Unit" label="Central Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="21027" end="21052" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="21168" end="21174" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="21377" end="21390" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="21636" end="21651" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766797" start="21707" end="21714" title="Chinese Americans in Texas" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="21721" end="21731" title="Vietnamese American" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="21742" end="21750" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="21776" end="21784" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="21867" end="21882" title="Indian American" label="Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302518" start="22039" end="22046" title="Ismaili Jamatkhana" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="23181" end="23198" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="23290" end="23302" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23412" end="23421" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="23568" end="23615" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q981608" start="23844" end="23861" title="Sienna Plantation" label="Sienna Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006894" start="23890" end="23912" title="Imperial Sugar Company" label="Imperial Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781569" start="23980" end="23996" title="Basilian Fathers" label="Basilian Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834610" start="24155" end="24192" title="BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston" label="BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q931506" start="24196" end="24208" title="Swaminarayan" label="Swaminarayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="24251" end="24265" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="24266" end="24282" title="Fort Bend County" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="24289" end="24297" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q173273" start="24347" end="24355" title="Chinmaya" label="Chinmaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="24446" end="24451" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726383" start="24706" end="24711" title="Alief" label="Alief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997339" start="25080" end="25114" title="Islamic Society of Greater Houston" label="Islamic Society of Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="25421" end="25444" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="25602" end="25613" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="25636" end="25653" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227857" start="25948" end="25956" title="Sugar refinery" label="refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425316" start="26049" end="26061" title="Schlumberger" label="Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369609" start="26066" end="26078" title="oil services" label="oil services"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="26129" end="26141" title="Interstate 45" label="Gulf Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818280" start="26230" end="26246" title="U.S. Highway 90A" label="U.S. Highway 90A"/>
<link wikidata="Q653581" start="26789" end="26801" title="Fluor Daniel" label="Fluor Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206056" start="26863" end="26874" title="Minute Maid" label="Minute Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634858" start="26902" end="26924" title="Sugar Land Town Square" label="Sugar Land Town Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452756" start="26928" end="26940" title="First Colony" label="First Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597863" start="26999" end="27019" title="2000 St. James Place" label="2000 St. James Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q796309" start="27042" end="27054" title="BMC Software" label="BMC Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987225" start="27261" end="27270" title="Westchase, Houston" label="Westchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="27561" end="27576" title="Council-Manager" label="Council-Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="27637" end="27649" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="28763" end="28775" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="28790" end="28795" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="28834" end="28857" title="single-member districts" label="single-member districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="28906" end="28914" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245966" start="29434" end="29449" title="Dean A. Hrbacek" label="Dean A. Hrbacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233962" start="29464" end="29480" title="David G. Wallace" label="David G. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090055" start="29495" end="29512" title="James A. Thompson (Texas politician)" label="James A. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="29640" end="29650" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="29705" end="29715" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="29807" end="29816" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707370" start="29852" end="29892" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 22nd congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 22nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q96741441" start="29961" end="29971" title="Troy Nehls" label="Troy Nehls"/>
<link wikidata="Q180390" start="30067" end="30076" title="Tom DeLay" label="Tom DeLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="30227" end="30235" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="30335" end="30352" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707966" start="30391" end="30402" title="Texas Senate, District 17" label="District 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="30410" end="30422" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205149" start="30459" end="30471" title="Joan Huffman" label="Joan Huffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q979806" start="30590" end="30603" title="New Territory, Texas" label="New Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q969235" start="30605" end="30614" title="Greatwood, Texas" label="Greatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697190" start="30631" end="30638" title="Telfair, Sugar Land" label="Telfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707967" start="30656" end="30667" title="Texas Senate, District 18" label="District 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195634" start="30695" end="30709" title="Lois Kolkhorst" label="Lois Kolkhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568855" start="30725" end="30736" title="Glenn Hegar" label="Glenn Hegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350359" start="30804" end="30827" title="Texas State Comptroller" label="Texas State Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="30855" end="30885" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119018" start="30968" end="30979" title="Rick Miller (Texas politician)" label="Rick Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="30991" end="31009" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18630894" start="31110" end="31122" title="Ron Reynolds (Texas politician)" label="Ron Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31184" end="31199" title="Phil Stephenson (Texas politician)" label="Phil Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31332" end="31349" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31351" end="31373" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31402" end="31418" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="31480" end="31516" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187963" start="31537" end="31561" title="Jester State Prison Farm" label="Jester State Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187959" start="31571" end="31579" title="Jester I Unit" label="Jester I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044590" start="31581" end="31586" title="Carol Vance Unit" label="Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187955" start="31588" end="31598" title="Jester III Unit" label="Jester III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187957" start="31604" end="31613" title="Jester IV Unit" label="Jester IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="31621" end="31640" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061943" start="31681" end="31693" title="Central Unit" label="Central Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="32181" end="32209" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="32378" end="32390" title="White-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="32565" end="32576" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="32749" end="32759" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q128334" start="33046" end="33056" title="Round Rock, Texas" label="Round Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639365" start="33407" end="33429" title="Smart Financial Centre" label="Smart Financial Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="33497" end="33512" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634855" start="33914" end="33938" title="Sugar Land Space Cowboys" label="Sugar Land Space Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="33939" end="33960" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163924" start="33996" end="34015" title="Constellation Field" label="Constellation Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869400" start="34250" end="34290" title="Atlantic League of Professional Baseball" label="Atlantic League of Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="34325" end="34338" title="Triple-A West" label="Triple-A West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="34346" end="34354" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="34372" end="34386" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="34525" end="34532" title="cricket (sport)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225769" start="34592" end="34607" title="Islamic Education Institute of Texas" label="Everest Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="34611" end="34619" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634858" start="34645" end="34667" title="Sugar Land Town Square" label="Sugar Land Town Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918608" start="34829" end="34843" title="Marriott Hotel" label="Marriott Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842874" start="35138" end="35162" title="Houston Business Journal" label="Houston Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452759" start="35245" end="35262" title="First Colony Mall" label="First Colony Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474092" start="35717" end="35730" title="Houston Aeros (1994–2013)" label="Houston Aeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="35738" end="35760" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q232999" start="35784" end="35797" title="Tara Lipinski" label="Tara Lipinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639365" start="36486" end="36508" title="Smart Financial Centre" label="Smart Financial Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990705" start="36580" end="36609" title="Wharton County Junior College" label="Wharton County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="36633" end="36654" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="36779" end="36808" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="36852" end="36869" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="36953" end="36969" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="37239" end="37261" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="37273" end="37310" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="Fort Bend Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083086" start="37484" end="37522" title="Sugar Land Independent School District" label="Sugar Land Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="37597" end="37626" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="37644" end="37690" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131515" start="37768" end="37788" title="Clements High School" label="Clements High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313451" start="37790" end="37808" title="Dulles High School (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="Dulles High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387103" start="37813" end="37832" title="Kempner High School" label="Kempner High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823127" start="37845" end="37863" title="Stephen F. Austin High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836269" start="37868" end="37886" title="Travis High School (Fort Bend County, Texas)" label="Travis High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480844" start="37986" end="38016" title="Lamar Consolidated High School" label="Lamar Consolidated High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543705" start="38021" end="38045" title="George Ranch High School" label="George Ranch High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707865" start="38198" end="38211" title="Texas Monthly" label="Texas Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="38402" end="38410" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079480" start="38451" end="38473" title="Sugar Land High School" label="Sugar Land High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046886" start="38969" end="38985" title="M.R. Wood School" label="M.R. Wood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q123134782" start="39013" end="39039" title="black school" label="schools for black children"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022436" start="39163" end="39186" title="Willowridge High School (Houston)" label="Willowridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659593" start="39221" end="39243" title="Harmony Public Schools" label="Harmony Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="39259" end="39274" title="charter schools" label="charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="39438" end="39452" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647529" start="39569" end="39591" title="Texas Education Agency" label="Texas Education Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="39769" end="39816" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358885" start="39839" end="39849" title="K–8 school" label="K–8 school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229205" start="40244" end="40271" title="Pope John XXIII High School (Harris County, Texas)" label="Pope John XXIII High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600591" start="40275" end="40287" title="Greater Katy" label="Greater Katy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230340" start="40294" end="40321" title="Fort Bend Christian Academy" label="Fort Bend Christian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="40422" end="40438" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225769" start="40663" end="40682" title="Darul Arqam Schools" label="Darul Arqam Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772656" start="40766" end="40784" title="The Village School (Houston)" label="The Village School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916501" start="40792" end="40807" title="Energy Corridor" label="Energy Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971008" start="40818" end="40857" title="British International School of Houston" label="British International School of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600591" start="40861" end="40873" title="Greater Katy" label="Greater Katy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830147" start="40879" end="40904" title="Awty International School" label="Awty International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580395" start="40908" end="40921" title="Spring Branch, Houston" label="Spring Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470802" start="41089" end="41115" title="Fort Bend County Libraries" label="Fort Bend County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q432526" start="41369" end="41390" title="The Sugarland Express" label="The Sugarland Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187963" start="41491" end="41535" title="Jester State Prison Farm" label="Beauford H. Jester prison pre-release center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="41691" end="41707" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="42416" end="42429" title="Folk musician" label="Folk musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="42430" end="42440" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044259" start="42459" end="42475" title="Midnight Special (song)" label="Midnight Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200415" start="42912" end="42921" title="Sugarland" label="Sugarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="43007" end="43024" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="43256" end="43273" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141398" start="43527" end="43540" title="Houston Press" label="Houston Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993676" start="43932" end="43966" title="Fort Bend Herald and Texas Coaster" label="Fort Bend Herald and Texas Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="44335" end="44359" title="public-access television" label="public-access television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="44363" end="44368" title="cable TV" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470808" start="44465" end="44470" title="Fort Bend Independent School District" label="FBISD"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="44491" end="44507" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="44621" end="44628" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151002" start="44635" end="44642" title="Xfinity" label="Xfinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="44714" end="44725" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654562" start="44777" end="44793" title="AT&amp;amp;T U-verse" label="AT&amp;amp;T U-verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187313" start="44878" end="44888" title="Phonoscope Communications" label="Phonoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053413" start="44901" end="44909" title="Ygnition" label="Ygnition"/>
<link wikidata="Q974046" start="45058" end="45073" title="The Client List (TV series)" label="The Client List"/>
<link wikidata="Q175104" start="45089" end="45109" title="Jennifer Love Hewitt" label="Jennifer Love Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744320" start="45289" end="45299" title="The Rookie (TV series)" label="The Rookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="45471" end="45482" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="45542" end="45561" title="public transport" label="mass transit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q586193" start="45658" end="45667" title="METRORail" label="METRORail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="45697" end="45710" title="regional rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818280" start="45717" end="45733" title="U.S. Route 90 Alternate (Texas)" label="U.S. Highway 90A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015387" start="45792" end="45797" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas" label="METRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="45908" end="45924" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446872" start="46021" end="46034" title="Interstate 69 in Texas" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505525" start="46035" end="46050" title="U.S. Route 59 in Texas" label="U.S. Highway 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="46656" end="46674" title="Interstate Highway System" label="interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818280" start="46677" end="46702" title="U.S. Route 90 Alternate (Texas)" label="U.S. Highway 90 Alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="47088" end="47103" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503844" start="47397" end="47413" title="Texas State Highway 99" label="State Highway 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503844" start="47414" end="47427" title="Grand Parkway" label="Grand Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853515" start="47961" end="47988" title="Sugar Land Regional Airport" label="Sugar Land Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="48587" end="48615" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="48659" end="48675" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162423" start="48921" end="48938" title="Conquest Airlines" label="Conquest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="49036" end="49072" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="49095" end="49119" title="William P. Hobby Airport" label="William P. Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="49449" end="49463" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="49543" end="49558" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="State Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="49662" end="49668" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="49670" end="49676" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377390" start="49782" end="49795" title="Katie Armiger" label="Katie Armiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395806" start="49814" end="49824" title="Kevin Bass" label="Kevin Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="49852" end="49866" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="49875" end="49895" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261870" start="49898" end="49908" title="Derek Carr" label="Derek Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q180390" start="49928" end="49937" title="Tom DeLay" label="Tom DeLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334798" start="50003" end="50011" title="Ed Fiori" label="Ed Fiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q447967" start="50035" end="50055" title="Sean Patrick Flanery" label="Sean Patrick Flanery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263013" start="50065" end="50080" title="Derrick Frazier" label="Derrick Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q869161" start="50086" end="50096" title="cornerback" label="cornerback"/>
<link wikidata="Q312513" start="50099" end="50112" title="Stuart Holden" label="Stuart Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q964378" start="50130" end="50142" title="Jerry Hughes" label="Jerry Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="50166" end="50179" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760540" start="50182" end="50194" title="George Iloka" label="George Iloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355802" start="50209" end="50227" title="Brittney Karbowski" label="Brittney Karbowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q232999" start="50243" end="50256" title="Tara Lipinski" label="Tara Lipinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q290181" start="50300" end="50311" title="Diana López (taekwondo)" label="Diana López"/>
<link wikidata="Q552961" start="50313" end="50323" title="Mark López (taekwondo)" label="Mark López"/>
<link wikidata="Q699489" start="50329" end="50341" title="Steven López" label="Steven López"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362860" start="50364" end="50391" title="Keshi (singer)" label="Casey Luong, known as Keshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14342739" start="50425" end="50438" title="Simone Manuel" label="Simone Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157530" start="50476" end="50487" title="Maddie Font" label="Maddie Font"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157530" start="50511" end="50527" title="Maddie &amp;amp; Tae" label="Maddie &amp;amp; Tae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073303" start="50530" end="50540" title="Pete Olson" label="Pete Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108216783" start="50573" end="50588" title="Ashley Spillers" label="Ashley Spillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821316" start="50623" end="50637" title="Allison Tolman" label="Allison Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16395511" start="50639" end="50643" title="66th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115333595" start="50664" end="50675" title="Ryan Trahan" label="Ryan Trahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125263" start="50677" end="50685" title="YouTuber" label="YouTuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q107406406" start="50688" end="50711" title="Simeon Woods Richardson" label="Simeon Woods Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106465822" start="50727" end="50731" title="Rosé (drag queen)" label="Rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q169844" start="50745" end="50768" title="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race" label="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q104073362" start="50769" end="50778" title="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race season 13" label="Season 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q108459029" start="50790" end="50815" title="Nicholas Alexander Chavez" label="Nicholas Alexander Chavez"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135901" wikidata="Q973251" url="?curid=135901" title="Thompsons, Texas">
<text>Thompsons is a town in Fort Bend County, Texas, United States, within the Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown metropolitan area. The population was 156 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==
Thompsons is located south of the Brazos River in east-central Fort Bend County at (29.486494, –95.605803). Richmond, the county seat, is to the northwest. According to the United States Census Bureau, Thompsons has a total area of , of which is land and , or 40.71%, is water.

Smithers Lake, an artificial impoundment, along with its associated W.A. Parish Power Plant occupies most of the western half of the town itself. The ETJ of Sugar Land borders the northern end of Thompsons&#x27; ETJ; that of Rosenberg is on the west; Missouri City&#x27;s approaches from the east.

===Climate===

The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Thompsons has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 236 people, 93 households, and 73 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 114 housing units at an average density of 18.4 per square mile (7.1/km2). The racial makeup of the town was 43.64% White, 47.03% African American, 0.85% Native American, 2.12% Asian, 3.81% from other races, and 2.54% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.05% of the population.

There were 93 households, out of which 29.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.8% were married couples living together, 20.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.5% were non-families. 19.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 2.82.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 22.5% under the age of 18, 11.0% from 18 to 24, 26.3% from 25 to 44, 28.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $32,083, and the median income for a family was $32,321. Males had a median income of $38,125 versus $22,222 for females. The per capita income for the town was $29,977. About 20.0% of families and 20.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.4% of those under the age of eighteen and 29.7% of those 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
The United States Postal Service operates the Thompsons Post Office at 222 Oilfield Road.
The city was first incorporated in 1979 and has a mayor council form of government. The first mayor was mayor G. W. Longserre who was succeeded by current mayor Freddie Newsome.

==Government and infrastructure==
Fort Bend County does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

==Education==
Thompsons is zoned to Lamar Consolidated Independent School District schools. It is zoned to George Ranch High School.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q973251" start="0" end="9" title="Thompsons, Texas" label="Thompsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="15" end="19" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="23" end="39" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="41" end="46" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="74" end="100" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston–Sugar Land–Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="150" end="161" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q903306" start="212" end="224" title="Brazos River" label="Brazos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="286" end="294" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="351" end="378" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358456" start="457" end="470" title="Smithers Lake" label="Smithers Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010297" start="525" end="548" title="WA Parish Generating Station" label="W.A. Parish Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="607" end="610" title="Extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="ETJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="614" end="624" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="682" end="691" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980055" start="708" end="728" title="Missouri City, Texas" label="Missouri City&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="888" end="917" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="942" end="967" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1043" end="1049" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1291" end="1296" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1305" end="1321" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1329" end="1344" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1352" end="1357" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1370" end="1381" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1417" end="1425" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1429" end="1435" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1586" end="1601" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2398" end="2415" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2509" end="2521" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="2644" end="2672" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2976" end="2993" title="hospital district" label="hospital district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3017" title="OakBend Medical Center" label="OakBend Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3062" title="charity hospital" label="charity hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480848" start="3133" end="3179" title="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District" label="Lamar Consolidated Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543705" start="3204" end="3228" title="George Ranch High School" label="George Ranch High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135902" wikidata="Q982527" url="?curid=135902" title="Mount Vernon, Texas">
<text>Mount Vernon is a town and the county seat of Franklin County, Texas, United States. The population was 2,491 at the 2020 United States census.

==History==

Mount Vernon started as a settlement near the Fanning Springs (on Holbrook Street south of the present town square). Affidavits filed to establish land titles soon after the Texas Revolution document the settlement by squatters in Spanish Texas commencing in 1818.

By 1848 the United States government established a post office, and in 1849 a formal town site was laid out on land donated by Stephen and Rebecca Keith for the town of Mount Vernon. Since there were two other Mount Vernons in Texas, the post office was called &quot;Keith&quot; and then &quot;Lone Star&quot; before the name &quot;Mount Vernon&quot; became available in 1875. Franklin County was carved out of Titus County in 1875, and Mount Vernon was elected county seat in competition with other communities.

The county&#x27;s economy was based in agriculture with corn and cotton, followed by over 500,000 peach trees in production in the 1920s, watermelons in the 1930s, and the state&#x27;s top record production of cane syrup in the 1940s. The 1936 discovery of oil on C.G. Hughes&#x27; land in the north part of the county led to a more diversified economy, with oil production continuing today combined with light industry, manufacturing, and diverse agricultural endeavors. Mount Vernon, as county seat, was assured a continuing vital existence as the economic center for the county. The town boasted churches, doctors, lawyers, and many varied stores in a time before people had the ability to travel far. The town voted to incorporate in 1910 under a mayor/council form of government. In 1911 a bond issue was passed to create a public waterworks. Electric and gas utility service followed.

The downtown area reflects a small-town atmosphere. The central plaza has a picturesque gazebo and park benches. On the north side of the square is a classical revival 1912 white limestone courthouse with a chiming clock tower. The courthouse recently underwent an extensive restoration as part of the Texas Historic Courthouse Preservation Program and has been returned to its 1912 grandeur.

History abounds in and around Mount Vernon. Over 50 homes built before World War I still stand around town and are marked with signs designating the original owners and year of construction. Tour maps are available at various locations including the Franklin County Historical Association Museums, Franklin County Chamber of Commerce, and Mount Vernon City Hall. There are over 20 official state historical markers in Franklin County. The Cherokee Trace runs along the eastern edge of the county south toward Nacogdoches. The Choctaw Trail runs through the county toward Dallas. The Bankhead Highway remains as Mount Vernon&#x27;s Main Street.

==Geography==
Mount Vernon is located at the center of Franklin County. U.S. Route 67 passes through the northern side of town as Main Street, leading east to Mount Pleasant and west to Sulphur Springs. Texas State Highway 37 passes through the western side of town, leading north to Bogata and south to Winnsboro. Interstate 30 passes through the southern end of town, with access from Exit 146 (Highway 37) and Exit 147. I-30 leads east to Texarkana and west to Dallas.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Mount Vernon has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.38%, is water.

===Climate===
==Demographics==

According to the 2000 U.S. census, there were 2,286 people, 903 households, and 582 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,045 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 77.21% White, 13.52% African American, 0.61% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 7.17% from other races, and 1.18% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.80% of the population. In 2020, its population was 2,491; at the 2020 U.S. census, its racial and ethnic makeup was predominantly non-Hispanic white.

In 2000, the median income for a household in the town was $28,824, and the median income for a family was $36,150. Males had a median income of $30,132 versus $18,707 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,186. About 14.9% of families and 17.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.6% of those under age 18 and 16.3% of those age 65 or over. The 2020 American Community Survey determined the median household income was $56,016.

==Museums and attractions==
=== Fire Station Museum ===
Housed in the 1940 WPA-financed fire station, changing exhibits from the permanent collection include nature and history displays of butterflies, bird eggs, violins, toys, seashells, antique tools, wood carvings, and Native American artifacts. The dental chair and equipment that were once used by Dr. Con Smith in Mount Vernon is on display. Exhibits upstairs include a collection of bird eggs and Native American artifacts from Franklin County and other parts of Texas and a collection of butterflies. The museum is one of only 13 museums holding eggs of the extinct Carolina parakeet, heath hen, and passenger pigeon. An exhibit of sports memorabilia related to the life and career of home-town boy and pro-football legend Don Meredith is also housed here. The museum is open Tuesday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 1 P.M., and otherwise by appointment. It is located at 111 S. Kaufman Street. Call 903-537-9300 for information and appointments for tours or visit FCHA. Admission is free. Ask for a free map of historic homes and an annotated driving-tour guide for the town.
=== 1894 Railroad Depot ===
The restored Mount Vernon 1894 Cotton Belt Railroad Depot is a real gem that has been carefully restored pursuant to National Register standards with original colors and decor. Separate waiting rooms, designed to serve under the segregation laws at that time, today house exhibits. The central office is furnished with antiques suitable to an office at the turn of the 20th century including working telegraphy and railroading exhibits. The waiting room formerly restricted to White patrons houses a model train exhibit. The large freight room houses an 1899 Studebaker covered wagon in excellent condition and offers students a chance to reflect on the real change in transportation in America after the advent of the automobile. There is also a small 1880 log cabin that was moved onto the property, a syrup press and mill, period mule-drawn farm machinery, and a blacksmith shop. The Depot is located at 202 S. Kaufman Street. Call 903-537-9300 to schedule a tour or visit the Fire Station Museum across the street for me information. Admission is free

=== Bankhead Highway Visitor Center ===
The Bankhead Highway, which opened in 1919 and ran from Washington D.C. to San Diego, was the nation&#x27;s first all-weather transcontinental highway. It passes through Franklin County and serves as Mount Vernon&#x27;s Main Street and follows an early Indian trading route known as the Choctaw Trail. By 1930 it was renumbered as U. S. No. 1 and was called &quot;The Broadway of America.&quot; The Bankhead Highway Route was changed in 1937 and follows present U. S. Hwy 67. 
The Visitor Center is one fourth mile west of U.S. Highway 37 on CR NW 1017. Just follow Main Street to the west past Highway 37. The Visitor Center includes the Lowry Pavilion, which is available to rent for special outdoor occasions, and the Dupree Park Nature Preserve and Nature Trail, a mile and a half walk through the property with special marked stations for bird sightings. Though the property gates are locked at off hours, a pedestrian gate allows admittance for individual use from dawn until dusk. A printed trail guide is available in the Visitor Center.

=== Alamo Mission Museum ===
Using a replica of the Alamo Mission as the backdrop, the mission mixes history and fun. Learn about Texas history and bring the family out for family events such as Chili Cook-off &amp; Bluegrass Festival, Turtle Derby, Halloween Hayrides with pumpkin fun, and Redneck Rendezvous. The museum is located at 1714 County Road 4105 SE.

=== Old Mount Vernon Waterworks Plant ===
Located on Holbrook Street just south of the intersection with Rutherford Street, the first facility was built in 1911. Dr. Will Godwin, entomologist with Stephen F. Austin State University, and Steve Moore, current Michener Fellow with the University of Texas, are restoring the facility.

==Recreation==
=== Little Creek Park ===

Mr. &amp; Mrs. N. E. Dupree donated approximately 4.2 acres of land to the City of Mount Vernon in July 1958 for the love and respect they had for the young people of the town and surrounding communities for the creation of a park. The park consists of tennis courts, basketball courts, two playground areas, baseball field, a covered pavilion for family and social gatherings, and a walking trail. The park is located just south of the town square on Kaufman Street. Contact the City of Mount Vernon at 903-537-2252 for more information.

=== Lake Cypress Springs ===

Franklin County is the home of spring-fed Lake Cypress Springs and is a bass fisherman&#x27;s paradise. It is surrounded by 869 acres of public parks owned and maintained by the Franklin County Water District. Camper sites, shelters, and meeting pavilions are located in various parks at the lake, as well as a marina with water playground equipment. Lake Cypress Springs was impounded in 1970 with 3,400 acres of top fishing waters. Walleye were stocked in the early days of the lake with some success. Black Bass and catfish are the prime targets of visiting anglers today. The waters of Lake Bob Sandlin back up to the dam on Cypress Creek. For more information, contact Franklin County Water District at 903-537-4536 or FCWD Website.

==Education==
The town is served by the Mount Vernon Independent School District and is home to the Mount Vernon High School Tigers.

On May 24, 2019, the Mount Vernon school board announced former Baylor University coach Art Briles had been given a two-year contract as the high school&#x27;s varsity football coach. This decision has attracted widespread attention due to Briles having been terminated in 2016 from his position as head coach of Baylor&#x27;s football team as part of the Baylor University sexual assault scandal.

==Notable people==

* Bobby Maples, offensive lineman with the Houston Oilers, Pittsburgh Steelers and Denver Broncos
* Don Meredith, former Dallas Cowboys quarterback and Monday Night Football broadcaster
* Greg Ostertag, retired NBA player

==References==

==External links==
*City of Mount Vernon official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982527" start="0" end="12" title="Mount Vernon, Texas" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="18" end="22" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="31" end="42" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110624" start="46" end="61" title="Franklin County, Texas" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="63" end="68" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="117" end="142" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="332" end="348" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="389" end="402" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q113096" start="835" end="847" title="Titus County, Texas" label="Titus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="886" end="897" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1148" end="1158" title="cane syrup" label="cane syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q961082" start="1918" end="1924" title="gazebo" label="gazebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q970482" start="2733" end="2744" title="Nacogdoches, Texas" label="Nacogdoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2795" end="2801" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q818869" start="2807" end="2823" title="Bankhead Highway" label="Bankhead Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504331" start="2941" end="2954" title="U.S. Route 67 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q125934" start="3028" end="3042" title="Mount Pleasant, Texas" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q978175" start="3055" end="3070" title="Sulphur Springs, Texas" label="Sulphur Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503703" start="3072" end="3094" title="Texas State Highway 37" label="Texas State Highway 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q890387" start="3153" end="3159" title="Bogata, Texas" label="Bogata"/>
<link wikidata="Q539501" start="3173" end="3182" title="Winnsboro, Texas" label="Winnsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q94104" start="3184" end="3197" title="Interstate 30 in Texas" label="Interstate 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q844020" start="3311" end="3320" title="Texarkana, Texas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3333" end="3339" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3359" end="3386" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3516" end="3532" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3742" end="3747" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3756" end="3772" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3780" end="3795" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3803" end="3808" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3821" end="3832" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3868" end="3876" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3880" end="3886" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3972" end="3988" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="4037" end="4055" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4243" end="4260" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4354" end="4366" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="4450" end="4475" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="4604" end="4607" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q629204" start="5154" end="5171" title="Carolina parakeet" label="Carolina parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125882" start="5173" end="5182" title="heath hen" label="heath hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="5188" end="5204" title="passenger pigeon" label="passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945081" start="5311" end="5323" title="Don Meredith" label="Don Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118357" start="9180" end="9200" title="Lake Cypress Springs" label="Lake Cypress Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963974" start="9917" end="9957" title="Mount Vernon Independent School District" label="Mount Vernon Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924379" start="9977" end="10001" title="Mount Vernon High School (Texas)" label="Mount Vernon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="10075" end="10092" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796715" start="10099" end="10109" title="Art Briles" label="Art Briles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525744" start="10367" end="10407" title="Baylor University sexual assault scandal" label="Baylor University sexual assault scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935321" start="10432" end="10444" title="Bobby Maples" label="Bobby Maples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="10473" end="10487" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="10489" end="10508" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="10513" end="10527" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q945081" start="10530" end="10542" title="Don Meredith" label="Don Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="10551" end="10565" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="10582" end="10603" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366501" start="10618" end="10631" title="Greg Ostertag" label="Greg Ostertag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135903" wikidata="Q973970" url="?curid=135903" title="Fairfield, Texas">
<text>Fairfield is a city and county seat of Freestone County, Texas, United States. The population was 2,850 at the 2020 census, down from 3,094 at the 2000 census. It was founded in 1851.

==Geography==
Fairfield is located in the center of Freestone County. Interstate 45 passes through the west side of the city, leading north to Dallas and south to Houston. Access is from Exits 197 and 198. U.S. Route 84 runs directly through the city, leading east to Palestine and west to Waco. Texas State Highway 75 (Fairway) crosses US 84 at the west end of downtown, and leads northwest to Streetman and south to Dew.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which , or 0.07%, is water.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cold winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Fairfield has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,850 people, 932 households, and 658 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 3,094 people, 1,235 households, and 791 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,431 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 71.46% White, 21.43% African American, 0.26% Native American, 0.68% Asian, 4.65% from other races, and 1.52% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.50% of the population.

There were 1,235 households, out of which 30.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.2% were married couples living together, 13.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.9% were non-families. 32.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 3.06.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 26.3% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 25.9% from 25 to 44, 20.5% from 45 to 64, and 18.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $28,636, and the median income for a family was $40,871. Males had a median income of $29,643 versus $15,887 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,308. About 14.1% of families and 18.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.4% of those under age 18 and 22.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==

* Tony Brackens, NFL player
* Louis Cheek, NFL player
* Kenny Dorham, jazz trumpeter
* Nanceen Perry, track runner, Olympian
* Larry Rose III, NFL, CFL, XFL player
* Winfred Tubbs, NFL player

==Education==
The city is served by the Fairfield Independent School District. 

Navarro College offers year-round classes at their Navarro College Career &amp; Technical Center at Fairfield campus for undergraduate and graduate students.

==Gallery==
==References==

==External links==

* City of Fairfield official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q973970" start="0" end="9" title="Fairfield, Texas" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="24" end="35" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565" start="39" end="55" title="Freestone County, Texas" label="Freestone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="57" end="62" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="255" end="268" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="328" end="334" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="348" end="355" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985916" start="391" end="404" title="U.S. Route 84 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q617602" start="453" end="462" title="Palestine, Texas" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="475" end="479" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503793" start="481" end="503" title="Texas State Highway 75" label="Texas State Highway 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q302236" start="580" end="589" title="Streetman, Texas" label="Streetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267993" start="603" end="606" title="Dew, Texas" label="Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="626" end="653" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="849" end="878" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="903" end="928" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1003" end="1028" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1121" end="1127" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1345" end="1350" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1359" end="1375" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1383" end="1398" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1406" end="1411" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1424" end="1435" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1471" end="1479" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1483" end="1489" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1644" end="1659" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2456" end="2473" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2567" end="2579" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821941" start="2677" end="2690" title="Tony Brackens" label="Tony Brackens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686897" start="2705" end="2716" title="Louis Cheek" label="Louis Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q498729" start="2731" end="2743" title="Kenny Dorham" label="Kenny Dorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q452355" start="2762" end="2775" title="Nanceen Perry" label="Nanceen Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28008621" start="2802" end="2816" title="Larry Rose III" label="Larry Rose III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025048" start="2841" end="2854" title="Winfred Tubbs" label="Winfred Tubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430303" start="2908" end="2945" title="Fairfield Independent School District" label="Fairfield Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982160" start="2949" end="2964" title="Navarro College" label="Navarro College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135904" wikidata="Q978392" url="?curid=135904" title="Kirvin, Texas">
<text>Kirvin is a town in Freestone County, Texas, United States. The population was 101 at the 2020 census.

==History==
On May 6, 1922, three local African-American men were lynched in Kirvin by being mutilated and then burned alive for the alleged murder of a 17-year-old white girl, Eula Ausley. Their names were Snap Curry, Mose Jones and Johnny Cornish. Some 500 local Kirvin townsfolk, including the victim&#x27;s grandfather, took part in the killings. Evidence now points to the innocence of at least two of the three victims. During the next month, there were several more instances of lynching by hanging of other black men in the area. Ausley is buried in the Shanks Memorial Cemetery in Kirvin, on 950 just east of FM 80. A book by Monte Akers titled &quot;Flames After Midnight: Murder, Vengeance, and the Desolation of a Texas Community&quot; was written about the incident. Two white men who were suspects in the Ausley killing were never charged-despite bloody tracks from the murder scene to their house.

==Geography==

Kirvin is located in northwestern Freestone County and is northwest of Fairfield, the county seat, and east of Wortham.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Kirvin has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 122 people, 41 households, and 28 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 51 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 85.25% White, 8.20% African American, 4.92% from other races, and 1.64% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.92% of the population.

There were 41 households, out of which 43.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.8% were married couples living together, 9.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.7% were non-families. 29.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.98 and the average family size was 3.64.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 33.6% under the age of 18, 13.1% from 18 to 24, 24.6% from 25 to 44, 16.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $36,250, and the median income for a family was $42,500. Males had a median income of $35,625 versus $13,125 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,320. There were 3.6% of families and 5.8% of the population living below the poverty line, including 5.0% of under eighteens and 14.3% of those over 64.

==Education==
Kirvin is served by the Wortham Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978392" start="0" end="6" title="Kirvin, Texas" label="Kirvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565" start="20" end="36" title="Freestone County, Texas" label="Freestone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="38" end="43" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q110913717" start="144" end="177" title="Lynching in Kirvin, Texas" label="African-American men were lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q973970" start="1104" end="1113" title="Fairfield, Texas" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="1119" end="1130" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q969740" start="1144" end="1151" title="Wortham, Texas" label="Wortham"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1171" end="1198" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1280" end="1286" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1497" end="1502" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1510" end="1526" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1539" end="1550" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1586" end="1594" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1598" end="1604" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1755" end="1770" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2567" end="2584" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2683" end="2695" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037193" start="2798" end="2833" title="Wortham Independent School District" label="Wortham Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135905" wikidata="Q982884" url="?curid=135905" title="Teague, Texas">
<text>Teague is a city in Freestone County, Texas, United States. The population was 3,384 at the 2020 census.

==Settlement==
Teague, Texas, was initially settled around the time of the Civil War and developed significantly during the latter half of the 19th century. Originally known as Brewer, the community grew as a small settlement. In April 1886, a resident wrote that all they needed was a jeweler and shoemaker. The resident went on to inventory all the businesses they had, such as a good dry goods and grocery store, a blacksmith and wood shop, and a barber. Later in 1886, a gin was to open. The 1895 Rand McNally atlas shows Brewer with a post office and no express office or railroad. Also in 1895, Brewer Baptist Church ministered by A. B. Tedder had 109 members. The arrival of the Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway in 1906 was pivotal for Teague&#x27;s development. The railway company established its machine and car shops in the town, which led to rapid growth and the town being renamed Teague. This renaming was done by the railway magnate Benjamin Franklin Yoakum in honor of his mother, Narcissus Teague, and her parents, who were early pioneers in Freestone County. Teague was incorporated as a municipality in 1906 and officially recognized as a city in 1907.

In its early years, Teague thrived as a significant railway hub and a shipping center for local cotton farmers. By 1914, the town had a diverse array of services and amenities, including multiple churches, public schools, waterworks, an electric light plant, an ice plant, banks, cotton gins, a cottonseed oil mill, a cotton compress, and several newspapers. The population reached approximately 3,300 by that time. However, the Great Depression and subsequent economic challenges led to a decline in the number of businesses and population. Despite these hardships, Teague&#x27;s population saw steady growth from the mid-1980s onwards, with the community adapting and evolving through various economic shifts, including the rise of natural gas production as an important industry.

Teague also has a 3300-foot-long airport used primarily for recreational use.

===Recent===

In recent years, Teague has seen a variety of community events and developments that highlight its vibrant local culture and civic engagement. Recently, the town hosted numerous events, including holiday celebrations, fairs, and educational workshops. The Fourth of July festivities included a fireworks show and community picnics, while the annual Peach Festival in Fairfield featured music, food trucks, and a 5K run. The Teague Public Library has also been active, offering programs like arts and crafts classes, science days, and a real Mad Hatter Bubble Show.

On the civic front, Teague has continued to maintain its community-oriented focus through various public services and development projects. The city has seen active participation in local government elections, with positions such as mayor and aldermen being regularly contested. Additionally, the Teague Economic Development Corporation has been involved in promoting local business growth and infrastructure improvements.

==Geography==

Teague is located in western Freestone County. U.S. Route 84 passes through the northern side of the city, leading northeast to Fairfield, the county seat, and northwest to Mexia. Texas State Highway 179 (Main Street) leads east to Dew.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city of Teague has a total area of , of which is land and , or 3.69%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,384 people, 1,088 households, and 802 families residing in the city.

As of the census of 2000, there were 4,557 people, 1,275 households, and 864 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,526 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 65.28% White, 27.67% African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.20% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 6.03% from other races, and 0.61% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 13.50% of the population.

There were 1,275 households, out of which 32.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.6% were married couples living together, 14.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.2% were non-families. 29.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.11.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 19.9% under the age of 18, 14.6% from 18 to 24, 36.9% from 25 to 44, 15.4% from 45 to 64, and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 166.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 185.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $29,485, and the median income for a family was $36,842. Males had a median income of $24,884 versus $18,821 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,326. About 10.0% of families and 16.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.9% of those under age 18 and 14.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The city, and surrounding areas, are served by the Teague Independent School District, providing education from pre-kindergarten through 12th grade. The district includes Teague Elementary School, Teague Junior High School, and Teague High School, each dedicated to fostering a supportive and enriching educational environment. Teague ISD has a strong emphasis on academic achievement, extracurricular involvement, and community engagement. Recent initiatives include the District of Innovation Plan, which aims to provide more flexibility and local control over educational practices to better meet the needs of students and staff.

In recent years, Teague ISD has focused on enhancing its facilities and resources to support student success. The district offers a variety of extracurricular activities, including athletics, band, theater, and Future Farmers of America (FFA). These programs aim to develop well-rounded students with opportunities for leadership and personal growth. The district has also prioritized health and nutrition, special education, and technology integration to ensure a comprehensive and inclusive educational experience. Community involvement remains a cornerstone of Teague ISD&#x27;s philosophy, with numerous events and programs designed to foster strong relationships between the schools and the broader community.

As of the 2021-2022 school year, it had 1,181 students. 48.8% of students were considered at risk of dropping out of school. 10% of students were enrolled in bilingual and English language learning programs.

The school received an accountability rating of A for the 2021-2022 school year.

In the Class of 2021, 97.3% of students received their high school diplomas on time or earlier. The dropout rate for students in grades 9-12 was 0.2% during the 2020-2021 school year.

The average ACT score was 20.8.

As of the 2021-2022 school year, an average teacher&#x27;s salary was $53,708, which is $5,179 less than the state average. On average, teachers had 13.1 years of experience.

==References==

==External links==
*City of Teague official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982884" start="0" end="6" title="Teague, Texas" label="Teague"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565" start="20" end="36" title="Freestone County, Texas" label="Freestone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="38" end="43" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="181" end="190" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539294" start="792" end="825" title="Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway" label="Trinity and Brazos Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888680" start="1055" end="1079" title="Benjamin Franklin Yoakum" label="Benjamin Franklin Yoakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985916" start="3209" end="3222" title="U.S. Route 84 in Texas" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q973970" start="3290" end="3299" title="Fairfield, Texas" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="3305" end="3316" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q973900" start="3335" end="3340" title="Mexia, Texas" label="Mexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504017" start="3342" end="3365" title="Texas State Highway 179" label="Texas State Highway 179"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267993" start="3394" end="3397" title="Dew, Texas" label="Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3417" end="3444" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3558" end="3583" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3678" end="3684" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3904" end="3909" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3918" end="3934" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3942" end="3957" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3965" end="3970" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3978" end="3994" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4007" end="4018" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4054" end="4062" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4066" end="4072" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4227" end="4242" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5042" end="5059" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5153" end="5165" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691362" start="5306" end="5340" title="Teague Independent School District" label="Teague Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135906" wikidata="Q969740" url="?curid=135906" title="Wortham, Texas">
<text>Wortham is a town in Freestone County, Texas, United States. The population was 980 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==

Wortham is located in the northwestern corner of Freestone County. Texas State Highway 14 runs through town as Third Street, leading north to Richland and Interstate 45, and south to Mexia. Fairfield, the Freestone County seat, is to the southeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land. Wortham lies near the highest point between Dallas and Houston, the nearby Tehuacana Hills.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 980 people, 429 households, and 252 families residing in the town.

As of the census of 2000, there were 1,082 people, 428 households, and 278 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 479 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 79.94% White, 17.84% African American, 0.65% Native American, 1.20% from other races, and 0.37% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.77% of the population.

There were 428 households, out of which 35.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.3% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.0% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.12.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 28.4% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 20.4% from 45 to 64, and 18.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 80.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 72.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $23,988, and the median income for a family was $35,625. Males had a median income of $26,094 versus $18,098 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,269. About 14.7% of families and 18.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.1% of those under age 18 and 17.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The town is served by the Wortham Independent School District and is home to the Wortham High School Bulldogs.

==Notable people==

* Charlie Davis, NFL defensive tackle for the St. Louis Cardinals
* Leonard Davis, a guard/offensive tackle for the Dallas Cowboys, Arizona Cardinals and Detroit Lions
* Blind Lemon Jefferson, an influential blues musician, born and buried in Wortham

==References==

==External links==
* Wortham ISD</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969740" start="0" end="7" title="Wortham, Texas" label="Wortham"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565" start="21" end="37" title="Freestone County, Texas" label="Freestone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="39" end="44" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503647" start="187" end="209" title="Texas State Highway 14" label="Texas State Highway 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q974835" start="262" end="270" title="Richland, Texas" label="Richland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="275" end="288" title="Interstate 45" label="Interstate 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q973900" start="303" end="308" title="Mexia, Texas" label="Mexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q973970" start="310" end="319" title="Fairfield, Texas" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="387" end="414" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388382" start="532" end="547" title="Tehuacana Hills" label="Tehuacana Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="577" end="602" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="693" end="699" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="915" end="920" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="929" end="945" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="953" end="968" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="981" end="992" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1028" end="1036" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1040" end="1046" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1198" end="1213" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2010" end="2027" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2121" end="2133" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037193" start="2249" end="2284" title="Wortham Independent School District" label="Wortham Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037192" start="2304" end="2323" title="Wortham High School (Texas)" label="Wortham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084764" start="2357" end="2370" title="Charlie Davis (defensive tackle)" label="Charlie Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="2372" end="2375" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938063" start="2401" end="2420" title="History of the St. Louis Cardinals (NFL)" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830302" start="2423" end="2436" title="Leonard Davis (American football)" label="Leonard Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="2440" end="2445" title="Guard (American football)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="2446" end="2462" title="offensive tackle" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="2471" end="2485" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="2487" end="2504" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="2509" end="2522" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q45001" start="2525" end="2546" title="Blind Lemon Jefferson" label="Blind Lemon Jefferson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135907" wikidata="Q981354" url="?curid=135907" title="Bigfoot, Texas">
<text>Bigfoot is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Frio County, Texas, United States. The population was 450 at the 2010 census, up from 304 at the 2000 census.

==History==
The first settlement at Bigfoot was made in the 1860s, but the community was called &quot;Connally&#x27;s Store&quot; until the post office was established in 1883. The present name is in honor of Texas Ranger William A. A. &quot;Bigfoot&quot; Wallace, a former resident of the town.

==Geography==
Bigfoot is located in the northeast corner of Frio County. It is bordered to the north by Medina County and to the east by Atascosa County. Texas State Highway 173 passes through the northeastern part of the CDP, leading northwest to Devine and southeast to Jourdanton. Downtown San Antonio is to the north, and Pearsall, the Frio County seat, is to the southwest.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Bigfoot CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.06%, is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 304 people, 110 households, and 91 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 12.7 people per square mile (4.9/km2). There were 127 housing units at an average density of 5.3/sq mi (2.1/km2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 81.58% White, 16.12% from other races, and 2.30% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 44.74% of the population.

There were 110 households, out of which 31.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.4% were married couples living together, 12.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.4% were non-families. 14.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.76 and the average family size was 3.01.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 25.0% under the age of 18, 7.6% from 18 to 24, 25.7% from 25 to 44, 29.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $19,375, and the median income for a family was $17,083. Males had a median income of $22,917 versus $28,750 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $14,250. About 23.7% of families and 29.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 38.2% of those under the age of eighteen and 27.5% of those 65 or over, the area code here is 830.

==Education==
Bigfoot is served by the Devine Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981354" start="0" end="7" title="Bigfoot, Texas" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="14" end="38" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="43" end="66" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="76" end="87" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="89" end="94" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="141" end="152" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="173" end="184" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="396" end="408" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003891" start="409" end="450" title="William A. A. &amp;quot;Bigfoot&amp;quot; Wallace" label="William A. A. &amp;quot;Bigfoot&amp;quot; Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q110421" start="588" end="601" title="Medina County, Texas" label="Medina County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108372" start="621" end="636" title="Atascosa County, Texas" label="Atascosa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504004" start="638" end="661" title="Texas State Highway 173" label="Texas State Highway 173"/>
<link wikidata="Q981952" start="732" end="738" title="Devine, Texas" label="Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q980582" start="756" end="766" title="Jourdanton, Texas" label="Jourdanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="777" end="788" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="810" end="818" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="881" end="908" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1008" end="1014" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1104" end="1122" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1281" end="1286" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1300" end="1311" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1347" end="1355" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1359" end="1365" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1518" end="1533" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2329" end="2346" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2439" end="2451" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267537" start="2602" end="2636" title="Devine Independent School District" label="Devine Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135908" wikidata="Q972549" url="?curid=135908" title="Dilley, Texas">
<text>Dilley is a town in Frio County, Texas, United States. The population was 3,274 at the 2020 census. It is located off Interstate 35, south of the county seat in Pearsall.

==Geography==

Dilley is located in southern Frio County. Interstate 35 bypasses the city on the west, with access from Exits 82 through 86. I-35 leads northeastward to San Antonio and southward to Laredo. Pearsall, the county seat, is to the north. Texas State Highway 85 passes through the center of town as Leona Street, leading northeast to Pleasanton and west to Carrizo Springs.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Dilley has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,274 people, 886 households, and 585 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,674 people, 955 households, and 727 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,158 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 66.93% White, 10.40% African American, 0.57% Native American, 0.76% Asian, 18.81% from other races, and 2.53% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 72.24% of the population.

There were 955 households, out of which 42.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.7% were married couples living together, 20.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.8% were non-families. 21.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.00 and the average family size was 3.47.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 27.9% under the age of 18, 13.0% from 18 to 24, 35.5% from 25 to 44, 14.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females, there were 145.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 166.9 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $19,540, and the median income for a family was $22,021. Males had a median income of $26,825 versus $13,229 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,475. About 32.6% of families and 35.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 42.5% of those under age 18 and 31.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The city is served by the Dilley Independent School District. The Dilley Independent School District has three schools: Dilley Elementary, Mary Harper Middle School, and Dilley High School.

==Gallery==
==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Dilley has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==See also==
* South Texas Family Residential Center, located in Dilley, the largest immigrant detention center in the United States

==References==

==External links==
* City of Dilley official website
* Handbook of Texas Online – Dilley
* Dilley Independent School District</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q972549" start="0" end="6" title="Dilley, Texas" label="Dilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="20" end="31" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="33" end="38" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="87" end="98" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="118" end="131" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="161" end="169" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="341" end="352" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="370" end="376" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="392" end="403" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503814" start="422" end="444" title="Texas State Highway 85" label="Texas State Highway 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q981108" start="517" end="527" title="Pleasanton, Texas" label="Pleasanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q982334" start="540" end="555" title="Carrizo Springs, Texas" label="Carrizo Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="575" end="602" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="689" end="714" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="825" end="831" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1049" end="1054" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1079" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1087" end="1102" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1110" end="1115" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1129" end="1140" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1176" end="1184" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1188" end="1194" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1347" end="1362" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2160" end="2177" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2271" end="2283" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276882" start="2399" end="2433" title="Dilley Independent School District" label="Dilley Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2705" end="2734" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2756" end="2781" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18706190" start="2844" end="2881" title="South Texas Family Residential Center" label="South Texas Family Residential Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135909" wikidata="Q982099" url="?curid=135909" title="Hilltop, Texas">
<text>Hilltop is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Frio County, Texas, United States. Its population was 356 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==
Hilltop is located in southern Frio County. It is bordered to the south by the city of Dilley. Interstate 35 forms the southeastern edge of the CDP, with access from Exits 85 and 86. I-35 leads north to Pearsall, the Frio County seat, and south past Dilley to Cotulla.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Hilltop CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, 300 people, 83 households, and 75 families were residing in the CDP. The population density was 251.5 people per mi2 (97.3/km2). There were 101 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 77.00% White, 21.67% from other races, and 1.33% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 90.00% of the population.

Of the 83 households, 57.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.7% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 9.6% were not families. About 8.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.61, and the average family size was 3.81.

In the CDP, the age distribution was 36.7% under 18, 11.3% from 18 to 24, 29.7% from 25 to 44, 15.0% from 45 to 64, and 7.3% who were 65 or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 106.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 118.4 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $23,229, and for a family was $23,229. Males had a median income of $16,250 versus $7,045 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $7,269. About 37.1% of families and 50.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 73.0% of those under the age of 18 and 60.0% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
Hilltop is served by the Dilley Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q982099" start="0" end="7" title="Hilltop, Texas" label="Hilltop"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="14" end="38" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="43" end="66" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="76" end="94" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="141" end="152" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q972549" start="256" end="262" title="Dilley, Texas" label="Dilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="264" end="277" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="372" end="380" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q972917" start="429" end="436" title="Cotulla, Texas" label="Cotulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="456" end="483" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="562" end="568" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="651" end="669" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="767" end="780" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1786" end="1803" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1895" end="1907" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276882" start="2025" end="2059" title="Dilley Independent School District" label="Dilley Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135910" wikidata="Q977671" url="?curid=135910" title="Moore, Texas">
<text>Moore is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Frio County, Texas, United States. Its population was 610 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==
Moore is located in northeastern Frio County. Interstate 35 passes through the community, with access from Exit 114. I-35 leads northeast to downtown San Antonio and southwest to Pearsall, the Frio County seat.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP as drawn in 2010 has a total area of about , down from an area of at the 2000 census. All of the CDP area is land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2020, 279 people lived in the Moore CDP. The population density was 20.6 people per square mile (8.0/km2). The 283 housing units averaged 9.1/sq mi (3.5/km2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 85.09% White, 0.47% African American, 1.40% Native American, 0.31% Pacific Islander, 10.09% from other races, and 2.64% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 46.27% of the population.

Of the 248 households, 29.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.6% were married couples living together, 10.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.6% were not families. About 23.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56, and the average family size was 3.02.

In the CDP, the age distribution was 25.6% under 18, 4.5% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 27.0% from 45 to 64, and 17.1% who were 65 or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 107.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.4 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $39,063, and for a family was $40,774. Males had a median income of $24,531 versus $28,281 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $15,975. About 9.9% of families and 15.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.2% of those under age 18 and 12.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Moore is served by the Pearsall Independent School District.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q977671" start="0" end="5" title="Moore, Texas" label="Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="12" end="36" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="41" end="64" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="74" end="92" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="139" end="150" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="213" end="226" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="317" end="328" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="346" end="354" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="396" end="423" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="577" end="583" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="632" end="650" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="750" end="763" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1844" end="1861" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1953" end="1965" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935532" start="2078" end="2114" title="Pearsall Independent School District" label="Pearsall Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135911" wikidata="Q974485" url="?curid=135911" title="North Pearsall, Texas">
<text>North Pearsall is a census-designated place (CDP) in Frio County, Texas, United States. The population was 739 at the 2020 census.

==Geography==
North Pearsall is located in central Frio County and is bordered to the south by the city of Pearsall, the county seat. Interstate 35 forms the western edge of the CDP, with access from Exit 104.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, 561 people, 162 households, and 139 families were residing in the CDP. The population density was 420.3 people per mi2 (162.9/km2). The 176 housing units averaged 131.9/sq mi (51.1/km2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 72.55% White, 1.25% Native American, 24.42% from other races, and 1.78% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 82.00% of the population.

Of the 162 households, 58.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.5% were married couples living together, 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.6% were not families. About 10.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.46, and the average family size was 3.73.

In the CDP, the age distribution was 37.4% under 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 30.3% from 25 to 44, 18.9% from 45 to 64, and 3.7% who were 65 or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.7 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $32,917, and for a family, $35,000. Males had a median income of $26,667 versus $17,167 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $11,602. About 8.3% of families and 8.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.7% of those under age 18 and 11.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
North Pearsall is served by the Pearsall Independent School District.

==See also==

* List of census-designated places in Texas

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974485" start="0" end="14" title="North Pearsall, Texas" label="North Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="20" end="43" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="53" end="64" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="66" end="71" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="118" end="129" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="239" end="247" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="253" end="264" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="266" end="279" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="360" end="387" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="458" end="464" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="549" end="567" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="665" end="678" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1706" end="1723" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1814" end="1826" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935532" start="1947" end="1983" title="Pearsall Independent School District" label="Pearsall Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734083" start="2002" end="2043" title="List of census-designated places in Texas" label="List of census-designated places in Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135912" wikidata="Q979446" url="?curid=135912" title="Pearsall, Texas">
<text>Pearsall ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Frio County, Texas, United States. The population was 7,325 at the 2020 census, down from 9,146 at the 2010 census.

==Geography==

Pearsall is located near the center of Frio County. Interstate 35 bypasses the city on the west side, with access from Exits 99, 101, and 104. I-35 leads northeast to San Antonio and south to Laredo.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Pearsall has a total area of , of which , or 0.27%, is covered by water.

In 2003, Pearsall annexed the unincorporated neighborhood of West Pearsall, increasing the population of the town by approximately 350 people.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen climate classification, Pearsall has a humid subtropical climate, &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 7,325 people, 2,599 households, and 1,845 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, 7,157 people, 2,201 households, and 1,688 families were living in the city. The population density was . The 2,470 housing units averaged 584.9/sq mi (226.0/km). The racial makeup of the city was 73.80% White, 0.39% African American 0.71% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 22.02% from other races, and 2.79% from two or more races. About 84.24% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 2,201 households, 41.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.1% were married couples living together, 18.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.3% were not families. About 20.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.99 and the average family size was 3.47.

In the city, the age distribution was 30.6% under 18, 10.4% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 19.7% from 45 to 64, and 12.4% who were 65 or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $21,602, and for a family was $23,470. Males had a median income of $21,295 versus $14,720 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,383. 35.0% of the population and 30.4% of families were below the poverty line. 43.2% of those under the age of 18 and 40.0% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

==Government and infrastructure==
The United States Postal Service operates the Pearsall Post Office.

The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement operates the South Texas Detention Facility in an unincorporated area in Frio County near Pearsall.

==Education==
Pearsall Independent School District has four schools: Ted Flores Elementary, Pearsall Intermediate, Pearsall Junior High, and Pearsall High School.

==Notable people==

* Alfred Allee, a 19th-century peace officer, was at one time a deputy sheriff in Pearsall
* Gene Bailey, baseball player
* Mary Moore, former mayor
* George Strait, country music singer, was born in Poteet, Texas, but raised in Pearsall
* Dave Studdard, professional football player, offensive lineman Denver Broncos (1979–1988)
* Brad Wright, head football coach at Texas State University-San Marcos from 2007 to 2010

==Gallery==
==References==

==External links==
* City of Pearsall official website
* LoneStar Internet: Pearsall, Texas, very brief history
* Handbook of Texas Online: Pearsall, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="0" end="8" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="34" end="45" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="49" end="67" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="116" end="127" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="233" end="246" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="348" end="359" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="373" end="379" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="399" end="426" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q976654" start="563" end="576" title="West Pearsall, Texas" label="West Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="777" end="806" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="823" end="848" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="930" end="955" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1070" end="1076" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1252" end="1265" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2342" end="2359" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2447" end="2459" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="2603" end="2631" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="2672" end="2712" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28447526" start="2726" end="2756" title="South Texas Detention Facility" label="South Texas Detention Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="2763" end="2782" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935532" start="2828" end="2864" title="Pearsall Independent School District" label="Pearsall Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935532" start="2955" end="2975" title="Pearsall High School" label="Pearsall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722216" start="3000" end="3012" title="Alfred Allee" label="Alfred Allee"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="3062" end="3076" title="deputy sheriff" label="deputy sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531079" start="3091" end="3102" title="Gene Bailey" label="Gene Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063193" start="3122" end="3132" title="Mary Moore (mayor)" label="Mary Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="3149" end="3162" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="3164" end="3177" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q973174" start="3198" end="3211" title="Poteet, Texas" label="Poteet, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229946" start="3238" end="3251" title="Dave Studdard" label="Dave Studdard"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="3301" end="3315" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954373" start="3330" end="3341" title="Brad Wright (American football)" label="Brad Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="3366" end="3399" title="Texas State University-San Marcos" label="Texas State University-San Marcos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="135913" wikidata="Q976654" url="?curid=135913" title="West Pearsall, Texas">
<text>West Pearsall was a census-designated place (CDP) in Frio County, Texas, United States. The population was 349 at the 2000 census.

West Pearsall was annexed into the City of Pearsall in late 2002.

==Geography==
West Pearsall is located at (28.897874, - 99.107938).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , all of it land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 349 people, 107 households, and 89 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 127 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 67.05% White, 0.29% African American, 29.23% from other races, and 3.44% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 99.71% of the population.

There were 107 households, out of which 40.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.2% were married couples living together, 20.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.8% were non-families. 13.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.26 and the average family size was 3.54.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 34.7% under the age of 18, 9.7% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 16.6% from 45 to 64, and 10.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females, there were 106.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.0 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $26,000, and the median income for a family was $26,550. Males had a median income of $14,205 versus $12,917 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $8,168. About 11.3% of families and 7.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 38.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
West Pearsall is served by the Pearsall Independent School District.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q976654" start="0" end="13" title="West Pearsall, Texas" label="West Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="20" end="43" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q27011" start="53" end="64" title="Frio County, Texas" label="Frio County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="66" end="71" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q979446" start="175" end="183" title="Pearsall, Texas" label="Pearsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="285" end="312" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="388" end="394" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="605" end="610" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="618" end="634" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="648" end="659" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="695" end="703" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="707" end="713" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="866" end="881" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1677" end="1694" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1785" end="1797" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935532" start="1917" end="1953" title="Pearsall Independent School District" label="Pearsall Independent School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
