<doc id="80077" wikidata="Q208365" url="?curid=80077" title="Ethnomusicology">
<text>Ethnomusicology (from Greek ἔθνος &quot;ethnos&quot; ‘nation’ and μουσική &quot;mousike&quot; ‘music’) is the multidisciplinary study of music &quot;in&quot; its cultural context, investigating social, cognitive, biological, comparative, and other dimensions involved other than sound. Ethnomusicologists study music as a reflection of culture and investigate the act of musicking through various immersive, observational, and analytical approaches drawn from other disciplines such as anthropology to understand a culture’s music. This discipline emerged from comparative musicology, initially focusing on non-Western music, but later expanded to embrace the study of any and all different kinds of music of the world. Ethnomusicology development resembled that of Anthropology very closely. 

==Definition==
Stated broadly, ethnomusicology may be described as a holistic investigation of music in its cultural contexts. The term ethnomusicology itself can be broken down as such: &#x27;ethno&#x27; = people, and &#x27;musicology&#x27; = the study of music. Thus, in the process of developing the study of music and people, the field of ethnomusicology combines perspectives from a wide variety of disciplines such as folklore, psychology, cultural anthropology, linguistics, comparative musicology, music theory, and history. This disciplinary variety has resulted in several distinct definitions of ethnomusicology. As follows, there has not often been a unified definition of ethnomusicology within the field itself. Attitudes and foci of ethnomusicologists have evolved since initial studies in the area of comparative musicology in the early 1900s. For example, in 1956, Willard Rhodes provided his perspective on the definition of ethnomusicology, stating that it is a theoretical and empirical study amalgamating both musicology and anthropology. Then, in 1983, Bruno Nettl characterized ethnomusicology as a product of Western thinking, proclaiming that &quot;ethnomusicology as western culture knows it is actually a western phenomenon.&quot; Later, in 1992, Jeff Todd Titon simply described ethnomusicology as the study of &quot;people making music&quot;. 

While there still is not a unified, authoritative definition for ethnomusicology, a number of constants appear in the definitions frequently adopted by leading scholars in the field. It is agreed upon that ethnomusicologists look at music from beyond a purely theoretical, sonic, or historical perspective. Instead, these scholars look at music within culture, music as culture, and music as a reflection of culture. In other words, &quot;ethnomusicology&quot; was developed as the study of all music as a human social and cultural phenomenon. 

Rhodes, in 1956, had described ethnomusicology as a fusion between musicology and cultural anthropology. He focused on the scientific study of music and the interpretation of the cultural phenomena within. However, he called for a broader view that emphasizes &quot;music as an emotional expression.&quot; This notion is highly similar to that of Merriam&#x27;s 1960 extension of ethnomusicology, which views it as &quot;the study of music in culture,&quot; that emphasized its pivotal role in human nature and the fact that musicology is primarily a human centric endeavour.
Merriam&#x27;s 1964 work redefined ethnomusicology and highlighted its importance in cultural anthropology in understanding music within different socio-cultural communities. He distinguished and showcased its distinct nature from that of comparative musicology by emphasizing the influence of social and cultural factors on music and how human centric it is. Hood&#x27;s 1971 perspective, emphasized the significance of direct engagement and performance of the intended music to be studied as a means of ethnomusicological research, having the realization that studying it academically was necessary but so was the direct act of performance. This came into direct opposition to some of his peers of the past. Hood addressed this by stressing the need to unlearn Western musical conventions when studying non-Western traditions showcasing the inevitable arguments that may arise in the future on the nature of ethnomusicological research.

In addition, many ethnomusicological studies share common methodological approaches encapsulated in ethnographic fieldwork. Scholars of ethnomusicology often conduct their primary fieldwork among those who make the music, learning languages and the music itself. Ethnomusicologists also take on the role of a participant observer in learning to perform in a musical tradition, a practice Mantle Hood termed &quot;bi-musicality&quot;. Musical fieldworkers also collect recordings and contextual information about the music of interest. Thus, ethnomusicological studies do not rely on printed or manuscript sources as the primary source of epistemic authority, but rather, the focus is on qualitative practice-based research methods.

==History==

When ethnomusicology first emerged in Western academic circles, its focus was primarily on non-Western music. This early approach often neglected European and Western musical traditions, creating a contrast with the field of conventional musicology, which centered on Western art music. Initially known as &quot;comparative musicology,&quot; the field set Western music as a standard to which other musical traditions were compared. This approach led to criticism for imposing Western biases on non-Western music, which prompted scholars to shift from &quot;comparative musicology&quot; to &quot;ethnomusicology&quot; in the 1950s. The new term aimed to emphasize a descriptive, culture-sensitive approach that respected each musical tradition on its own terms.

Over time, the scope of ethnomusicology broadened to encompass the study of music from all cultural contexts, including Western traditions. This shift reflects a more human-centric approach, where music is seen not only as an art form but as a social and cultural phenomenon deeply connected to identity, tradition, and daily life.

Folklorists, who began preserving and studying folklore music in Europe and the US in the 19th century, are considered the precursors of the field prior to the Second World War. Oskar Kolberg is regarded as one of the earliest European ethnomusicologists as he first began collecting Polish folk songs in 1839 (Nettl 2010, 33). The International Musical Society in Berlin in 1899 acted as one of the first centers for ethnomusicology.

==Towards a Scientific Approach==

As the study of music across cultures developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, scholars began applying scientific methods to analyze musical structures systematically. While ethnomusicology had not yet emerged as a formal discipline, foundational work in this period established techniques that would later influence the field. One key figure, Alexander J. Ellis, introduced methods for measuring musical pitch and scale structures in his 1885 paper, &quot;On the Musical Scales of Various Nations.&quot; Ellis’s approach provided a basis for the objective analysis of musical systems across different cultures, allowing for cross-cultural comparison and reducing subjective biases. 

The institutionalization of comparative musicology, a precursor to ethnomusicology, was largely driven by the efforts of early 20th-century scholars like Carl Stumpf and Erich M. von Hornbostel. As Dieter Christensen (1991) explains, Stumpf, a psychologist and philosopher, founded the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv, which became one of the first archives dedicated to the systematic collection and preservation of non-Western music. This archive enabled researchers to record and analyze diverse musical forms with scientific precision, marking a significant advancement in the field.

Hornbostel, a student of Stumpf, expanded on this scientific approach by developing comparative musicology methods that emphasized objective analysis of elements such as pitch, rhythm, and timbre across musical traditions. His work promoted the use of standardized transcription and recording techniques, which allowed for detailed comparisons of music from different cultural contexts. According to Christensen, Hornbostel’s methodologies were instrumental in formalizing comparative musicology as a recognized academic discipline, laying the groundwork for what would later evolve into ethnomusicology.

While these scientific methods introduced rigor to the study of music, later scholars recognized the need to balance objectivity with cultural interpretation. Although Hornbostel and Stumpf emphasized a scientific approach, subsequent ethnomusicologists integrated these methods with ethnographic practices to ensure that cultural contexts were not overshadowed by purely empirical analysis. This integration helped shape ethnomusicology into an interdisciplinary field that values both precision and cultural understanding.

==Theories and methods==
Ethnomusicologists often apply theories and methods from cultural anthropology, cultural studies and sociology as well as other disciplines in the social sciences and humanities. Though some ethnomusicologists primarily conduct historical studies, the majority are involved in long-term participant observation. Therefore, ethnomusicological work can be characterized as featuring a substantial, intensive ethnographic component.

=== Anthropological and musicological approaches ===
Two approaches to ethnomusicological studies are common: the &quot;anthropological&quot; and the &quot;musicological&quot;. Ethnomusicologists using the anthropological approach generally study music to learn about people and culture. Those who practice the musicological approach study people and cultures to learn about music. Charles Seeger differentiated between the two approaches, describing the anthropology of music as studying the way that music is a &quot;part of culture and social life&quot;, while musical anthropology &quot;studies social life as a performance,&quot; examining the way &quot;music is part of the very construction and interpretation of social and conceptual relationships and processes.&quot;

Charles Seeger and Mantle Hood were two ethnomusicologists that adopted the musicological approach. Hood started one of the first American university programs dedicated to ethnomusicology, often stressing that his students must learn how to play the music they studied. Further, prompted by a college student&#x27;s personal letter, he recommended that potential students of ethnomusicology undertake substantial musical training in the field, a competency that he described as &quot;&quot;bi-musicality&quot;.&quot; This, he explained, is a measure intended to combat ethnocentrism and transcend problematic Western analytical conventions. Seeger also sought to transcend comparative practices by focusing on the music and how it impacted those in contact with it. Similar to Hood, Seeger valued the performance component of ethnomusicology.

Ethnomusicologists following the anthropological approach included scholars such as Steven Feld and Alan Merriam. The anthropological ethnomusicologists stress the importance of field work and using participant observation. This can include a variety of distinct fieldwork practices, including personal exposure to a performance tradition or musical technique, participation in a native ensemble, or inclusion in a myriad of social customs. In the past, local musical transcription was required to study music globally, due to the lack of technology such as phonographs or videographing technology. Similarly, Alan Merriam defined ethnomusicology as &quot;music as culture,&quot; and stated four goals of ethnomusicology: to help protect and explain non-Western music, to save &quot;folk&quot; music before it disappears in the modern world, to study music as a means of communication to further world understanding, and to provide an avenue for wider exploration and reflection for those who are interested in primitive studies. This approach emphasizes the cultural impact of music and how music can be used to further understand humanity.

The two approaches to ethnomusicology bring unique perspectives to the field, providing knowledge both about the effects culture has on music, and about the impact music has on culture.

===Analysis===

==== Problems of analysis ====
The great diversity of types of music found across the world has necessitated an interdisciplinary approach to ethnomusicological study. Analytical and research methods have changed over time, as ethnomusicology has continued solidifying its disciplinary identity, and as scholars have become increasingly aware of issues involved in cultural study (see Theoretical Issues and Debates). Among these issues are the treatment of Western music in relation to music from &quot;other,&quot; non-Western cultures and the cultural implications embedded in analytical methodologies. Kofi Agawu (see 2000s) noted that scholarship on African music seems to emphasize difference further by continually developing new systems of analysis; he proposes the use of Western notation to instead highlight similarity and bring African music into mainstream Western music scholarship.

In seeking to analyze such a wide scope of musical genres, repertories, and styles, some scholars have favored an all-encompassing &quot;objective&quot; approach, while others argue for &quot;native&quot; or &quot;subjective&quot; methodologies tailored to the musical subject. Those in favor of &quot;objective&quot; analytical methods hold that certain perceptual or cognitive universals or laws exist in music, making it possible to construct an analytical framework or set of categories applicable across cultures. Proponents of &quot;native&quot; analysis argue that all analytical approaches inherently incorporate value judgments and that, to understand music it is crucial to construct an analysis within cultural context. This debate is well exemplified by a series of articles between Mieczyslaw Kolinski and Marcia Herndon in the mid-1970s; these authors differed strongly on the style, nature, implementation, and advantages of analytical and synthetic models including their own. Herndon, backing &quot;native categories&quot; and inductive thinking, distinguishes between analysis and synthesis as two different methods for examining music. By her definition, analysis seeks to break down parts of a known whole according to a definite plan, whereas synthesis starts with small elements and combines them into one entity by tailoring the process to the musical material. Herndon also debated on the subjectivity and objectivity necessary for a proper analysis of a musical system. Kolinski, among those scholars critiqued by Herndon&#x27;s push for a synthetic approach, defended the benefits of analysis, arguing in response for the acknowledgment of musical facts and laws.

==== Analytical methodologies ====
As a result of the above debate and ongoing ones like it, ethnomusicology has yet to establish any standard method or methods of analysis. This is not to say that scholars have not attempted to establish universal or &quot;objective&quot; analytical systems. Bruno Nettl acknowledges the lack of a singular comparative model for ethnomusicological study, but describes methods by Mieczyslaw Kolinski, Béla Bartók, and Erich von Hornbostel as notable attempts to provide such a model.

Perhaps the first of these objective systems was the development of the cent as a definitive unit of pitch by phonetician and mathematician Alexander J. Ellis (1885). Ellis made notable contributions to the foundations of comparative musicology and ultimately ethnomusicology with the creation of the cents system; in fact, the ethnomusicologist Hornbostel &quot;declared Ellis the &#x27;true founder of comparative scientific musicology.&#x27;&quot; Prior to this invention, pitches were described by using measurements of frequency, or vibrations per second. However, this method was not reliable, &quot;since the same interval has a different reading each time it occurs across the whole pitch spectrum.&quot; On the other hand, the cents system allowed any interval to have a fixed numerical representation, regardless of its specific pitch level. Ellis used his system, which divided the octave into 1200 cents (100 cents in each Western semitone), as a means of analyzing and comparing scale systems of different types of music. He had recognized that global pitch and scale systems were not naturally occurring in the world, but rather &quot;artifices&quot; created by humans and their &quot;organized preferences,&quot; and they differed in various locations. In his article in the &quot;Journal of the Society of Arts and Sciences&quot;, he mentions different countries such as India, Japan, and China, and notes how the pitch systems varied &quot;not only [in] the absolute pitch of each note, but also necessarily the intervals between them.&quot; From his experiences with interviewing native musicians and observing the variations in scales across the locations, he concludes that &quot;there is no practical way of arriving at the real pitch of a musical scale, when it cannot be heard as played by a native musician&quot; and even then, &quot;we only obtain that particular musician&#x27;s tuning of the scale.&quot; Ellis&#x27;s study is also an early example of comparative musicological fieldwork (see Fieldwork).

Alan Lomax&#x27;s method of cantometrics employed analysis of songs to model human behavior in different cultures. He posited that there is some correlation between musical traits or approaches and the traits of the music&#x27;s native culture. Cantometrics involved qualitative scoring based on several characteristics of a song, comparatively seeking commonalities between cultures and geographic regions.

Mieczyslaw Kolinski measured the exact distance between the initial and final tones in melodic patterns. Kolinski refuted the early scholarly opposition of European and non-European kinds of music, choosing instead to focus on much-neglected similarities between them, what he saw as markers of &quot;basic similarities in the psycho-physical constitution of mankind.&quot; Kolinski also employed his method to test, and disprove, Erich von Hornbostel&#x27;s hypothesis that European music generally had ascending melodic lines, while non-European music featured descending melodic lines.

Adopting a more anthropological analytical approach, Steven Feld conducted descriptive ethnographic studies regarding &quot;sound as a cultural system.&quot; Specifically, his studies of Kaluli people of Papua New Guinea use sociomusical methods to draw conclusions about its culture.

===Fieldwork===

Bruno Nettl, Emeritus Professor of Musicology at the University of Illinois, defines fieldwork as &quot;direct inspection [of music, culture, etc] at the source,&quot; and states that &quot;It is in the importance of fieldwork that anthropology and ethnomusicology are closest: It is a &#x27;hallmark&#x27; of both fields, something like a union card.&quot; However, he mentions that ethnomusicological fieldwork differs from anthropological fieldwork because the former requires more &quot;practical&quot; information about &quot;recording, filming, video-taping, [and] special problems of text-gathering.&quot; The experience of an ethnomusicologist in the field is his/her data; experience, texts (e.g. tales, myths, proverbs), structures (e.g. social organization), and &quot;imponderabilia of everyday life&quot; all contribute to an ethnomusicologist&#x27;s study. He also notes how ethnomusicological fieldwork &quot;principally involves interaction with other humans&quot; and is primarily about &quot;day-to-day personal relationships,&quot; and this shows the more &quot;personal&quot; side of the discipline. The importance of fieldwork in the field of ethnomusicology has required the development of effective methods to pursue fieldwork.

==== History of fieldwork ====
In the 19th century until the mid-20th century, European scholars (folklorists, ethnographers, and some early ethnomusicologists) who were motivated to preserve disappearing music cultures (from both in and outside of Europe), collected transcriptions or audio recordings on wax cylinders. Many such recordings were then stored at the Berliner Phonogramm-Archiv at the Berlin school of comparative musicology, which was founded by Carl Stumpf, his student Erich M. von Hornbostel, and medical doctor Otto Abraham. Stumpf and Hornbostel studied and preserved these recordings in the Berlin Archiv, setting the foundation for contemporary ethnomusicology. But, the &quot;armchair analysis&quot; methods of Stumpf and Hornbostel required very little participation in fieldwork themselves, instead using the fieldwork of other scholars. This differentiates Stumpf and Hornbostel from their present-day contemporaries, who now use their fieldwork experience as a main component in their research.

Ethnomusicology&#x27;s transition from &quot;armchair analysis&quot; to fieldwork reflected ethnomusicologists trying to distance themselves from the field of comparative musicology in the period following World War II. Fieldwork emphasized face-to-face interaction to gather the most accurate impression and meaning of music from the creators of the music, in contrast with &quot;armchair analysis&quot; that disconnected the ethnomusicologist from the individual or group of performers.

Stumpf and Hornbostel were not the only scholars to use &quot;armchair&quot; analysis. Other scholars analyzed recordings and transcriptions that they did not make. For instance, in his work &quot;Hungarian Folk Music&quot;, Béla Bartók analyzes various traits of Hungarian folk songs. While drawing from recordings made by himself, Bartók also relies on transcriptions by other musicians; among them are , Zoltán Kodály, and Lászo Lajtha. These transcriptions came in recorded and printed format, and form the majority of Bartók&#x27;s source material.

In 1935, the journal American Anthropologist published an article titled &quot;Plains Ghost Dance and Great Basin Music,&quot; authored by George Herzog. Herzog was an assistant to Hornbostel and Stumpf. Herzog draws from material &quot;available to [him]&quot; and &quot;in the literature,&quot; including transcriptions by James Mooney for the Bureau of American Ethnology; Natalie Curtis, and Alice C. Fletcher. Herzog analyzes structure and melodic contour of Ghost Dance songs. He notes that Ghost Dance music&#x27;s &quot;paired patterns&quot; occur in many Native American tribes&#x27; music, and they may have migrated from tribe to tribe.

Writing later in the 1950s, Jaap Kunst wrote about fieldwork for the purpose of recording and transcribing sound. Kunst lists various &quot;phonogram-archives,&quot; collections of recorded sound. They include the archives founded by Stumpf.

A pioneering study in fieldwork was conducted by David McAllester of Navajo music, particularly the music of the Enemy Way ceremony. In it, McAllester details the procedures of the ceremony, as well as the music itself.

Aside from Enemy Way music, McAllester sought Navajo cultural values based on analysis of attitudes toward music. To his interviewees, McAllester gave a questionnaire, which includes these items:

* Some people beat a drum when they sing; what other things are used like that?
* What did people say when you learned how to sing?
* Are there different ways of making the voice sound when we sing?
* Are there songs that sound especially pretty?
* What kind of melody do you like better: (illustrate with a chant-like melody and a more varied one).
* Are there songs for men only? [for women only? for children only?]

The ethnomusicologist Alan Merriam reviewed McAllester&#x27;s work, calling it &quot;strange to speak of a work published in 1954 as &#x27;pioneering,&#x27; but this is precisely the case.&quot; He described McAllester&#x27;s work as &quot;[relating] music to culture and culture to music in terms of the value system of the Navaho [sic].&quot; As of 1956, the time that Merriam published his review, the idea of such work &quot;occurred to ethnomusicologists with surprising infrequency.&quot;

In his work &quot;The Anthropology of Music&quot;, published in 1964, Merriam wrote that &quot;ethnomusicology has suffered from the amateur field collector whose knowledge of its aims has been severely restricted. Such collectors operate under the assumption that the important point is simply to gather music sound, and that this sound–often taken without discrimination and without thought, for example, to problems of sampling–can then simply be turned over to the laboratory worker to do something about it.&quot;

In the same work, Merriam states that &quot;what the ethnomusicologist does in the field is determined by his own formulation of method, taken in its broadest sense.&quot; Fieldwork can have multiple areas of inquiry, and Merriam lists six of these:

# Musical material culture: classification of instruments, cultural perception of musical instruments.
# Song texts.
# Categories of music: &quot;envisaged by [...] the people themselves as various separable types of songs.&quot;
# The musician: &quot;the training of musicians and the means of becoming a musician&quot;; perceptions of musicians.&quot;
# The uses and functions of music in relation to other aspects of culture.
# Music as a creative cultural activity: &quot;what are the sources from which music is drawn?&quot;

Bruno Nettl describes early 20th-century fieldwork as extraction of music, which is analyzed elsewhere. Between 1920 and 1960, however, fieldworkers wished to map entire musical systems, and resided longer in the field. After the 1950s, some not only observed, but also participated in musical cultures.

Mantle Hood wrote about this practice as well. Hood had learned from musicians in Indonesia about the intervals of sléndro scales, as well as how to play the rebab. He was interested in the characteristics of Indonesian music, as well as &quot;social and economic valuations&quot; of music.

By the 1980s, participant-observer methodology became the norm, at least in the North American tradition of ethnomusicology.

Aside from this history of fieldwork, Nettl writes about informants: the people whom fieldworkers research and interview. Informants do not contain the entirety of a musical culture, and need not represent the ideal of the culture. According to Nettl, there is a bell-shaped curve of musical ability. In a community, the majority are &quot;simply good&quot; at their music. They are of greatest interest. However, it is also worth seeing who a community recommends as informants. People may direct a fieldworker to the best musicians, or they may suggest many &quot;simply good&quot; musicians. This attitude is reflective of the culture&#x27;s values.

As technology advanced, researchers graduated from depending on wax cylinders and the phonograph to digital recordings and video cameras, allowing recordings to become more accurate representations of music studied. These technological advances have helped ethnomusicologists be more mobile in the field, but have also let some ethnomusicologists shift back to the &quot;armchair analysis&quot; of Stumpf and Hornbostel. Since video recordings are now considered cultural texts, ethnomusicologists can conduct fieldwork by recording music performances and creating documentaries of the people behind the music, which can be accurately studied outside of the field. Additionally, the invention of the internet and forms of online communication could allow ethnomusicologists to develop new methods of fieldwork within a virtual community.

Heightened awareness of the need to approach fieldwork in an ethical manner arose in the 1970s in response to a similar movement within the field of anthropology. Mark Slobin writes in detail about the application of ethics to fieldwork. Several potential ethical problems that arise during fieldwork relate to the rights of the music performers. To respect the rights of performers, fieldwork often includes attaining complete permission from the group or individual who is performing the music, as well as being sensitive to the rights and obligations related to the music in the context of the host society.

Another ethical dilemma of ethnomusicological fieldwork is the inherent ethnocentrism (more commonly, eurocentrism) of ethnomusicology. Anthony Seeger has done seminal work on the notion of ethics within fieldwork, emphasizing the need to avoid ethnocentric remarks during or after the field work process. Emblematic of his ethical theories is a 1983 piece that describes the fundamental complexities of fieldwork through his relationship with the Suyá Indians of Brazil. To avoid ethnocentrism in his research, Seeger does not explore how singing has come to exist within Suyá culture, instead explaining how singing creates culture presently, and how aspects of Suyá social life can be seen through both a musical and performative lens. Seeger&#x27;s analysis exemplifies the inherent complexity of ethical practices in ethnomusicological fieldwork, implicating the importance for the continual development of effective fieldwork in the study of ethnomusicology.

==== Systematized fieldwork ====
In his 2005 paper &quot;Come Back and See Me Next Tuesday,&quot; Nettl asks whether ethnomusicologists can, or even should practice a unified field methodology as opposed to each scholar developing their own individual approach. Nettl considers several factors when sampling music from different cultures. The first thing is that in order to discover the best representation of any culture, it is important to be able to &quot;discern between ordinary experience and ideal,&quot; all while considering the fact that &quot;the &#x27;ideal&#x27; musician may also know and do things completely outside the ken of the rest.&quot; Another factor is the process of selecting teachers, which depends on what the fieldworker wishes to accomplish. Regardless of whatever method a fieldworker decides to use to conduct research, fieldworkers are expected to &quot;show respect for their material and for the people with whom they work.&quot; As Nettl explains, ethnomusicology is a field that heavily relies on both the collection of data and the development of strong personal relationships, which often cannot be quantified by statistical data. He summarizes Bronisław Malinowski&#x27;s classification of anthropological data (or, as Nettl applies it, ethnomusicological data) by outlining it as three types of information: 1) texts, 2) structures, and 3) the non-ponderable aspects of everyday life. The third type of information, Nettl claims is the most important because it captures the ambiguity of experience that cannot be captured well through writing. He cites another attempt made by Morris Friedrich, an anthropologist, to classify field data into fourteen different categories in order to demonstrate the complexity that information gathered through fieldwork contains. There are a myriad of factors, many of which exist beyond the researcher&#x27;s comprehension, that prevent a precise and accurate representation of what one has experienced in the field. As Nettl notices, there is a current trend in ethnomusicology to no longer even attempt to capture a whole system or culture, but to focus on a very specific niche and try to explain it thoroughly. Nettl&#x27;s question, however, still remains: should there be a uniform method for going about this type of fieldwork?

Alan Merriam addresses issues that he found with ethnomusicological fieldwork in the third chapter of his 1964 book, &quot;The Anthropology of Music&quot;. One of his most pressing concerns is that, as of 1964 when he was writing, there had been insufficient discussion among ethnomusicologists about how to conduct proper fieldwork. That aside, Merriam proceeds to characterize the nature of ethnomusicological fieldwork as being primarily concerned with the collection of facts. He describes ethnomusicology as both a field and a laboratory discipline. In these accounts of the nature of ethnomusicology, it seems to be closely related to a science. Because of that, one might argue that a standardized, agreed-upon field method would be beneficial to ethnomusicologists. Despite that apparent viewpoint, Merriam conclusively claims that there should be a combination of a standardized, scientific approach and a more free-form analytical approach because the most fruitful work he has done has come from combining those two rather than separating them, as was the trend among his contemporaries.

Even Merriam&#x27;s once progressive notion of a balanced approach came into question as time passed. Specifically, the idea that ethnomusicology is or can be &quot;at all&quot; factual. In a 1994 book, &quot;May it Fill Your Soul: Experiencing Bulgarian Music&quot;, Timothy Rice uses enlightenment philosophy to substantiate his opinion that fieldwork cannot be used as fact. The philosophy he works with involves theorizing over the distinction between objectivity and subjectivity. In order to ground those debates in ethnomusicology, he equates musicology to objectivity and musical experience to subjectivity. Rice uses the philosophical attitudes that Martin Heidegger, Hans-Georg Gadamer, and Paul Ricoeur take towards objectivity and subjectivity to state that human perception of the world is inherently subjective because the only way in which humans can interpret what goes on around them is through symbols. Human preconceptions of those symbols will always influence the ways in which an individual might process the world around them. Applying that theory to music and ethnomusicology, Rice brings back the terms of musicology and musical experience. Because one&#x27;s experience of music is simply an interpretation of preconceived symbols, one cannot claim musical experience as factual. Thus, systematizing fieldwork like one would a scientific field is a futile endeavor. Instead, Rice asserts that any attempt to engage with someone else&#x27;s musical experience, which cannot be truly understood by anyone except that person, must be confined to individual analysis. Characterizing the musical experience of a whole culture, according to Rice&#x27;s logic, is not possible.

Another argument against the objectivity and standardization of fieldwork comes from Gregory Barz and Tim Cooley in the second chapter of their book, &quot;Shadows in the Field: New Perspectives for Fieldwork in Ethnomusicology&quot;. In this chapter, entitled &quot;Confronting the Field(Note): In and Out of the Field,&quot; they claim that a researcher&#x27;s field work will always be personal because a field researcher in ethnomusicology, unlike a field researcher in a hard science, is inherently a participant in the group they are researching just by being there. To illustrate the disparity between those subjective, participatory experiences that ethnomusicological fieldworkers have and what typically gets published as ethnomusicological literature, Barz and Cooley point out the difference between field research and field notes. While field research attempts to find &quot;the&quot; reality, field notes document &quot;a&quot; reality. The issue, according to Barz and Cooley, is that field notes, which capture the personal experience of the researcher, are often omitted from whatever final writing that researcher publishes.

==== Ethical concerns and best practices ====
Heightened awareness of the need to approach fieldwork in an ethical manner arose in the 1970s in response to a similar movement within the field of anthropology. Mark Slobin writes in detail about the application of ethics to fieldwork. Several potential ethical problems that arise during fieldwork relate to the rights of the music performers. To respect the rights of performers, fieldwork often includes attaining complete permission from the group or individual who is performing the music, as well as being sensitive to the rights and obligations related to the music in the context of the host society.

Another ethical dilemma of ethnomusicological fieldwork is the inherent ethnocentrism (more commonly, eurocentrism) of ethnomusicology. Anthony Seeger, Emeritus Professor of Ethnomusicology at UCLA, has done seminal work on the notion of ethics within fieldwork, emphasizing the need to avoid ethnocentric remarks during or after the field work process. Emblematic of his ethical theories is a 1983 piece that describes the fundamental complexities of fieldwork through his relationship with the Suyá Indians of Brazil. To avoid ethnocentrism in his research, Seeger does not explore how singing has come to exist within Suyá culture, instead explaining how singing creates culture presently, and how aspects of Suyá social life can be seen through both a musical and performative lens. Seeger&#x27;s analysis exemplifies the inherent complexity of ethical practices in ethnomusicological fieldwork, implicating the importance for the continual development of effective fieldwork in the study of ethnomusicology.

In recent decades, ethnomusicologists have paid greater attention to ensuring that their fieldwork is both ethically conducted and provides a holistic sense of the community or culture under study. As the demographic makeup of ethnomusicologists conducting research grows more diverse, the field has placed a renewed emphasis on a respectful approach to fieldwork that avoids stereotyping or assumptions about a particular culture. Rather than using European music as a baseline against which music from all other cultures is compared, researchers in the field often aim to place the music of a certain society in the context only of the culture under study, without comparing it to European models. In this way, the field aims to avoid an &quot;us vs. them&quot; approach to music.

Nettl and other scholars hope to avoid the perception of the &quot;ugly ethnomusicologist,&quot; which carries with it the same negative connotations as the &quot;ugly American&quot; traveler. Many scholars, from Ravi Shankar to V. Kofi Agawu, have criticized ethnomusicology for, as Nettl puts it, &quot;dealing with non-European music in a condescending way, treating it as something quaint or exotic.&quot; Nettl recalls an angry young man from Nigeria who asked the researcher how he could rationalize the study of other cultures&#x27; music. Nettl couldn&#x27;t come up with an easy answer, and posits that ethnomusicologists need to be careful to respect the cultures they study and avoid treating valuable pieces of culture and music as just one of many artifacts they study.

Part of the problem, Nettl notes, is that the vast majority of ethnomusicologists are &quot;members of Western society who study non-Western music,&quot; contributing to the perception that wealthy, white individuals are taking advantage of their privilege and resources. Researchers want to avoid the perception — accurate or exaggerated — that they&#x27;re entering poorer and less technologically advanced communities, treating residents like test subjects, gleaning all they can, and then penning condescending reports about the quaintness of native music. This sort of insider-outside relationship also applies to researchers of developing nations who are studying music that originate from their home country. Nettl gives an example of how a Briton doing research in Nigeria would be considered an outsider, but a Nigerian of Yoruba background may be considered by some to be an insider relative to their Hausa compatriots. Through this example, he communicates that scholars of any nationality, ethnic background, or social class will more often than not be approaching their studies as an outsider in an established community.

Researchers are optimistic that increased diversity within the field of ethnomusicology will help alleviate some ethical concerns. With more fieldwork of Western music and societies being conducted by researchers from underrepresented cultures — a reversal from the norm — some believe the field will reach a happy equilibrium. Author Charles Keil suggests that as &quot;more of &#x27;them&#x27; may want to study &#x27;us,&#x27; a more interested anthropology will emerge ... in the sense of intersubjective, intercultural ... critical, revolutionary.&quot; American ethnomusicologist and Wesleyan University professor Mark Slobin notes that most ethical concerns stem from interactions that occur during fieldwork between the researcher and the informant, or member of the community being studied. Nettl, in a 2005 paper, described the feeling of being an outsider approaching a community — in this case, Native American — that he wanted to study. He said ethnomusicologists often face feelings of trepidation as they attempt to get to know the local populace and culture while attempting to avoid being exploitative. Researchers have different methods, but Nettl&#x27;s is to be patient, as he obeys a Native American man&#x27;s instruction to &quot;come back and see me next Tuesday,&quot; even though the man has plenty of free time and could sing to Nettl in the moment.

Ethnomusicologists attempt to bridge gaps in perspective by conducting long-term, residential studies.
In 1927, George Herzog spent two months with the Pima tribe in Arizona, an amount of time that would be considered short by today&#x27;s standards — where periods of fieldwork can often last longer than a year. But Herzog recorded several hundred songs during that time, establishing a precedent for increasingly long field studies that have yielded more and more recordings. A lengthy period of fieldwork isn&#x27;t useful, though, without proper techniques for ensuring the researcher gets a representative sampling of the music in a community. When he worked with the Blackfoot people, Nettl said he wasn&#x27;t too concerned with whether the singer teaching him about Blackfoot music was good or bad, but did assume he would be representative of all Blackfoot singers. But Nettl soon gained a new perspective, and &quot;no longer assumed that all informants in an indigenous society would tell me the same thing; I had discarded the idea of essential homogeneity.&quot; Despite discarding this assumption, Nettl acknowledges that by only interviewing one person, he is relying heavily on that person&#x27;s ability to articulate a whole society&#x27;s culture and musical traditions.

There are myriad other ethical considerations that arise in the field, and Slobin attempts to summarize and explain some that he&#x27;s come across or heard about. Ethnomusicologists may face dilemmas related to their roles as archivists and historians, such as whether to purchase a rare, one-of-a-kind instrument and preserve it, or leave it with musicians who created it. They may encounter controversy over whether they are allowed to watch, participate in, or record various songs or dances, or over who should be allowed to view videos or other products of fieldwork after the researcher has returned home.

===Theoretical issues and debates===

====Universals====
Musicologists have long pondered the existence of universals in music. Despite the trope of music being a &quot;universal language&quot;, we have yet to find anyone that can indisputably point out concrete characteristics that all types of music have in common. If one were to ascertain one or multiple universals found in music, it would create a basis for which all music is defined on, which would drastically change the way that music study is conducted or regarded. Ethnomusicology is (debatably) a comparative and subjective field. Having a concrete definition of music would create a way for ethnomusicologists to objectively evaluate music and come up with more concrete conclusions based on this. It would also remove much of the bias within the field of ethnomusicology. Additionally, the definition of the field of ethnomusicology relies on an understood meaning of the word &quot;music&quot;; For these reasons, universals are highly sought after. Despite this, it is unknown whether or not such universals could even exist, which is why there is still a debate among ethnomusicologists. In a journal published in 1971 called Ethnomusicology, this debate was carried out among renowned ethnomusicologists from the Society of Ethnomusicology, as outlined below, which set forth the recurring ideas around this topic in the field.

Ethnomusicologists initially started to question the possibility of universals because they were searching for a new approach to explain musicology that differed from Guido Adler&#x27;s. Ethnomusicologists worldwide have realized that culture has an important role in shaping aesthetic responses to music. This realization sparked controversy in the community, with debates questioning what people consider music, and whether perceptions of consonance and dissonance have a biological or cultural basis. Belief in universal traits of music was characteristic of nineteenth-century scholarship. Musicologists like Longfellow had written that Music is the universal language of mankind. The search for musical universalities has remained a topic amongst ethnomusicologists since Wilhelm Wundt, who tried to prove that &quot;all &#x27;primitive&#x27; peoples have monophonic singing and use intervals. Most musicians and even some teachers of Wundt&#x27;s time believed that music was a universal language, resulting in the development of scholarship that dealt with only one kind of music and treated all other kinds as true relatives if distant of the Western canon. The assumption seemed to be that the basic principles of Western music were universally valid because it was the only &quot;true&quot; music. Later, by the 1990s it had become increasingly difficult to view the world of music without including some discussion about the notion of universals. Charles Seeger, for instance, categorized his interpretation of musical universals by using inclusion-exclusion styled Venn-diagrams to create five types universals, or absolute truths, of music. Universals in music are as hard to come by as universals in language since both potentially have a universal grammar or syntax. Dane Harwood noted that looking for causality relationships and &quot;deep structure&quot; (as postulated by Chomsky) is a relatively fruitless way to look for universals in music. In &quot;The Universal Language.&quot; In The Study of Ethnomusicology: Thirty-One Issues and Concepts Bruno Nettl asserts that music is not a universal language and is more of a dialect because of the influence of culture on its creation and interpretation. Nettl shares the belief with his colleagues that trying to find a universal in music is unproductive because there will always be at least one instance proving that there is no musical universals. Nettl asserts that music is not the universal language, but types of music are not as mutually unintelligible as languages. One should study the music of each society in its own terms and learn it individually, referred to as music&#x27;s dialects rather than music&#x27;s languages. Nettl concludes his writing by stating that despite the wide variety of different kinds of music, the ways in which people everywhere have chosen to sing and play are more alike than the boundaries of the imaginable might suggest. There are other ethnomusicologists that note the invailidity of music as a universal language. For example, George List writes, &quot;I once knew a missionary who assured me that the Indians to whom he had ministered on the west coast of Mexico neither sang nor whistled,&quot; and ethnomusicologist David P. McAllester writes, &quot;Any student of man must know that somewhere, someone is doing something that he calls music but nobody else would give it that name. That one exception would be enough to eliminate the possibility of a real universal.&quot; As a result of this gamesmanship of ethnomusicologists to poke holes in universals, focus shifted from trying to find a universal to trying to find near-universals, or qualities that may unite the majority of the world&#x27;s music.

In Some Thoughts on &quot;Universals&quot; in World Music, McAllester claims there are no absolute universals in music, but there are plenty near-universals in that all music has some tonal center, and establishes a tendency that emits a feeling and the performers of that music influences the way in which that tendency is felt or realized. Music transforms experience and each person feels something when they hear it. Music is the actualization of the mystical experience for everybody. The universality of music exists in its ability to effect the human-mind. McAllester was a believer in near universals, he wrote, &quot;I will be satisfied if nearly everybody does it,&quot; which is why he postulated that nearly all music has a tonal center, has a tendency to go somewhere, and also has an ending. However McAllester&#x27;s main point is that music transforms the everyday humdrum into something else, bringing about a heightened experience. He likens music to having an out of body experience, religion, and sex. It is music&#x27;s ability to transport people mentally, that is in his opinion a near universal that almost all different kinds of music share.

In response to McAllester&#x27;s Universal Perspectives on Music, Klaus P. Wachsmann counters that even a near universal is hard to come by because there are many variables when considering a very subjective topic like music and music should not be removed from culture as a singular variable. There is a universal understanding that music is not the same everywhere, and a conversation of the universality of music can only be held when omitting the word &quot;music&quot;, or &quot;universals&quot;, or both. Wachsmann thinks that resemblance may be the main influencer of what we call music and what we do not. His approach, instead of finding a universal, was to create an amalgam of relations for sound and psyche: &quot;(1) the physical properties of the sounds, (2) the physiological response to the acoustic stimuli, (3) the perception of sounds as selected by the human mind that is programmed by previous experiences, and (4) the response to the environmental pressures of the moment. In this tetradic schema lies an exhaustive model of the universals in music.&quot; However, Wachsmann does allow that they all had some influenced experience and this belief is echoed by another ethnomusicologist who shares the belief that the universal lies in the specific way music reaches the listener. &quot;Whatever it communicates is communicated to the members of the in-group only, whoever they may be. This is as true of in-groups in our own society as in any other. Does &quot;classical&quot; music communicate to every American? Does rock and roll communicate to every parent?&quot; This relativity goes to prove that people are used to thinking of a certain phenomenon that marries indescribable components that we resemble to what we know as music from our reference. It is also here that Wachsmann acknowledges that part of the problem of identifying universals in music is that it requires a set definition of music, but he does not think that the lack of a definition does not need to &quot;disturb us unduly because usage will decide whether the emphasis is on primarily utilitarian speech or on speech that creates &quot;special time&quot; in a culture. And in any case, phenomena do have a way of belonging to more than one kind of continuum at the same time&quot;.

Folklore specializing ethnomusicologist George List, in his book &quot;On the Non-universality of Musical Perspectives&quot;, is in agreement with all within the discussion by saying that there is something unique that music produces, arguing that it always possesses significance to the group that it is produced by/around: &quot;Whatever [music] communicates is communicated to the members of the in-group only, whoever they may be. This is as true of in-groups in our own society as in any other&quot;(List, 399). However, List deviates from McAllister in saying that the &quot;weakness&quot; in his idea regarding music as a producer of &quot;heightened experience&quot; is that &quot;it applies equally well to other arts, not only to music&quot;, and therefore cannot be a universality of music, since it can&#x27;t be defined as a sole characteristic of music. List takes this thinking to McAllister&#x27;s notion of music possessing tendency as well, stating that &quot;all art forms, one might say every human activity, are patterned and show some form of organization, show &#x27;tendencies&#x27;.&quot; Additionally, List acknowledges the problem of talking about universality in music while there isn&#x27;t an objective definition of music itself: &quot;But words, as the common definition suggests, are lexically meaningful while music is not. Since music is abstract how do we study and assess its production of &#x27;heightened experience&#x27;.&quot;

Dane Harwood, in response to this debate, approached the question of universality in music in his article &quot;Universals in Music: A Perspective from Cognitive Psychology&quot;, years after the initial debate, from a psychology perspective. His view is that universals in music are not a matter of specific musical structure or function—but of basic human cognitive and social processes construing and adapting to the real world. He calls this the &quot;information processing approach&quot;, and argues that one must &quot;examine music as a complex auditory stimulus which is somehow perceived, structured, and made meaningful by the human perceptual and cognitive system. From this point of view, we can search for perceptual and cognitive processes which all human beings apply to musical sound, and thus identify some processing universal&quot;. He argues that this would adjust for the differences in context with which music is defined, produced, and observed, which would lead to insight into. &quot;if there are universal cultural processes operating on musical information&quot;. It is here that he takes a more technical turn and points to different musical phenomena and their relation to the way that humans process what they&#x27;re listening to. He argues that music is both a cultural and individual phenomenon, yet culture is something individuals learn about their worlds which is shared with others in the group.
One aspect of music is tuning, and recent work has shown that many musical traditions&#x27; tuning&#x27;s notes align with their dominant instrument&#x27;s timbre&#x27;s partials and fall on the tuning continuum of the syntonic temperament, suggesting that tunings of the syntonic temperament (and closely related temperaments) may be a potential universal, thus explaining some of the variation among musical cultures (specifically and exclusively with regard to tuning and timbre) and possible limits on that variation.

====Linguistics and semiotics====
It is often the case that interests in ethnomusicology stem from trends in anthropology, and this is no different for symbols. In 1949, anthropologist Leslie White wrote, &quot;the symbol is the basic unit of all human behavior and civilization,&quot; and that use of symbols is a distinguishing characteristic of humans. Once symbolism was at the core of anthropology, scholars sought to examine music &quot;as a symbol or system of signs or symbols,&quot; leading to the establishment of the field of musical semiotics. Bruno Nettl discusses various issues relating ethnomusicology to musical semiotics, including the wide variety of culturally dependent, listener-derived meanings attributed to music and the problems of authenticity in assigning meaning to music. Some of the meanings that musical symbols can reflect can relate to emotion, culture, and behavior, much in the same way that linguistic symbols function.

The interdisciplinarity of symbolism in anthropology, linguistics, and musicology has generated new analytical outlooks (see Analysis) with different focuses: Anthropologists have traditionally conceived of whole cultures as systems of symbols, while musicologists have tended to explore symbolism within particular repertories. Structural approaches seek to uncover interrelationships between symbolic human behaviors.

In the 1970s, a number of scholars, including musicologist Charles Seeger and semiotician Jean-Jacques Nattiez, proposed using methodology commonly employed in linguistics as a new way for ethnomusicologists to study music. This new approach, widely influenced by the works of linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce, and anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, among others, focused on finding underlying symbolic structures in cultures and their music.

In a similar vein, Judith Becker and Alton L. Becker theorized the existence of musical &quot;grammars&quot; in their studies of the theory of Javanese gamelan music. They proposed that music could be studied as symbolic and that it bears many resemblances to language, making semiotic study possible. Classifying music as a humanity rather than science, Nattiez suggested that subjecting music to linguistic models and methods might prove more effective than employing the scientific method. He proposed that the inclusion of linguistic methods in ethnomusicology would increase the field&#x27;s interdependence, reducing the need to borrow resources and research procedures from exclusively other sciences.

John Blacking was another ethnomusicologist who sought to create an ethnomusicological parallel to linguistic models of analysis. In his work on Venda music, he writes, &quot;The problem of musical description is not unlike that in linguistic analysis: a particular grammar should account for the processes by which all existing and all possible sentences in the language are generated.&quot; Blacking sought more than sonic description. He wanted to create a musical analytical grammar, which he coined the Cultural Analysis of Music, that could incorporate both sonic description and how cultural and social factors influence structures within music. Blacking desired a unified method of musical analysis that &quot;...can not only be applied to all music, but can explain both the form, the social and emotional content, and the effects of music, as systems of relationships between an infinite number of variables.&quot; Like Nattiez, Blacking saw a universal grammar as a necessary for giving ethnomusicology a distinct identity. He felt that ethnomusicology was just a &quot;meeting ground&quot; for anthropology of music and the study of music in different cultures, and lacked a distinguishing characteristic in scholarship. He urged others in the field to become more aware and inclusive of the non-musical processes that occur in the making of music, as well as the cultural foundation for certain properties of the music in any given culture, in the vein of Alan Merriam&#x27;s work.

Some musical languages have been identified as more suited to linguistically focused analysis than others. Indian music, for example, has been linked more directly to language than music of other traditions. Critics of musical semiotics and linguistic-based analytical systems, such as Steven Feld, argue that music only bears significant similarity to language in certain cultures and that linguistic analysis may frequently ignore cultural context.

====Comparison====
Since ethnomusicology evolved from comparative musicology, some ethnomusicologists&#x27; research features analytical comparison. The problems arising from using these comparisons stem from the fact that there are different kinds of comparative studies with a varying degree of understanding between them. Beginning in the late 60s, ethnomusicologists who desired to draw comparisons between various types of music and cultures have used Alan Lomax&#x27;s idea of cantometrics. Some cantometric measurements in ethnomusicology studies have been shown to be relatively reliable, such as the wordiness parameter, while other methods are not as reliable, such as precision of enunciation. Another approach, introduced by Steven Feld, is for ethnomusicologists interested in creating ethnographically detailed analysis of people&#x27;s lives; this comparative study deals with making pairwise comparisons about competence, form, performance, environment, theory, and value/equality. Bruno Nettl has noted as recently as 2003 that comparative study seems to have fallen in and out of style, noting that although it can supply conclusions about the organization of musicological data, reflections on history or the nature of music as a cultural artifact, or understanding some universal truth about humanity and its relationship to sound, it also generates a great deal of criticism regarding ethnocentrism and its place in the field.

====Insider/outsider epistemology====

The relevance and implications of insider and outsider distinctions within ethnomusicological writing and practice has been a subject of lengthy debate for decades, invoked by Bruno Nettl, Timothy Rice, and others. The question that causes such debate lies in the qualifications for an ethnomusicologist to research another culture when they represent an outsider, dissecting a culture that does not belong to them. Historically, ethnomusicological research was tainted with a strong bias from Westerners in thinking that their music was superior to the other kinds of music they researched. From this bias grew an apprehension of cultures to allow ethnomusicologists to study them, thinking that their music would be exploited or appropriated. There are benefits to ethnomusicological research, i.e. the promotion of international understanding, but the fear of this &quot;musical colonialism&quot; represents the opposition to an outsider ethnomusicologist in conducting his or her research on a community of insiders. As Nettl puts it, there are three common conceptions held by so-called host cultures: 1) The intentions of Western ethnomusicologists are not to study their traditions from a standpoint of interest and respect but as a comparison to their own customs. 2) Western ethnomusicologists want to apply their own methodologies to analyze their music, which will inherently fail in their opinions. 3) Ethnomusicologists make broad generalizations, ignoring the more subtle differences within different regions. 

In &quot;The Study of Ethnomusicology: Thirty-One Issues and Concepts&quot;, Nettl discusses personal and global issues pertaining to field researchers, particularly those from a Western academic background. In a chapter that recounts his field recordings among Native Americans of the northern plains, for instance, he attempts to come to terms with the problematic history of ethnographic fieldwork, and envision a future trajectory for the practice in the 21st century and beyond. Considering that ethnomusicology is a field that intersects in a vast array of other fields in the social sciences and beyond, it focuses on studying people, and it is appropriate to encounter the issue of &quot;making the unfamiliar, familiar,&quot; a phrase coined by William McDougall that is well known in social psychology. As in social psychology, the &quot;unfamiliar&quot; is encountered in three different ways during ethnomusicological work: 1) two different cultures come into contact and elements of both are not immediately explicable to the other; 2) experts within a society produce new knowledge, which is then communicated to the public; and 3) active minorities communicate their perspective to the majority.

Nettl has also been vocal about the effect of subjective understanding on research. As he describes, a fieldworker might attempt immersing themselves into an outsider culture to gain full understanding. This, however, can begin to blind the researcher and take away the ability to be objective in what is being studied. The researcher begins to feel like an expert in a culture&#x27;s music when, in fact, they remain an outsider no matter the amount of research, because they are from a different culture. The background knowledge of each individual influences the focus of the study because of the comfort level with the material. Nettl characterizes the majority of outsiders as &quot;simply members of Western society who study non-Western music, or members of affluent nations who study the music of the poor, or maybe city folk who visit the backward villages in their hinterland.&quot; This points to possible Eurocentric origins of researching foreign and exotic music. Within this outsider/insider dynamic and framework unequal power relations come into focus and question.

In addition to his critiques of the outsider and insider labels, Nettl creates a binary that roughly equates to Western and Nonwestern. He points out what he feels are flaws in Western thinking through the analyses of multiple societies, and promotes the notion of collaborating, with a greater focus on acknowledging the contribution of native experts. He writes, &quot;The idea of joint research by an &#x27;insider&#x27; and an &#x27;outsider&#x27; has been mentioned as a way of bridging the chasms.&quot; In spite of his optimism, the actualization of this practice has been limited and the degree to which this can solve the insider/outsider dilemma is questionable. He believes that every concept is studied through a personal perspective, but &quot;a comparison of viewpoints may give the broadest possible insight.&quot;

The position of ethnomusicologists as outsiders looking in on a music culture, has been discussed using Said&#x27;s theory of Orientalism. This manifests itself in the notion that music championed by the field may be, in many ways, a Western construction based on an imagined or romanticized view of &quot;the Other&quot; situated within a colonial mindset. According to Nettl, there are three beliefs of insiders and members of the host culture that emerge that lead to adverse results. The three are as follows: (1) &quot;Ethnomusicologists come to compare non-Western musics or other &quot;other&quot; traditions to their own... in order to show that the outsider&#x27;s own music is superior,&quot; (2) &quot;Ethnomusicologists want to use their own approaches to non-Western music;&quot; and (3) &quot;They come with the assumption that there is such a thing as African or Asian or American Indigenous music, disregarding boundaries obvious to the host.&quot; As Nettl argues, some of these concerns are no longer valid, as ethnomusicologists no longer practice certain orientalist approaches that homogenize and totalize various types of music. He explores further intricacies within the insider/outsider dichotomy by deconstructing the very notion of insider, contemplating what geographic, social, and economic factors distinguish them from outsiders. He notes that scholars of &quot;more industrialized African and Asian nations&quot; see themselves as outsiders in regard to rural societies and communities. Even though these individuals are in the minority, and ethnomusicology and its scholarship is generally written from a western perspective, Nettl disputes the notion of the native as the perpetual other and the outsider as the westerner by default.

Timothy Rice is another author who discusses the insider/outsider debate in detail but through the lens of his own fieldwork in Bulgaria and his experience as an outsider trying to learn Bulgarian music. In his experience, told through his book &quot;May it Fill Your Soul: Experiencing Bulgarian Music&quot;, he had a difficult time learning Bulgarian music because his musical framework was founded in a Western perspective. He had to &quot;broaden his horizons&quot; and try instead to learn the music from a Bulgarian framework in order to learn to play it sufficiently. Although he did learn to play the music, and the Bulgarian people said that he had learned it quite well, he admitted that &quot;there are still areas of the tradition (...) that elude my understanding and explanation. (...) Some sort of culturally sensitive understanding (...) will be necessary to close this gap.&quot;

Ultimately, Rice argues that despite the impossibility of being objective about one&#x27;s approach ethnomusicologists may still learn much from self-reflection. In his book, he questions about whether or not one can be objective in understanding and discussing art and, in accordance with the philosophies of phenomenology, argues that there can be no such objectivity since the world is constructed with preexisting symbols that distort any &quot;true&quot; understanding of the world we are born into. He then suggests that no ethnomusicologist can ever come to an objective understanding of a music nor can an ethnomusicologist understand foreign music in the same way that a native would understand it. In other words, an outsider can never become an insider. However, an ethnomusicologist can still come to a subjective understanding of that music, which then shapes that scholar&#x27;s understanding of the outside world. From his own scholarship, Rice suggests &quot;five principles for the acquisition of cognitive categories in this instrumental tradition&quot; among Bulgarian musicians. However, as an outsider, Rice notes that his &quot;understanding passed through language and verbal cognitive categories&quot; whereas the Bulgarian instrumental tradition lacked &quot;verbal markers and descriptors of melodic form&quot; so &quot;each new student had to generalize and learn on his own the abstract conceptions governing melodies without verbal or visual aids.&quot; With these two different methods for learning music, an outsider searching for verbal descriptions versus an insider learning from imitating, represent the essential differences between Rice&#x27;s culture and the Bulgarian culture. These inherent musical differences blocked him from reaching the role of an insider.

Not only is there the question of being on the outside while studying another culture, but also the question of how to go about studying one&#x27;s own society. Nettl&#x27;s approach would be to determine how the culture classifies their own music. He is interested in the categories they would create to classify their own music. In this way, one would be able to distinguish themselves from the outsider while still having slight insider insight. Kingsbury, an American pianist and ethnomusicologist, believes it is impossible to study a music outside of one&#x27;s culture, but what if that culture is your own? One must be aware of the personal bias they may impose on the study of their own culture.

Kingsbury, decided to reverse the common paradigm of a Westerner performing fieldwork in a non-western context, and apply fieldwork techniques to a western subject. In 1988 he published Music, Talent, and Performance: A Conservatory Cultural System, which detailed his time studying an American northeastern conservatory. He approached the conservatory as if it were a foreign land, doing his best to disassociate his experiences and prior knowledge of American conservatory culture from his study. In the book, Kingsbury analyzes conservatory conventions he and his peers may have overlooked, such as the way announcements are disseminated, to make assertions about the conservatory&#x27;s culture. For example, he concludes that the institutional structure of the conservatory is &quot;strikingly decentralized.&quot; In light of professors&#x27; absences, he questions the conservatory&#x27;s commitment to certain classes. His analysis of the conservatory contains four main elements: a high premium on teachers&#x27; individuality, teachers&#x27; role as nodal points that reinforce a patron-client-like system of social organization, this subsequent organization&#x27;s enforcement of the aural traditions of musical literacy, and the conflict between this client/patron structure and the school&#x27;s &quot;bureaucratic administrative structure.&quot; Ultimately, it seems, Kingsbury thinks the conservatory system is inherently flawed. He emphasizes that he does not intend to &quot;chide&quot; the conservatory, but his critiques are nonetheless far from complimentary. In 1997, Kingsbury continued his critical examination of the field with the publication of &quot;Should Ethnomusicology Be Abolished? (Reprise),&quot; arguing that a significant weakness of the discipline is the tendency of researchers to study music from various cultures through the lens of their own.

Another example of western ethnomusicologists studying their native environments comes from Craft&#x27;s My Music: Explorations of Music in Daily Life. The book contains interviews from dozens of (mostly) Americans of all ages, genders, ethnicities, and backgrounds, who answered questions about the role of music in their lives. Each interviewee had their own unique, necessary, and deeply personal internal organization of their own music. Some cared about genre, others organized the music important to themselves by artist. Some considered music deeply important to them, some did not care about music at all.

====Applied ethnomusicology====
Applied ethnomusicology uses music as a device to build bridges and create positive change in the world. &quot;Today applied ethnomusicology is established as one of the strongest branches of ethnomusicology&quot;. Jeff Titon thinks of ethnomusicology as the study of people making music, where applied ethnomusicology is &quot;a music centered intervention into a particular community whose purpose is to benefit that community, for example a social improvement, a musical benefit, a cultural good, or an economic advantage.&quot; Applied ethnomusicology is people-focused and guided by ethical and humanitarian principles. The first time that the term applied ethnomusicology appeared in an official SEM publication was in 1964 when The Anthropology of Music Alan Merriam wrote &quot;The ultimate aim of the study of man involves the question of whether one is searching knowledge for its own sake or is attempting to provide solutions for practically applied problems.&quot; The purpose of an applied ethnomusicology is the latter, knowledge for the sake of positive impact on humanitarian issues. Thus, a part of applied ethnomusicology is advocacy as opposed to solely participating as the observer. This includes working with a community to move social initiatives forward, and &quot;acting as an intermediary between cultural insiders and outsiders&quot;.
 Applied ethnomusicology became widely known in the 1990s but many fieldworkers were practicing it long before the name was established. For example, David McAllester and Bruno Nettl&#x27;s fieldwork on Enemy Way music is very much an example of applied ethnomusicology, where ethical values were closely considered and where the approach itself is comprehensive and designed to share understanding for the betterment of the Navajo nation. Here is an example of how applied ethnomusicology goes further than just considering music&#x27;s role within culture, but what music is &quot;conceived to be&quot; within a culture. Clearly, a crucial part of applied ethnomusicology is fieldwork and the way in which fieldwork is conducted as well as the way the fieldworker speaks on and acts towards the subject matter post-fieldwork. In an interview David McAllester revealed how he saw his role after conducting fieldwork on the Navajo Nation, &quot;And my experience, once I got among the Navajos, caused me to drop out of anthropology. I dropped the scientific point of view to a large extent, and I became…um, an advocate of the Navajos, rather than an objective viewer. And I was certainly among those in ethnomusicology who began to value… the views of the people who make the music, more than the value of the trained scholars who were studying it.&quot; This is the essence of applied ethnomusicology, to find a role to play in the research you conduct during and after conducting research.

====Ethnomusicology and Western music====
Early in the history of the field of ethnomusicology, there was debate as to whether ethnomusicological work could be done on the music of Western society, or whether its focus was exclusively toward non-Western music. Some early scholars, such as Mantle Hood, argued that ethnomusicology had two potential focuses: the study of all non-European art music, and the study of the music found in a given geographical area.

However, even as early as the 1960s some ethnomusicologists were proposing that ethnomusicological methods should also be used to examine Western music. For instance, Alan Merriam, in a 1960 article, defines ethnomusicology not as the study of non-Western music, but as the study of music in culture. In doing so he discards some of the &#x27;external&#x27; focus proposed by the earlier (and contemporary) ethnomusicologists, who regarded non-Western music as more relevant to the attention of scholars. Moreover, he expands the definition from being centered on music to including the study of culture as well.

Modern ethnomusicologists, for the most part, consider the field to apply to western music as well as non-western. However, ethnomusicology, especially in the earlier years of the field, was still primarily focused on non-western cultures; it is only in recent years that ethnomusicological scholarship involved more diversity with respect to both the cultures being studied and the methods by which these cultures may be studied. Ian Pace has discussed how questions regarding what exactly is within ethnomusicology&#x27;s purview tend to be political rather than scholarly questions. He also states that biases become readily apparent when examining how ethnomusicologists approach Western vs non-Western music.

Despite the increased acceptance of ethnomusicological examinations of Western music, modern ethnomusicologists still focus overwhelmingly on non-Western music. One of the few major examinations of Western art music from an ethnomusicological focus, as well as one of the earliest, is Henry Kingsbury&#x27;s book &quot;Music, Talent, and Performance&quot;. In his book, Kingsbury studies a conservatory in the north-eastern United States. His examination of the conservatory uses many of the traditional fieldwork methods of ethnomusicology; however, Kingsbury was studying a group which he is a member of. Part of his approach was to think of his own culture as primitive and tribal to lend it a sense of &#x27;otherness&#x27;, upon which much of anthropology&#x27;s theory is based (Kingsbury cites J.M. Weatherford&#x27;s ethnography of US Congress as the reason he chose this technique).

Bruno Nettl, when writing about signs and symbols, addressed symbolism in Western music culture. He cites a specific example of a music analyst interpreting music Beethoven in a literal fashion according to various pieces of literature. The analyst assigns direct meanings to motifs and melodies according to the literature. Nettl states that this reveals how members of Western music culture are inclined to view art music as symbolic.

Some ethnomusicological work focuses less on either Western or non-Western music specifically. For example, Martin Stokes&#x27; work regarding various aspects of identity addresses many cultures, both Western and non-Western. Stokes wrote about gender as it relates to music in various cultures, including Western, analyzing the fairly common phenomena of musicians seemingly presiding over events that are often related to issues of gender, or how a culture may seek to &quot;desex&quot; musicians as a form of control. The insights that Stokes makes are not exclusive to any culture. Stokes also dedicates much of his writing on identity, nationality, and location to how this manifests in Western music. He notes the presence of Irish music in migrant communities in England and American as a way in which individuals locate themselves in the world.

Because ethnomusicology is not limited to the study of music from non-Western cultures, it has the potential to encompass various approaches to the study of the many types of music around the world and emphasize their different contexts and dimensions (cultural, social, material, cognitive, biological, etc.) beyond their isolated sound components. Thus, Western popular music is also subject to ethnomusicological interest. This ethnomusicological work has been called urban ethnomusicology.

Thomas Turino has written about the influence of the media on consumerism in Western society and that it is a bi-directional effect. A large part of self-discovery and feeling accepted in social groups is related to common musical tastes. Record companies and producers of music recognize this reality and respond by catering to specific groups. In the same way that &quot;sounds and imagery piped in over the radio and Internet and in videos shape adolescent sense of gendered selves as well as generational and more specific cohort identities,&quot; so do individuals shape the media&#x27;s marketing responses to musical tastes in Western popular music culture. The culmination of identity groups (teenagers in particular) across the country represents a significant force that can shape the music industry based on what is being consumed.

====Ethics====
Ethics is vital in the Ethnomusicology field because the product that comes out of fieldwork can be the result of the interaction between two cultures. Applying ethics to this field will confirm that each party is comfortable with the elements in the product and ensure that each party is compensated fairly for their contribution. To learn more about the monetary effects after a work is published, please see the copyright section of this page.

Ethics is defined by Merriam-Webster as, &quot;the principles of conduct governing an individual or a group.&quot; In historical primary documents, there are accounts of interactions between two cultures. An example of this is Hernán Cortés&#x27; personal journal during his exploration of the world, and his interaction with the Aztecs. He takes note of every interaction as he is a proxy the Spanish monarchy. This interaction was not beneficial to both parties because Cortes as a soldier conquered the Aztecs and seized their wealth, goods, and property in an unjust manner. Historically, interactions between two different cultures have not ended in both parties being uplifted. In fieldwork, the ethnomusicologist travels to a specific country with the intent to learn more about the culture, and while she is there, she will use her ethics to guide her in how she interacts with the indigenous people.

In the Society of Ethnomusicology, there is a committee on ethics that publishes the field&#x27;s official Position Statement on Ethics. Because ethnomusicology has some fundamental values that stem from anthropology, some of the ethics in ethnomusicology parallel some ethics in anthropology as well. The American Anthropology Association have statements about ethics and anthropological research which can be paralleled to ethnomusicology&#x27;s statement.

Mark Slobin, a twentieth century ethnomusicologist, observes that discussion on ethics has been founded on several assumptions, namely that: 1) &quot;Ethics is largely an issue for &#x27;Western&#x27; scholars working in &#x27;non-Western&#x27; societies&quot;; 2) &quot;Most ethical concerns arise from interpersonal relations between scholar and &#x27;informant&#x27; as a consequence of fieldwork&quot;; 3) &quot;Ethics is situated within...the declared purpose of the researcher: the increase of knowledge in the ultimate service of human welfare.&quot; Which is a reference to Ralph Beals; and 4) &quot;Discussion of ethical issues proceeds from values of Western culture.&quot; Slobin remarks that a more accurate statement might acknowledge that ethics vary across nations and cultures, and that the ethics from the cultures of both researcher and informant are in play in fieldwork settings.

Some case scenarios for ethically ambiguous situations that Slobin discusses include the following:

# The discovery of a rare musical instrument leads to the debate of whether it should be preserved in a museum or left in its native culture to be played, but not necessarily preserved.
# The filming of a documentary video brings up the issues of consent from those who are being filmed. Additionally, the film should not necessarily be shown if the producer is not present to answer questions or clarify the video&#x27;s content if there are questions from the audience.
# Deciding how the monetary gains of a musical production should be distributed is a more prominent case of ethical concern.
# Attaining partial permission in the field is usually not enough to justify filming or recording; every person in the group should consent to the presence of a recording device.
# Whether truthful but possibly condemning information about a group is a situation that should be treated with extreme caution. Any information that could cause trouble for the musicians may need to be censored.
Slobin&#x27;s discussion of ethical issues in ethnomusicology was surprising in that he highlights the ethnomusicology community&#x27;s apathy towards the public discussion of ethical issues, as evidenced by the lackluster response of scholars at a large 1970 SEM meeting.

Slobin also points out a facet of ethical thinking among ethnomusicologists in that many of the ethical rules deal with Westerners studying in non-Western, third world countries. Any non-Western ethnomusicologists are immediately excluded from these rules, as are Westerner&#x27;s studying Western music.

He also highlights several prevalent issues in ethnomusicology by using hypothetical cases from an American Anthropological Association newsletter and framing them in terms of ethnomusicology. For example: &quot;You bring a local musician, one of your informants, to the West on tour. He wants to perform pieces you feel inappropriately represent his tradition to Westerns, as the genre reinforces Western stereotypes about the musician&#x27;s homeland... do you have the right to overrule the insider when he is on your territory?&quot;

Ethnomusicologists also tend towards the discussion of ethics in sociological contexts. Timothy Taylor writes on the byproducts of cultural appropriation through music, arguing that the 20th century commodification of non-western kinds of music serves to marginalize certain groups of musicians who are not traditionally integrated into the western music production and distribution industries. Slobin also mentions cultural and musical appropriation, noting that there is an ethical concern with musical appropriation being portrayed as appreciation and the &quot;long-term appropriation and profiteering of minority musics by the music industry.&quot; Steven Feld also argues that ethnomusicologists also have their place in analyzing the ethics of popular music collaboration, such as Paul Simon&#x27;s work with traditional zydeco, Chicano, and South African beats on Graceland. He provides some evidence for Slobin&#x27;s statement in his article, &quot;Notes on World Beat&quot;, as he notes that inherently imbalanced power dynamics within musical collaboration can contribute to cultural exploitation. According to Feld&#x27;s article, it seems as though the party that is &quot;appreciating&quot; a type of music ultimately reaps more benefits, such as &quot;economic rewards and artistic status,&quot; than the party whose work is appropriated. For example, The Rolling Stones paid homage to Muddy Waters by &quot;utilizing many aspects of [the] original recorded performance style from the 1950s&quot; and claimed that the cover version brought &quot;free&quot; publicity to the Muddy Waters. However, as Feld mentions, this statement is an arrogant one, since it implies that &quot;it takes a recording by The Rolling Stones to bring recognition to the artistic contributions of a Muddy Waters.&quot; Feld&#x27;s question of how to &quot;measure appropriation of original creative product&quot; when there is always a &quot;lesser trickle down of economic payback&quot; remains unanswered. Another ethical issue that Feld brings up is the power dynamics within record companies. The companies themselves make the most money and major contract artists can produce their own work and &quot;tak[e] economic/artistic risks commensurate with their sales.&quot; On the other hand, the musicians, who play the role of &quot;wage laborers&quot; as well as &quot;bearers and developers of musical traditions and idioms,&quot; gain the least and have the most to lose, since they offer their labor and aspects of their culture in the hopes that &quot;royalty percentages, spinoff jobs, tours, and recording contracts might follow from the exposure and success of records.&quot;

When talking about ethics in ethnomusicology it is imperative that I remain specific about who it applies to. An ethnomusicologist must consider ethics if he comes from a culture that is different from the culture that he wants to conduct his research on. An ethnomusicologist that conducts research on a culture that is their own may not have to weigh ethics. For example, music scholar, Kofi Agawu writes about African music and all of its significant aspects. He mentions the dynamics of music among the generations, the significance of the music, and the effects of the music on the society. Agawu highlights that some scholars glaze over the spirit of African music and argues that this is problematic because the spirit is one of the most essential components in the music. Agawu is also a scholar from Africa, more specifically Ghana, so he knows more about the culture because he is a part of that culture. Being a native of the culture that one is studying is beneficial because of the instinctive insight that one has been taught since birth. However, a native fieldworker may experience a slight ethical dilemma as they research their own community, given that there are concerns that &quot;arise from interpersonal relations between scholar and &#x27;informant&#x27; as a consequence of fieldwork.&quot; According to Clint Bracknell, who studies Aboriginal song traditions from the Nyungar southwest of Australia as a Nyungar person from that region, Indigenous researchers can &quot;use ethnomusicology as a platform&quot; to &quot;engage with, learn, and invigorate their own regional music traditions, particularly those that are presently endangered and under-researched&quot; in order to &quot;contribute to the diversity of music studied, supported, and sustained worldwide.&quot; However, they also risk &quot;expos[ing] the vital organs of their culture&quot; as well as the &quot;outsider&quot; misinterpreting their culture. If the native fieldworker&#x27;s community does not want them to reveal or record their cultural practices, the fieldworker experiences the dilemma of how much they can reveal in the face of a &quot;cultural grey out&quot; without crossing the line. The fieldworker must consider how they can support musical diversity while simultaneously respecting their community&#x27;s wishes.

Martin Rudoy Scherzinger, another twentieth-century ethnomusicologist, contests the claim that copyright law is inherently conducive to exploitation of non-Westerners by Western musicologists for a variety of reasons some of which he quotes from other esteemed ethnomusicologists: some non-Western pieces are uncopyrightable because they are orally passed down, some &quot;sacred songs are issued forth by ancient spirits or gods&quot; giving them no other to obtain copyright, and the concept of copyright may only be relevant in &quot;commercially oriented societies&quot;. Furthermore, the very notion of originality (in the West especially) is a quagmire in and of itself. Scherzinger also brought several issues to the forefront that also arise with metaphysical interpretations of authorial autonomy because of his idea that Western aesthetical interpretation is not different from non-Western interpretation. That is, all music is &quot;for the good of mankind&quot; yet the law treats it differently.

====Gender====
Gender concerns have more recently risen to prominence in the methodology of ethnomusicology.
Modern researchers often criticize historical works of ethnomusicology as showing gender-biased research and androcentric theoretical models that do not reflect reality. There are many reasons for this issue. Historically, ethnomusicological fieldwork often focused on the musical contributions of men, in line with the underlying assumption that male-dominated musical practices were reflective of musical systems of a society as a whole. Other gender-biased research may have been attributed to the difficulty in acquiring information on female performers without infringing upon cultural norms that may not have accepted or allowed women to perform in public (reflective of social dynamics in societies where men dominate public life and women are mostly confined to the private sphere). Finally, men have traditionally dominated fieldwork and institutional leadership positions and tended to prioritize the experiences of men in the cultures they studied. With a lack of accessible female informants and alternative forms of collecting and analyzing musical data, ethnomusicological researchers such as Ellen Koskoff believe that we may not be able to fully understand the musical culture of a society. Ellen Koskoff quotes Rayna Reiter, saying that bridging this gap would explain the &quot;seeming contradiction and internal workings of a system for which we have only half the pieces.&quot;

Women contributed extensively to ethnomusicological fieldwork from the 1950s onward, but women&#x27;s and gender studies in ethnomusicology took off in the 1970s. Ellen Koskoff articulates three stages in women&#x27;s studies within ethnomusicology: first, a corrective approach that filled in the basic gaps in our knowledge of women&#x27;s contributions to music and culture; second, a discussion of the relationships between women and men as expressed through music; third, integrating the study of sexuality, performance studies, semiotics, and other diverse forms of meaning-making. Since the 1990s, ethnomusicologists have begun to consider the role of the fieldworker&#x27;s identity, including gender and sexuality, in how they interpret the music of other cultures. Until the emergence of notions like feminist ethnomusicology in late 1980s (which derived its momentum from Third Wave feminism), women within ethnomusicology were limited to serve as interpreters of content created and recorded by men.

Despite the historical trend of overlooking gender, modern ethnomusicologists believe that studying gender can provide a useful lens to understand the musical practices of a society. Considering the divisions of gender roles in society, ethnomusicologist Ellen Koskoff writes: &quot;Many societies similarly divide musical activity into two spheres that are consistent with other symbolic dualisms&quot;, including such culture-specific, gender-based dualisms as private/public, feelings/actions, and sordid (provocative)/holy. In some cultures, music comes to reflect those divisions in such a way that women&#x27;s music and instrumentation is viewed as &quot;non-music&quot; as opposed to men&#x27;s &quot;music&quot;. These and other dualities of musical behavior can help demonstrate societal views of gender, whether the musical behavior supports or subverts gender roles. In her analysis, Koskoff pinpoints a way in which this &quot;symbolic dualism&quot; manifests itself literally: the relationship between the form or shape of one&#x27;s instrument and the player&#x27;s gender identity; Koskoff&#x27;s research demonstrates that often, &quot;the life-giving roles of either sex are seen or reproduced in their shape or playing motion.&quot; Moving outside the analytical scope of gender and adopting a more intersectional lens, Koskoff also remarks on how female musical behavior is affiliated with heightened sexuality, with numerous different cultures holding similar yet unique criteria of eroticized dance movements (e.g. &quot;among the Swahili...all-female gathering where young women do hip-rotations to learn the &#x27;right&#x27; sexual movements). It is here where Koskoff integrates notions of the private vs. public sphere, examining how in certain cultures, female musical performance is not only linked to notions of heightened female sexuality, it is also associated with &quot;implied or real prostitution,&quot; thus insinuating a potential class hierarchy differentiating the society subcultures surrounding private vs. public female musical performance.

The tendency for public music performed by single women of child-bearing age to be associated with sex, while performances by older or married women tends to downplay or even deny their sexuality, suggests not only that music performance is linked to societal perception of a woman&#x27;s sexual viability decreasing with age or marriage, but also that female sexuality is often necessarily included in the expression of a feminine gender through musical performance. The cloistering and separation of women&#x27;s music actually offer a way for women to relate to one another or to understand and express their gender identity through musical practice within a more women-centric space. The private, intimate nature of some women&#x27;s music can also lead to secret protest behavior when that music is brought into the public sphere. Koskoff indicates that secret symbolic behavior and language coded into women&#x27;s performance may communicate private messages to other women in the community, allowing these performers to speak out against an unwanted marriage, mock a possible suitor, or even express homosexuality without the male audience catching on. As such, music performance may confirm and maintain these gender inequalities and social/sexual dynamics, may protest norms as it maintains them, or it may actually challenge and threaten the established order. One example of musical performance traditions that confirm social/sexual dynamics may be the trend of prioritizing a female musician&#x27;s physical appeal over her technical musical skill when judging her performance, which shows a devaluation of female musical expression in favor of objectification of the feminine physicality through the public gaze. Koskoff recalls that women musicians who do manage to become popular in mainstream culture may start to take on masculine-coded musical qualities, even if it was their expression of femininity through performance that initially elicited their acclaim.

Since Koskoff&#x27;s book was published, contemporary ethnomusicologists have continued to study the practices and dynamics she cites in more detail. In &quot;Sounds of Power: An Overview of Musical Instruments and Gender&quot;, Veronica Doubleday extends the examination of feminine gender expression in music performance to the use of specific musical instruments. She reiterates that in patriarchal societies, the role of a man in a marriage tends to be one of ownership and control, while a married woman often takes on a position of submission and subordination. As such, Doubleday suggests that when constructing a relationship with their instruments, men may incorporate their cultural expectation of dominance, whereas women may be unlikely to take power over an instrument in the same way. If the physical allure of a female musician takes priority over her technique, female gender expression through music performance may be confined to that which upholds traditional notions of female beauty and objectification. Doubleday relates this to the distinction of &quot;suitable&quot; instruments for women as those that require no physical exertions that may disrupt the graceful portrait of the woman, or instruments that take an accompaniment role to the performer&#x27;s singing.
Exploring more modern musical traditions, ethnomusicologist Gibb Schreffler recounts the role of Punjabi women in music in the context of migration in &quot;Migration Shaping Media: Punjabi Popular Music in a Global Historical Perspective&quot;. As women are often the bearers of tradition in Punjabi culture, they hold important roles in many traditional Punjabi rituals, including those that involve music, which help enable emigrants to maintain Punjabi culture wherever they are. Schreffler also notes that as a result of migration, bhangra music has enabled the reformation of traditional gender roles in the public sphere through the performance of music: &quot;In creating a &#x27;dance floor,&#x27; women were allowed to mingle with men in ways they had not done before&quot;.

Similarly, in &quot;Music and the Negotiation of Orthodox Jewish Gender Roles in Partnership &#x27;Minyanim&#x27;&quot;, a study of gender dynamics within Orthodox Jewish culture as disrupted by minyanim partner dance, Gordon Dale documents how partnership minyanim dance may actively reinterpret Orthodox Jewish religious law in establishing a new context for women&#x27;s performance. The grounding of a new female music performance tradition in religion is particularly noteworthy considering the ways in which women are often excluded from religious music, both in the Orthodox Jewish consideration of female singing as inappropriate or weaponized sexual behavior that conflicts with expectations of modesty, and across diverse cultural spheres, as shown in Hagedorn&#x27;s example of the batá drum. In this instance, feminine musical expression becomes a highly political issue, with right-wing Orthodox men insisting it was impossible for a man to hear a woman singing without experiencing it as a sexual act, and male partnership minyan participants concluding instead that certain considerations of modesty were not applicable in the context of their prayer. Therefore, a woman&#x27;s singing voice could also be considered a sound of gender liberation against Orthodox power structures. Dale explains that while religious women&#x27;s music initiatives from other cultures such as Indonesian women chanting from the Qur&#x27;an as described by Anne Rasmussen, this type of partnership minyanim requires Orthodoxy to actually create a new religious space in which &quot;men and women can express their religious and feminist values side by side&quot;. Though restrictions on the availability of female roles in worship mean that minyanim must focus more on gender-based partnership than on explicit equality, partnership minyanim still forge a unique musical prayer space in Jewish culture that listens to and encourages women&#x27;s voices. He describes one interaction with an older woman who was personally uncomfortable leading religious worship, but greatly appreciated observing other women in that role. Simply singing alongside women in an unrestrained manner served as a comfortable and fulfilling way for her to practice feminism.

There is much room for additional study on the expression of gender through musical performance, including the ways that musical performance can disrupt binary delineations of gender identity and promote the expression of transgender and/or non-binary genders. Koskoff briefly acknowledges that it is possible for performers to &quot;cross over into opposite gender domains, displaying behaviors normally associated with the opposite sex&quot;, which has greater implications for the way that music performance enables the performance of gender identity.

As a result of these new considerations from within the field, efforts to better document and preserve women&#x27;s contributions to ethnomusicology have increased. With a particular focus on collecting ethnomusicological works (as well as literature from related fields) that address gender inequities within musical performance as well as musical analysis, feminist musicologists Bowers and Bareis published the &quot;Biography on Music and Gender – Women in Music&quot;, which is arguably the most comprehensive collection compiling ethnomusicological literature meeting this analytical criteria. Although it is not an ethnomusicological book, another Susan McClary&#x27;s watershed book Feminine Endings (1991) shows &quot;relationships between musical structure and socio-cultural values&quot; and has influenced ethnomusicologists perception of gender and sexuality within the discipline itself. There is a general understanding that Western conceptions of gender, sexuality, and other social constructions do not necessarily apply to other cultures and that a predominantly Western lens can cause various methodological issues for researchers.

The concept of gender in ethnomusicology is also tied to the idea of , in which researchers critically consider their own identities in relation to the societies and people they are studying. For example, Katherine Hagedorn uses this technique in &quot;Divine Utterances: The Performance of Afro-Cuban Santeria&quot;. Throughout her description of her fieldwork in Cuba, Hagedorn remarks how her positionality, through her whiteness, femaleness, and foreignness, afforded her luxuries out of reach of her Cuban counterparts, and how the magnitude of difference in her experience and existence in Cuba was exacerbated by Cuba&#x27;s economic turmoil after the fall of the Soviet Union during the Cuban Revolution. Her positionality also put her in an &quot;outsider&quot; perspective on Cuban culture and affected her ability to access the culture as a researcher on Santeria. Her whiteness and foreignness, she writes, allowed her to circumvent intimate inter-gender relations centered around performance using the bata drum. Unlike her Cuban female counterparts who faced stigma, she was able to learn to play the bata and thus formulate her research.

Today, the society for ethnomusicology is actively dedicating itself to increasing the presence and stature of gender/sexuality/LGBTQ/feminist scholarship within our respective music societies through forums like The Gender and Sexualities Taskforce within the society for ethnomusicology. The society for ethnomusicology has additionally established awards to celebrate work and research conducted within this intersectional subfield of ethnomusicology. Specifically, the society of ethnomusicology developed the Marcia Herndon Prize, which was created to honor exceptional ethnomusicological work in gender and sexuality including, but not limited to, works that focus upon lesbian, gay, bisexual, two-spirited, homosexual, transgendered and multiple gender issues and communities, as well as to commemorate the deeply influential contributions of Herndon to the field in these arenas. Specifically, Herndon is championed for co-editing &quot;Music, Gender, and Culture&quot;, a collection of fifteen essays (all authored by women) inspired by the Heidelberg meeting of the Music and Gender Study Group of the International Council for Traditional Music, making key comparisons between the philosophies and behaviors between male and female ethnomusicologists and musicians. This work has prompted a great deal of dialogue among ethnomusicologists and scholars of related fields, including Virginia Giglio, Ph.D., who reviewed Herndon&#x27;s seminal work, identifying central themes of spirituality, female empowerment, and culturally-defined gender-related duties as specific areas for further exploration among modern feminist ethnomusicologists.

====Mass media====
In the first chapter of his book Popular Music of the Non-Western World, Peter Manual examines the effect technology has had on non-western music by discussing its ability to disseminate, change, and influence music around the world. He begins with a discussion about definitions of genres, highlighting the difficulties in distinguishing between folk, classical, and popular music, within any one society. By tracing the historical development of the phonograph, radio, cassette recordings, and television, Manuel shows that, following the practice set in the western world, music has become a commodity in many societies, that it no longer has the same capacity to unite a community, to offer a kind of &quot;mass catharsis&quot; as one scholar put it. He stresses that any modern theoretical lens from which to view music must account for the advent of technology.

Martin Stokes uses his book Ethnicity, Identity and Music to examine how the presence of records, tapes, and CD&#x27;s, and the ability to listen to music removed from its social setting affects identity and social boundaries. Stokes mentions how modernity and new technology has created a separation between place or &quot;locale&quot; (referring to the physical setting of social activity as situated geographically) and space (the location from where the music is being played and listened to.) Stokes calls the separation from space and place, &quot;relocation&quot; and refers to it as an &quot;anxiety ridden process.&quot; Stokes believes that music plays an essential role to how individuals &quot;relocate&quot; themselves, claiming that music is unmatched by any other social activity in its ability to evoke and organize collective memory. Stokes also claims that the presence of records, tapes and CD&#x27;s creates the ability to present experiences of specific places &quot;with an intensity and power and simplicity unmatched.&quot; Stokes also touches upon the differences and social boundaries that each &quot;place&quot; holds. Claiming that each &quot;place&quot; organizes &quot;hierarchies of moral and political order&quot; and with each specific evocation of &quot;place,&quot; defines the moral and political community to relation to the space in which the listener finds themselves. The possibility of the instant evocation of musical &quot;place&quot; allows individuals to &quot;locate,&quot; and identify themselves in a plurality of ways, allowing a unique mix of places and social boundaries. Stokes also goes on to mention how the control of media systems by state-controlled governments, through ownership of its channels is a tool which authoritarian states use. Such control is not certain, as the meanings cannot be totally controlled and the citizens of said state can simply turn off the radio state or tune into another. Stokes believes the technological advancements in sound reproduction has democratized recording and listening, and thus, &quot;weakened the grip of state and music industry monopolies.&quot;

The book Music and Technocultures by René T. Lysloff and Leslie C. Gay Jr. speaks upon the nature of the rise of technology. They believe that as technology increases, as does its social consequences. Such technologies do not change the social configurations which existed before new technologies, but instead the people that engage with and use these technologies change, instead. Lysloff and Gay use the emergence of the use of MP3s as an example. The MP3 file format can be combined with other software&#x27;s to give tools that link online communities of music consumers with vast databases of music files, which individuals then have easy access to gigabytes of digital information. The existence of MP3s and these software&#x27;s then allows for the new possibilities for the exchange of music and gives greater control to the selection of music to the end user, undermining the power of the popular music industries. Such technologies also allow unsigned artists to distribute their own recordings on an unthinkable scale. Later within the book Gay and Lysloff go on to speak on the effects of technological control on consumer practices. Gay and Lysloff go on to say that &quot;Popular music musicians today are shaped first as &#x27;consumers of technology,&#x27; in which musical practices align with consumer practices. Even within the &quot;architectonic&quot; structure of malls and acoustic spaces, they are built to connect with consumer practices, defining territory and motivating shoppers.

====Copyright====
Copyright is defined as &quot;the exclusive right to make copies, license, and otherwise exploit a literary, musical, or artistic work, whether printed, audio, video, etc.&quot; It is imperative because copyright is what dictates where credit and monetary awards should be allocated. While ethnomusicologists conduct fieldwork, they often must interact with the indigenous people since the purpose of being in a particular country is to collect information to make conclusions. Such researchers typically leave their countries of interest with data that include interviews, videos, and text, along with multiple other sources of value. Rights surrounding music ownership are thus often left to ethics, and cultural differences have produced complex legal traditions worldwide surrounding music ownership and heritage protection, including for instance in China and India.

The specific issue with copyright and ethnomusicology is that copyright is an American right; however, some ethnomusicologists conduct research in countries that are outside of the United States. For example, Anthony Seeger details his experience while working with the Suyá people of Brazil and the release of their song recordings. The Suyá people have practices and beliefs about inspiration and authorship, where the ownership roots from the animals, spirits, and &quot;owned&quot; by entire communities. In the American copyright laws, they ask for a single original author, not groups of people, animals, or spirits. Situations like Seeger&#x27;s then result in the indigenous people not being given credit or sometime into being able to have access to the monetary wealth that may come along with the published goods. Seeger also mentions that in some cases, copyright will be granted, but the informant-performer, the researcher, the producer, and the organization funding the research–earns the credit that the indigenous people deserve.

Martin Scherzinger mentions how copyright is dealt with in the Senegal region of Africa. The copyright benefits, such as royalties, from music are allocated to the Senegalese government, and then the government in turn hosts a talent competition, where the winner receives the royalties. Scherzinger offers a differing opinion on copyright, and argues that the law is not inherently ethnocentric. He cites the early ideology behind copyright in the 19th century, stating that spiritual inspiration did not prohibit composers from being granted authorship of their works. Furthermore, he suggests that group ownership of a song is not significantly different from the collective influence in Western classical music of several composers on any individual work.

A solution to some of the copyright issue that the ethnomusicology is having is to push for the broadening of the copyright laws in the United States. To broaden is equivalent to changing who can be cited as the original author of a piece of work to include the values that specific societies have. In order for this to be done, ethnomusicologists have to find a common ground amongst the copyright issues that they have encountered collectively.

====Identity====
The origins of music and its connections to identity have been debated throughout the history of ethnomusicology. Thomas Turino defines &quot;self,&quot; &quot;identity,&quot; and &quot;culture&quot; as patterns of habits, such that tendencies to respond to stimuli in particular ways repeat and reinscribe themselves. Musical habits and our responses to them lead to cultural formations of identity and identity groups. For Martin Stokes, the function of music is to exercise collective power, creating barriers among groups. Thus, identity categories such as ethnicity and nationality are used to indicate oppositional content.

Just as music reinforces categories of self-identification, identity can shape musical innovation. George Lipsitz&#x27;s 1986 case study of Mexican-American music in Los Angeles from the 1950s to the 1980s posits that Chicano musicians were motivated to integrate multiple styles and genres in their music to represent their multifaceted cultural identity. By incorporating Mexican folk music and modern-day barrio influences, Mexican rock-and-roll musicians in LA made commercially successful postmodern records that included content about their community, history, and identity. Lipsitz suggests that the Mexican community in Los Angeles reoriented their traditions to fit the postmodern present. Seeking a &quot;unity of disunity&quot;, minority groups can attempt to find solidarity by presenting themselves as sharing experience with other oppressed groups. According to Lipsitz, this disunity creates a disunity that furthermore engenders a &quot;historical bloc,&quot; made up of numerous, multifaceted, marginalized cultures.

Lipsitz noted the bifocal nature of the rock group Los Lobos is particularly exemplary of this paradox. They straddled the line by mixing traditional Mexican folk elements with white rockabilly and African American rhythm and blues, while simultaneously conforming to none of the aforementioned genres. That they were commercially successful was unsurprising to Lipsitz–their goal in incorporating many cultural elements equally was to play to everyone. In this manner, in Lipsitz&#x27;s view, the music served to break down barriers in its up front presentation of &quot;multiple realities&quot;.

Lipsitz describes the weakening effect that the dominant (Los Angeles) culture imposes on marginalized identities. He suggests that the mass media dilutes minority culture by representing the dominant culture as the most natural and normal. Lipsitz also proposes that capitalism turns historical traditions of minority groups into superficial icons and images in order to profit on their perception as &quot;exotic&quot; or different. Therefore, the commodification of these icons and images results in the loss of their original meaning.

Minorities, according to Lipsitz, cannot fully assimilate nor can they completely separate themselves from dominant groups. Their cultural marginality and misrepresentation in the media makes them aware of society&#x27;s skewed perception of them. Antonio Gramsci suggests that there are &quot;experts in legitimization&quot;, who attempt to legitimize dominant culture by making it look like it is consented by the people who live under it. He also proposes that the oppressed groups have their own &quot;organic intellectuals&quot; who provide counter-oppressive imagery to resist this legitimization. For example, Low riders used irony to poke fun at popular culture&#x27;s perception of desirable vehicles, and bands like Los Illegals provided their listening communities with a useful vocabulary to talk about oppression and injustice.

Michael M.J. Fisher breaks down the following main components of postmodern sensibility: &quot;bifocality or reciprocity of perspectives, juxtaposition of multiple realities-intertextuality, inter-referentiality, and comparisons through families of resemblance.&quot; A reciprocity of perspectives makes music accessible inside and outside of a specific community. Chicano musicians exemplified this and juxtaposed multiple realities by combining different genres, styles, and languages in their music. This can widen the music&#x27;s reception by allowing it to mesh within its cultural setting, while incorporating Mexican history and tradition. Inter-referentiality, or referencing relatable experiences, can further widen the music&#x27;s demographic and help to shape its creators&#x27; cultural identities. In doing so, Chicano artists were able to connect their music to &quot;community subcultures and institutions oriented around speech, dress, car customizing, art, theater, and politics.&quot; Finally, drawing comparisons through families of resemblance can highlight similarities between cultural styles. Chicano musicians were able to incorporate elements of R&amp;B, Soul, and Rock n&#x27; Roll in their music.

Music is not only used to create group identities, but to develop personal identity as well. Frith describes music&#x27;s ability to manipulate moods and organize daily life. Susan Crafts studied the role of music in individual life by interviewing a wide variety of people, from a young adult who integrated music in every aspect of her life to a veteran who used music as a way to escape his memories of war and share joy with others. Many scholars have commented on the associations that individuals develop of &quot;my music&quot; versus &quot;your music&quot;: one&#x27;s personal taste contributes to a sense of unique self-identity reinforced through the practices of listening to and performing certain music.

As part of a broader inclusion of identity politics (see Gender), ethnomusicologists have become increasingly interested in how identity shapes ethnomusicological work. Fieldworkers have begun to consider their positions within race, economic class, gender, and other identity categories and how they relate to or differ from cultural norms in the areas they study. Katherine Hagedorn&#x27;s 2001 Book &quot;Divine Utterances: The Performance of Afro-Cuban Santería&quot; is an example of experiential ethnomusicology, which &quot;...incorporates the author&#x27;s voice, interpretations, and reactions into the ethnography, musical and cultural analysis, and historical context.&quot; The book received the Society for Ethnomusicology&#x27;s prestigious Alan P. Merriam prize in 2002, marking a broad acceptance of this new method in the institutions of ethnomusicology.

===Nationalism===

Ethnomusicological inquiries frequently involve a focus on the relationship between music and nationalist movements across the world, necessarily following the emergence of the modern nation-state as a consequence of globalization and its associated ideals, in contrast to a pre-imperialist world.

In the latter half of the 19th century, song collectors motivated by the legacy of folkloric studies and musical nationalism in Southern and Eastern Europe collected folk songs for use in the construction of a pan-Slavic identity. Collector-composers became &quot;national composers&quot; when they composed songs that became emblematic of a national identity. Namely, Frederic Chopin gained international recognition as a composer of emblematic Polish music despite having no ancestral ties to the Polish peasantry. Other composers such as Béla Bartók, Jean Sibelius, Edvard Grieg, and Nikolai Rimsky Korsakov utilized as well as contributed to the growing archives of recorded European folk songs to compose songs for the benefit of the nationalist governments of their respective countries. The French musicologist Radolphe d&#x27;Erlanger undertook a project of reviving older musical forms in Tunisia in order to reconstruct &quot;Oriental music,&quot; playing on instruments such as the ud and ghazal. Performing ensembles using such instruments were featured at the 1932 Congress of Arab Music in Cairo.

===Globalization===
Towards the end of the 20th century, the field of ethnomusicology had blossomed in American academia. With racial and ethnic demographics evolving rapidly in institutions around the country, the demand for a new type of curricula that focused on teaching students about cultural differences only grew stronger. Incorporating ethnomusicology into the American curriculum allows for students to explore other cultures, and it provides an open space for students with varying cultural backgrounds. Thankfully, recordings of music from around the world began to enter the Euro-American music industry because of the advancements made in technology and musical devices. In addition to these advancements, many scholars were receiving funding in order to go abroad and perform research following the end of the Cold War. This type of research allowed scholars to learn firsthand about cultures they aren&#x27;t familiar with—including hearing testimonies about customs, observing social and cultural norms, and learning how to play the instruments from a culture.

Timothy Taylor discusses the arrival and development of new terminology in the face of globalization. The term &quot;World Music&quot; was developed and popularized as a way to categorize and sell &quot;non-Western&quot; music. The term &quot;world music&quot; began in the 1990s as a marketing term to classify and sell records from other parts of the world under a unified label. Different styles of this world music began making appearances on the Billboard charts, in Grammy Award nominations, and through participation of new immigrants looking to get involved as musicians and audience members. The Billboard Charts and the Grammy&#x27;s came to be used as a great indicator for trends happening in music and to let people know who and what is selling. The Billboard music charts can be thought of as a marker of day-to-day activities of the music industry, and the Grammy awards can be thought of as an indicator of what sells and excels. The term &quot;world beat&quot; was also employed in the 90s to refer specifically to pop music, but it has fallen out of use. The issue that these terms present is that they perpetuate an &quot;us&quot; vs. &quot;them&quot; dichotomy, effectively &quot;othering&quot; and combining musical categories outside of the Western tradition for the sake of marketing.

Turino proposes the use of the term &quot;cosmopolitanism&quot; rather than &quot;globalization&quot; to refer to contact between world musical cultures, since this term suggests a more equitable sharing of music traditions and acknowledges that multiple cultures can productively share influence and ownership of particular musical styles. Another relevant concept is glocalization, and a typology for how this phenomenon impacts music (called &quot;Glocal BAG model&quot;) is proposed in the book &quot;Music Glocalization&quot;.

The issue of appropriation has come to the forefront in discussions of music&#x27;s globalization, since many Western European and North American artists have participated in &quot;revitalization through appropriation,&quot; claiming sounds and techniques from other cultures as their own and adding them to their work without properly crediting the origins of this music. Steven Feld explores this issue further, putting it in the context of colonialism: admiration alone of another culture&#x27;s music does not constitute appropriation, but in combination with power and domination (economic or otherwise), insufficient value is placed on the music&#x27;s origin and appropriation has taken place. If the originators of a piece of music are given due credit and recognition, this problem can be avoided.

Feld criticizes the claim to ownership of appropriated music through his examination of Paul Simon&#x27;s collaboration with South African musicians during the recording of his &quot;Graceland&quot; album. Simon paid the South African musicians for their work, but he was given all of the legal rights to the music. Although it was characterized by what seems to be fair compensation and mutual respect, Feld suggests that Simon should not be able to claim complete ownership of the music. Feld holds the music industry accountable for this phenomenon, because the system gives legal and artistic credit to major contract artists, who hire musicians like &quot;wage laborers&quot; due to how little they were paid or credit they were given. This system rewards the creativity of bringing the musical components of a song together, rather than rewarding the actual creators of the music. As globalization continues, this system allows capitalist cultures to absorb and appropriate other musical cultures while receiving full credit for its musical arrangement.

Feld also discusses the subjective nature of appropriation, and how society&#x27;s evaluation of each case determines the severity of the offense. When American singer James Brown borrowed African rhythms, and when the African musician Fela Kuti borrowed elements of style from James Brown, their common roots of culture made the connection more acceptable to society. However, when Talking Heads borrow style from James Brown, the distancing between the artist and the appropriated music is more overt to the public eye, and the instance becomes more controversial from an ethical standpoint. Thus, the issue of cycling Afro-Americanization and Africanization in Afro-American/African musical material and ideas is embedded in &quot;power and control because of the nature of record companies and their cultivation of an international pop music elite with the power to sell enormous numbers of recordings.&quot;

Gibb Schreffler also examines globalization and diaspora through the lens of Punjabi pop music. Schreffler&#x27;s writing on bhangra music is a commentary on the dissemination of music and its physical movement. As he suggests, the function and reception of Punjabi music changed drastically as increasing migration and globalization catalyzed the need for a cohesive Punjabi identity, emerging &quot;as a stopgap during a period that was marked by the combination of large-scale experiences of separation from the homeland with as yet poor communication channels.&quot; In the 1930s, before liberation from British colonial rule, music that carried the explicit &quot;Punjabi&quot; label primarily had the function of regional entertainment. In contrast, Punjabi music of the 1940s and 50s coincided with a wave of Punjabi nationalism that replaced regionalist ideals of earlier times. The music began to form a particular genteel identity in the 1960s that was accessible even to Punjabi expatriates.

During the 1970s and 80s, Punjabi pop music began to adhere aesthetically to more cosmopolitan tastes, often overshadowing music that reflected a truly authentic Punjabi identity. Soon after, the geographic and cultural locality of Punjabi pop became a prevalent theme, reflecting a strong relationship to the globalization of widespread preferences. Schreffler explains this shift in the role of Punjabi pop in terms of different worlds of performance: amateur, professional, sacred, art, and mediated. These worlds are primarily defined by the act and function of the musical act, and each is a type of marked activity that influences how the musical act is perceived and the social norms and restrictions to which it is subject. Punjabi popular music falls into the mediated world due to globalization and the dissemination of commercial music separating performance from its immediate context. Thus, Punjabi popular music eventually &quot;evolved to neatly represent certain dualities that are considered to characterize Punjabi identity: East/West, guardians of tradition/embracers of new technology, local/diaspora.&quot;

In some instances, different groups of people in a culture rely on the globalization of music as a way to sustain themselves and their own culture. For example, author, scholar, and professor in the Department of Black Studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara, George Lipsitz analyzes how the fusion of global cultures play out on American soil through his study of Mexican American culture in Los Angeles. Lipsitz unpacks a lot of cultural issues found within the Mexican American communities during the late 1900s by answering a question Octavio Paz poses on the whereabouts of the Los Angeles Mexican culture. Octavio Paz, a Mexican poet and diplomat, once visited Los Angeles and noted that the culture of Mexico seems to float around the city. The culture never quite exists nor does it seem to vanish. Some of the manifestations of the Mexican-American culture in Los Angeles can be found in what Lipsitz called a &quot;historical bloc&quot;. This historical bloc refers to a group of different affinity groups that relate to each other through &quot;counter-hegemonic&quot;. The groups bond over their bifocal existence in between spaces, their juxtaposition of multiple realities, and their families of resemblance.

Particularly in Chicano music, the musicians in this culture were strongly encouraged to take on an identity separate from themselves, if they wanted to achieve success in the world. Success might look different depending on the artists. One form of success might be selling tons of record while another form of success might be receiving respect from Anglo-American as real contributors to the &quot;masterpieces&quot; of music. This was definitely not an easy task to achieve, and often required some extra work. For example, Lipsitz writes about the first successful Los Angeles Chicano rock-and-roll songs and what the band members had to do to in order to achieve. The Don Tostino&#x27;s Band reflected on how difficult it was for them to present Chicano music while not losing their identity. A band member stated that they wanted to play Chicano music instead of looking like clowns. This was a response to their audience&#x27;s initial expectation that the band would arrive on stage in sombreros, tropical outfits, and other stereotypes attributed to Chicano people.

Another example of globalization in music concerns cases of traditions that are officially recognized by UNESCO, or promoted by national governments, as cases of notable global heritage. In this way, local traditions are introduced to a global audience as something that is so important as to both represent a nation and be of relevance to all people everywhere.

====Cognition====

Cognitive psychology, neuroscience, anatomy, and similar fields have endeavored to understand how music relates to an individual&#x27;s perception, cognition, and behavior. Research topics include pitch perception, representation and expectation, timbre perception, rhythmic processing, event hierarchies and reductions, musical performance and ability, musical universals, musical origins, music development, cross-cultural cognition, evolution, and more.

From the cognitive perspective, the brain perceives auditory stimuli as music according to gestalt principles, or &quot;principles of grouping.&quot; Gestalt principles include proximity, similarity, closure, and continuation. Each of the gestalt principles illustrates a different element of auditory stimuli that cause them to be perceived as a group, or as one unit of music. Proximity dictates that auditory stimuli that are near to each other are seen as a group. Similarity dictates that when multiple auditory stimuli are present, the similar stimuli are perceived as a group. Closure is the tendency to perceive an incomplete auditory pattern as a whole—the brain &quot;fills in&quot; the gap. And continuation dictates that auditory stimuli are more likely to be perceived as a group when they follow a continuous, detectable pattern.

The perception of music has a quickly growing body of literature. Structurally, the auditory system is able to distinguish different pitches (sound waves of varying frequency) via the complementary vibrating of the eardrum. It can also parse incoming sound signals via pattern recognition mechanisms. Cognitively, the brain is often constructionist when it comes to pitch. If one removes the fundamental pitch from a harmonic spectrum, the brain can still &quot;hear&quot; that missing fundamental and identify it through an attempt to reconstruct a coherent harmonic spectrum.

Research suggests that much more is learned perception, however. Contrary to popular belief, absolute pitch is learned at a critical age, or for a familiar timbre only. Debate still occurs over whether Western chords are naturally consonant or dissonant, or whether that ascription is learned. Relation of pitch to frequency is a universal phenomenon, but scale construction is culturally specific. Training in a cultural scale results in melodic and harmonic expectations.

Cornelia Fales has explored the ways that expectations of timbre are learned based on past correlations. She has offered three main characteristics of timbre: timbre constitutes a link to the external world, it functions as perceptualization&#x27;s primary instrument and it is a musical element that we experience without informational consciousness. Fales has gone into in-depth exploration of humankind&#x27;s perceptual relation to timbre, noting that out of all of the musical elements, our perception of timbre is the most divergent from the physical acoustic signal of the sound itself. Growing from this concept, she also discusses the &quot;paradox of timbre&quot;, the idea that perceived timbre exists only in the mind of the listener and not in the objective world. In Fales&#x27; exploration of timbre, she discusses three broad categories of timbre manipulation in musical performance throughout the world. The first of these, timbral anomaly by extraction, involves the breaking of acoustic elements from the perceptual fusion of timbre of which they were part, leading to a splintering of the perceived acoustic signal (demonstrated in overtone singing and didjeridoo music). The second, timbral anomaly by redistribution, is a redistribution of gestalt components to new groups, creating a &quot;chimeric&quot; sound composed of precepts made up of components from several sources (as seen in Ghanaian balafon music or the bell tone in barbershop singing). Finally, timbral juxtaposition consists of juxtaposing sounds that fall on opposing ends of a continuum of timbral structure that extends from harmonically based to formant-structured timbres (as demonstrated again in overtone singing or the use of the &quot;minde&quot; ornament in Indian sitar music). Overall, these three techniques form a scale of progressively more effective control of perceptualization as reliance on the acoustic world increases. In Fales&#x27; examinations of these types of timbre manipulation within Inanga and Kubandwa songs, she synthesizes her scientific research on the subjective/objective dichotomy of timbre with culture-specific phenomena, such as the interactions between music (the known world) and spiritual communication (the unknown world).

Cognitive research has also been applied to ethnomusicological studies of rhythm. Some ethnomusicologists believe that African and Western rhythms are organized differently. Western rhythms may be based on ratio relationships, while African rhythms may be organized additively. In this view, that means that Western rhythms are hierarchical in nature, while African rhythms are serial. One study that provides empirical support for this view was published by Magill and Pressing in 1997. The researchers recruited a highly experienced drummer who produced prototypical rhythmic patterns. Magill and Pressing then used Wing &amp; Kristofferson&#x27;s (1973) mathematical modeling to test different hypotheses on the timing of the drummer. One version of the model used a metrical structure; however, the authors found that this structure was not necessary. All drumming patterns could be interpreted within an additive structure, supporting the idea of a universal ametrical organization scheme for rhythm.

Researchers have also attempted to use psychological and biological principles to understand more complex musical phenomena such as performance behavior or the evolution of music, but have reached few consensuses in these areas. It is generally accepted that errors in performance give insight into perception of a music&#x27;s structure, but these studies are restricted to Western score-reading tradition thus far. Currently there are several theories to explain the evolution of music. One of these theories, expanded on by Ian Cross, is the idea that music piggy-backed on the ability to produce language and evolved to enable and promote social interaction. Cross base his account on the fact that music is a humanly ancient art seen throughout nearly every example of human culture. Since opinions vary on what precisely can be defined as &quot;music&quot;, Cross defines it as &quot;complexly structured, affectively significant, attentionally entraining, and immediately—yet indeterminately—meaningful,&quot; noting that all known cultures have some art form that can be defined in this way. In the same article, Cross examines the communicative power of music, exploring its role in minimizing within-group conflict and bringing social groups together and claiming that music could have served the function of managing intra and inter-group interactions throughout the course of human evolution. Essentially, Cross proposes that music and language evolved together, serving contrasting functions that have been equally essential to the evolution of humankind. Additionally, Bruno Nettl has proposed that music evolved to increase efficiency of vocal communication over long distances, or enabled communication with the supernatural.

====Decolonizing ethnomusicology====
Ethnomusicologists have used decolonial approaches for diverse purposes, including: (a) showing how nations from outside “the west” use music projects to renegotiate international relations under postcolonial conditions, and (b) as a basis for methods to promote equality and transparency in intercultural music performance projects. The idea of decolonization is not new to the field of ethnomusicology. As early as 2006, the idea became a central topic of discussion for the Society for Ethnomusicology. In humanities and education studies, the term decolonization is used to describe &quot;an array of processes involving social justice, resistance, sustainability, and preservation. However, in ethnomusicology, decolonization is considered to be a metaphor by some scholars. Linda Tuhiwai Smith, a professor of indigenous studies in New Zealand, offered a look into the shift decolonization has taken: &quot;decolonization, once viewed as the formal process of handing over the instruments of government, is now recognized as a long-term process involving the bureaucratic, cultural, linguistic and psychological divesting of colonial power.&quot; For ethnomusicology, this shift means that fundamental changes in power structures, worldviews, academia, and the university system need to be analyzed as a confrontation of colonialism. A proposed decolonized approach to ethnomusicology involves reflecting on the philosophies and methodologies that constitute the discipline.

In order to understand the importance of decolonizing ethnomusicology it&#x27;s important to recognize the implications of having western methods and beliefs dominate this diverse field. In Mugglestone &amp; Alder&#x27;s writings from 1981, we see a clear illustration of Eurocentric thinking dominating the discourse on non-Western music. The application of Eurocentric concepts, and the comparative methodology rooted in Western traditions reveal a limited perspective that fails to appreciate the unique and diverse musical traditions of non-Western cultures. This Eurocentric approach essentially viewed non-Western music through a Eurocentric lens, which hindered a deeper understanding of these musical expressions on their own terms.

Gilman&#x27;s work from 1909 reinforces this Eurocentric perspective, particularly in the context of studying non-Western music through musical scores. The exclusive reliance on European knowledge and musical notation systems can indeed obscure the richness and complexities of non-Western musical traditions. Gilman&#x27;s observations highlight the limitations of such an approach, emphasizing the need for a more inclusive and culturally sensitive perspective. 

In this discussion, it is equally important to highlight the merits of a unified standard system for evaluating music. The framework of Western music, embodied in notation and musical systems, serves as a crucial foundation for the comprehensive analysis and assessment of musical compositions. This standardized system provides a common language that enables musicians, scholars, and enthusiasts from diverse backgrounds to communicate effectively about musical elements such as melody, harmony, rhythm, and structure.

The use of notation, with its established symbols and conventions, allows for the precise documentation of musical ideas and facilitates the reproduction of compositions with a high degree of accuracy. This not only aids in the preservation of musical works but also enables musicians across different regions and time periods to interpret and perform them authentically. The standardized nature of Western music notation fosters a level of consistency that promotes a shared understanding of musical concepts, fostering a global dialogue among musicians and scholars.

As recently as June 2020, there emerged a noteworthy discourse advocating for the continuation of this pursuit towards decolonization within the academic domain of ethnomusicology. This intellectual movement gained momentum through the contributions of individuals such as Danielle Brown, a former professor of Music History and Cultures at Syracuse University. In her analysis, Brown asserts that the discipline at its very core bears the indelible mark of colonialism and imperialism.

Brown&#x27;s argument revolves around the contention that ethnomusicology, as historically conceived and practiced, has been inherently built upon colonialist and imperialist ideologies, which have had a profound influence on the discipline&#x27;s methodologies, research agendas, and power dynamics. She claims that this embedded colonialism and imperialism within ethnomusicology have perpetuated harmful structures and narratives that marginalize, exoticize, and misrepresent non-Western cultures. These dynamics, according to Brown, not only perpetuate historical injustices but also perpetuate modern forms of inequity and oppression.

Furthermore, Brown, recognizing the gravity of the issue, posits that the only viable course of action to address the colonialist and imperialist aspects of ethnomusicology is the “dismantling or significant restructuring” of the field. The reason behind this comprehensive solution for change lies in the firm belief that minor tweaks or surface-level alterations would prove inadequate in addressing the deep-seated historical biases and entrenched systemic inequities that are inherent to ethnomusicology.

Brown ends her letter by expressing important calls to action for decolonization and moving towards a more just and inclusive future of ethnomusicology and academia in general: she states that &quot;diversity, equity, and inclusion are a package deal&quot; must be intentionally taught without the exclusion of the others, she explains the importance of having more BIPOC (black, indigenous, people of color) representation in music classrooms (ex. more BIPOC music teachers), she calls for people to recognize the resistance, not reluctance, of trying to provide a more equitable space for BIPOC people, and finally she calls people to admit first the colonialist and imperialist roots of the field of ethnomusicology before moving forward to address the next steps. 

The decolonization of ethnomusicology takes multiple paths. These proposed approaches are: i) ethnomusicologists addressing their roles as scholars, ii) the university system being analyzed and revised, iii) the philosophies, and thus practices, as a discipline being changed. The Fall/Winter 2016 issue of the Society for Ethnomusicology&#x27;s Student News contains a survey about decolonizing ethnomusicology to see their readers&#x27; views on what decolonizing ethnomusicology entailed. The different themes were: i) decentering ethnomusicology from the United States and Europe, ii) expanding/transforming the discipline, iii) recognizing privilege and power, and iv) constructing spaces to actually talk about decolonizing ethnomusicology among peers and colleagues.

One of the issues proposed by Brendan Kibbee for &quot;decolonizing&quot; ethnomusicology is how scholars might reorganize the disciplinary practices to broaden the base of ideas and thinkers. One idea posed is that the preference and privilege of the written word more than other forms of media scholarship hinders a great deal of potential contributors from finding a space in the disciplinary sphere. The possible influence of the Western bias against listening as an intellectual practice could be a reason for a lack of diversity of opinion and background within the field. The colonial aspect comes from the European prejudices regarding subjects&#x27; intellectual abilities derived from the Kantian belief that the act of listening being seen as a &quot;danger to the autonomy of the enlightened liberal subject.&quot; As colonists reorganized the economic global order, they also created a system that tied social mobility to the ability to assimilate European schooling, forming a meritocracy of sorts. Many barriers keep &quot;postcolonial&quot; voices out of the academic sphere such as the inability to recognize intellectual depth in local practices of knowledge production and transmission. If ethnomusicologists start to rethink the ways in which they communicate with one another, the sphere of academia could be opened to include more than just the written word, allowing new voices to participate.

Another topic of discussion for decolonizing ethnomusicology is the existence of archives as a legacy of colonial ethnomusicology or a model for digital democracy. Comparative musicologists used archives such as the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv to compare the types of music of the world. The current functions of such public archives within institutions and on the internet has been analyzed by ethnomusicologists. Activists and ethnomusicologists working with archives of recorded sound, like Aaron Fox, associate professor at Columbia University, have undertaken recovery and repatriation projects as an attempt at decolonizing the field. Another ethnomusicologist who has developed major music repatriation projects is Diane Thram, who works with the International Library of African Music. Similar work has been dedicated towards film and field video.

====Ethnicity====
Giving a strict definition to ethnicity is considered difficult by many scholars, but it can be best understood in terms of the creation and preservation of boundaries, in contrast to the social &quot;essences&quot; in the gaps between these boundaries. In fact, ethnic boundaries can both define and maintain social identities, and music can be used in local social situations by members of society to create such boundaries. The idea of authenticity becomes relevant here, where authenticity is not a property of the music or performance itself, but is a way of telling both insiders and outsiders that this is the music that makes one&#x27;s society unique. Authenticity can also be seen as the idea that a certain music is inextricably bound to a certain group or physical place. It can give insight into the question of the &quot;origin&quot; of music, in that it by definition bears connection to the geographical, historical, and cultural aspects of music. For instance, holding that particular aspects of African-American music are actually fundamentally African is critical to claims of authenticity in the global African diaspora. In terms of how authenticity can be connected to the concept of place, consider the concept of authenticity in Jewish music throughout the Jewish diaspora. &quot;Jewish&quot; music is bound to both the Land of Israel and the ancient Temple of Jerusalem.

Although groups are self-defining in how they express the differences between self and other, colonization, domination, and violence within developing societies cannot be ignored. In a society, often dominant groups brutally oppress minority ethnicities from their classification systems. Music can be used as a tool to propagate dominant classifications in such societies, and has been used as such by new and developing states especially through control of media systems. Indeed, though music can help define a national identity, authoritarian states can control this musical identity through technology, in that they end up dictating what citizens can listen to. Governments often value music as a symbol, which can be used to promote supra-national entities. They often use this to argue the right to participate in or control a significant cultural or political event, such as Turkey&#x27;s involvement in the Eurovision Song Contest.

Historically, anthropologists have believed that ethnomusicologists deal with something that by definition cannot be synonymous with the social realities of the present world. In response, ethnomusicologists sometimes present a concept of society that purely exists within an all-encompassing definition of music. Ethnomusicologist Charles Seeger agrees with this, giving an example of how Suya society (in Brazil) can be understood in terms of its music. Seeger notes how &quot;Suya society was an orchestra, its village was a concert hall, and its year a song.&quot;

Music helps one understand oneself in relation to people, places, and times. It informs one&#x27;s sense of physical place—a musical event (such as a collective dance) uniquely evokes collective memories and experiences of place. Both ethnomusicologists and anthropologists believe that music provides the means by which political and moral hierarchies are developed. Music allows people to comprehend both identities and physical places, as well as the boundaries that divide them.

Gender is another area where boundaries are &quot;performed&quot; in music. Instruments and instrumental performance can contribute to a society&#x27;s definition of gender, in that behaviour of performers conforms to the gender expectations of society (e.g. men should not display effort, or women should feign reluctance to perform). Issues of ethnicity and music intersect with gender studies in fields like historical musicology, the study of popular music, and ethnomusicology. Indeed, gender can be seen as a symbol of social and political order, and controlling gender boundaries is thus a means of controlling such order. Gender boundaries reveal the most deeply intrinsic forms of domination in a society, that subsequently provide a template for other forms of domination. However, music can also provide a means of pushing back against these boundaries by blurring the boundary between what is traditionally considered male and female.

When one listens to foreign music, one tries to make sense of it in terms of one&#x27;s own (familiar) music and musical worldviews, and this internal struggle can be seen as a power struggle between one&#x27;s musical views and the other, foreign ones. Sometimes, musicians celebrate ethnic plurality in problematic ways, in that they collect genres, and subsequently alter and reinterpret them in their own terms. Societies often publicize so-called multi-cultural music performances simply for the promotion of their own self-image. Such staged folklore begins to greatly diverge from the celebration of ethnic plurality it purportedly represents, and the music and dance being performed become meaningless when presented so entirely out of context. In such a scenario, which is seen very commonly, the meaning of the performance is both created and controlled by the performers, the audience, and even the media of the society the performance takes place in.

Music rarely remains stable in contexts of social change—&quot;culture contact&quot; causes music to be altered to whatever new culture it has come in contact with. In this way, minority communities can internalize the outside world through music—a kind of sense-making. They become able to deal with and control a foreign world on their own (musical) terms. Indeed, such integration of musical difference is an integral aspect of the creation of a musical identity, which can be seen in Seeger&#x27;s description of the Brazilian Suya, who took music from an outside culture and made it their own as an &quot;assertion of identity in a multi-ethnic social situation.&quot; In addition, consider the development of East Indian culture. Many of the trademarks of East Indian society, such as the caste system and the Bhojpuri form of the Hindi language, are becoming obsolete, which erodes their concept of ethnic identity. In light of these conditions, music has begun to play an unprecedented role in the concept of East Indian ethnic identity. Music can also play a transformative part in the formation of the identities of urban and migrant communities, which can be seen in the diverse and distinct musical cultures in the melting pot of communities in the US. In the case of colonialism, the colonizer and the colonized end up repeatedly exchanging musical ideas. For instance, in the Spanish colonization of the indigenous Native Americans, the resulting &quot;mestizo&quot; music reflects the intersection of these two culture spheres, and even gave way to new modes of musical expression bearing aspects of both cultures.

Ethnicities and class identities have a complicated relationship. Class can be seen as the relative control a group has over economic (relating to means of production), cultural, political, and social assets in various social areas. In the case of migrant communities, the divide between the concepts of ethnicity and class blur (for instance, one ethnic group/class level provides cheap labor for the other, such as in the case of Latinx Mexican immigrants performing cheap farming labor for White Americans). This blurring can also be seen in Zimbabwe, where White settlers determined a hierarchical social order divided by ethnicity: Blacks, others &quot;coloureds,&quot; Asians, and Whites (who were at the top of the hierarchy). The concept of &quot;geographical heritage&quot; (where one cannot change where one&#x27;s ancestors come from) contributed to this concept of immutability of this constructed hierarchy; White settlers enforced the ranks of this hierarchy through their definition of how &quot;civilized&quot; each ethnic group was (Whites being the most civilized).

However, one cannot simply match a class with a single musical style, as musical styles reflect the complex and often contradictory aspects of the society as a whole. Marxist subcultural theory proposes that subcultures borrow and alter traits from the dominant culture to create a newly diverse range of available traits where the signs of the dominant culture remain, but are now part of a new and simultaneously subversive whole. In fact, ethnicities are similar to classes in many ways. They are often either defined or excluded based on the rules of the dominant classificatory system of the society. Thus, ethnic minorities are forced to figure out how to create their own identities within the control of the dominant classifications. Ethnic minorities can also use music in order to resist and protest the dominant group. This can be seen in European Jews, African Americans, Malaysian-Chinese, and even in the Indonesian-Chinese, who expressed resistance through Chinese theater performances.

===Medical ethnomusicology===

Scholars have characterized medical ethnomusicology as &quot;a new field of integrative research and applied practice that explores holistically the roles of music and sound phenomena and related praxes in any cultural and clinical context of health and healing&quot;. Medical ethnomusicology often focuses specifically on music and its effect on the biological, psychological, social, emotional, and spiritual realms of health. In this regard, medical ethnomusicologists have found applications of music to combat a broad range of health issues; music has found usage in the treatment of autism, dementia, AIDS and HIV, while also finding use in social and spiritual contexts through the restoration of community and the role of music in prayer and meditation. Recent studies have also shown how music can help to alter mood and serve as cognitive therapy.

==Academic programs==

Many universities around the world offer ethnomusicology classes, offering both graduate and undergraduate degree-granting options, and act as centers for ethnomusicological research. The Society of Ethnomusicology maintains a list of such programs. At the undergraduate level, students pursuing degrees in ethnomusicology often enroll in programs housed within Departments of Music. These programs provide a solid foundation in music theory, history, and performance, with an emphasis on world music traditions. Introductory classes have helped expand the popularity of the discipline to a diverse set of students. For graduate students seeking more advanced training, master&#x27;s and Ph.D. programs specifically in ethnomusicology are commonly available. These advanced programs delve into a wide range of subjects, including in-depth research design, music transcription and analysis, the exploration of cultural interactions, and the utilization of specialized ethnomusicological tools. Students also engage with music studies theory, and they can choose from a variety of electives and area studies to tailor their education to their specific interests. Proficiency in at least two languages is often required to conduct research in diverse cultural contexts, and students are encouraged to pursue independent research projects. The culmination of their academic journey typically involves the completion of a dissertation that contributes to the field&#x27;s body of knowledge.

==In popular culture==
Global music festivals pertaining to ethnomusicology sometimes occur, most notably, WOMAD (World of Music, Arts and Dance). This yearly festival, first held in 1982, showcases a diverse range of artists and genres from around the world. This contributes to the rising popularity of ethnomusicological perspectives on a global scale.

A notable musical work heavily influenced by ethnomusicology is Paul Simon’s album, &quot;Graceland&quot; (1986). Incorporating elements of South African music, Simon displays the significance of ethnomusicology in popularizing and amalgamating diverse musical traditions.

The string quartet called the Kronos Quartet has exhibited many connections to the practice of ethnomusicology. Throughout their years, many collaborations have occurred between the members of the quartet and traditional musicians from around the world. This exemplifies the cross-cultural nature of ethnomusicological research; &quot;Pieces of Africa&quot; (1992) is an album by the Kronos Quartet that clearly exhibits these qualities. 

Ethnomusicology has also had its fair share of representation in literature. For example, in Karen Hesse’s novel, &quot;The Music of Dolphins&quot; (1996), one character (Doctor Elizabeth Beck) is an ethnomusicologist researching the musical communication of dolphins, exemplifying ethnomusicology in fictional literature. Another work of literature with ethnomusicological components is &quot;The Summer Prince&quot; by Alaya Dawn Johnson. This science fiction novel, published in 2013, presents an ethnomusicologist as its main protagonist. June Costa, the said protagonist, lives in a future society where art and creativity are tightly monitored. This novel revolves around the storyline of June Costa finding the hidden power of music as well as its potential to spur up change in a dystopian world.

In film, &quot;The Buena Vista Social Club&quot; (1999), directed by Wim Wenders, delves into traditional Cuban music and notably illustrates ethnomusicological elements in its portrayal of musicians and their cultural backbones. As well, the movie &quot;Songcatcher&quot; (2000) is loosely based on the ethnomusicology work of Olive Dame Campbell. In &quot;Inside Out 2&quot; (2024), ethnomusicologist is briefly mentioned as a possible future career for the character Riley, but her personified emotion of joy does not know what it is. Her personified anxiety later sees being one as part of a possible bad future for Riley, but it is unclear if Anxiety knows what it is either. 

==Ethnochoreology==
===Definition===

The definition of ethnochoreology stands to have many similarities with the current way of studying of ethnomusicology. With ethnochoreology&#x27;s roots in anthropology taken into account, and by the way that it is studied in the field, dance is most accurately defined and studied within this academic circle as two parts: as &quot;an integral part of a network of social events&quot; and &quot;as a part of a system of knowledge and belief, social behavior and aesthetic norms and values&quot;. That is, the study of dance in its performance aspects—the physical movements, costumes, stages, performers, and accompanied sound—along with the social context and uses within the society where it takes place.

===Beginnings===

Because of its growth alongside ethnomusicology, the beginning of ethnochoreology also had a focus on the comparative side of things, where the focus was on classifying different styles based on the movements used and the geographical location in a way not dissimilar to Lomax. This is best shown in &quot;Benesh Notation and Ethnochoreology&quot; in 1967 which was published in the ethnomusicology journal, where Hall advocates using the Benesh notation as a way of documenting dance styles so that it is &quot;possible to compare styles and techniques in detail — even &#x27;schools&#x27; within one style — and individual variations in execution from dancer to dancer.&quot;
In the seventies and eighties, like with ethnomusicology, ethnochoreology had a focus on a very specific communicative type of &quot;folklore music&quot; performed by small groups and the context and performance aspects of dance were studied and emphasized to be a part of a whole &quot;folkloric dance&quot; that needed to be preserved. This was influenced by the same human centered &quot;thick description&quot; way of study that had moved into ethnomusicology. However, at this time, the sound and dance aspects of the performances studied were still studied and analyzed a bit separately from the context and social aspects of the culture around the dance.

===Current===

Beginning in the mid eighties, there has been a reflexively interpretive way of writing about dance in culture that is more conscious of the impact of the scholar within the field and how it affects the culture and its relationship with the dance that the scholar is looking into. For example, because most scholars until this point were searching for the most &quot;authentic&quot; folk, there was a lack of study on individual performers, popular dances, and dances of subgroup groups within a culture such as women, youth, and members of the LGBT community. In contrast, this newer wave of study wanted a more open study of dance within a culture. Additionally, there was a shift for a more mutual give and take between the scholar and the subjects, who in field work, also assist the scholars as teachers and informants.

===Differences with ethnomusicology===

Although there are many similarities between ethnochoreology and ethnomusicology, there is a large difference between the current geographical scope of released studies. For example, from the beginning of ethnomusicology, there was a large focus on types of music from Africa and Asia, due to them seeming to have the most deviation from their norm while ethnochoreology, also beginning in Europe, has long had extensive studies of the Eastern European &quot;folk dances&quot; with relatively little of African and Asian dances, however American studies have delved into Native American and Southeast Asian dance. However, the very basis of this being a difference could be challenged on the basis that many European ethnomusicological and ethnochoreological studies have been done on the &quot;home&quot; folk music and dance in the name of nationalism.

===Organizations===

The Society for Ethnomusicology is, with the International Council for Traditional Music and the British Forum for Ethnomusicology, one of three major international associations for ethnomusicology. Its mission is &quot;to promote the research, study, and performance of music in all historical periods and cultural contexts.&quot; Officially founded in 1955, its origins extend back to November, 1953 at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association in Philadelphia with an informal agreement between Willard Rhodes, David McAllester, and Alan P. Merriam.

The International Council for Traditional Music (ICTM) is a scholarly non-governmental organization which focuses on the study, practice, documentation, preservation, and dissemination of traditional music and dance of all countries. Founded in London on September 22, 1947, it publishes the &quot;Yearbook for Traditional Music&quot; once a year and the &quot;Bulletin of the ICTM&quot; three times a year. The organization was previously known as the International Folk Music Council (IFMC). In 1949, it helped found the UNESCO International Music Council and remains a non-governmental organization in formal consultative relations with UNESCO.

According to its website, the British Forum for Ethnomusicology began in 1973 as the United Kingdom chapter of the International Folk Music Council; the International Folk Music Council later changed its name to the International Council for Traditional Music, and its United Kingdom chapter became the British Forum for Ethnomusicology in 1995. The mission of the British Forum for Ethnomusicology “is to advance the study, practice, documentation, preservation and dissemination of all and any music.”

==See also==
For articles on significant individuals in this discipline, see the List of ethnomusicologists.
* Choreomusicology
* Ethnochoreology
* Society for Ethnomusicology
* Fumio Koizumi Prize for Ethnomusicology
* List of musicologists
* List of musicology topics
* Musicology
* Prehistoric music
* Smithsonian Folkways
* Sociomusicology
* World music
* International Council for Traditional Music
* Society for Ethnomusicology

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*.
*

==External links==

* Society for Ethnomusicology
* International Council for Traditional Music
* British Forum for Ethnomusicology
* International Library of African Music (ILAM)
* The World and Traditional Music Section at the British Library 
* The Archives of Traditional Music at Indiana University
* Ethnomusicology, Folk Music, and World Music (University of Washington)
* Outreach Ethnomusicology An Online Ethnomusicology Community and Fieldwork Resource
* SIL publications on Ethnomusicology
* Yale Music Library Research Guide for Ethnomusicology
* Oxford Handbook of Applied Ethnomusicology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="0" end="15" title="Ethnomusicology" label="Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="22" end="27" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086970" start="371" end="380" title="musicking" label="musicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="486" end="498" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="573" end="583" title="musicology" label="musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="1264" end="1275" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="1301" end="1313" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="1870" end="1881" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q736767" start="2069" end="2084" title="Jeff Todd Titon" label="Jeff Todd Titon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2675" end="2687" title="Sociology" label="human social"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="4331" end="4343" title="ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="4344" end="4353" title="fieldwork" label="fieldwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323877" start="4619" end="4630" title="Mantle Hood" label="Mantle Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="6073" end="6084" title="Folklore studies" label="Folklorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="6120" end="6128" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6233" end="6249" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q195301" start="6251" end="6264" title="Oskar Kolberg" label="Oskar Kolberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q473602" start="6357" end="6374" title="Music of Poland" label="Polish folk songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="9037" end="9058" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143546" start="9060" end="9076" title="cultural studies" label="cultural studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="9081" end="9090" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066045" start="9793" end="9807" title="Charles Seeger" label="Charles Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066045" start="10189" end="10203" title="Charles Seeger" label="Charles Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323877" start="10208" end="10219" title="Mantle Hood" label="Mantle Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614691" start="11117" end="11128" title="Steven Feld" label="Steven Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649837" start="11133" end="11145" title="Alan Merriam" label="Alan Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="11232" end="11255" title="participant observation" label="participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12764" end="12794" title="#Theoretical issues and debates" label="Theoretical Issues and Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926065" start="12985" end="12995" title="V. Kofi Agawu" label="Kofi Agawu"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="13034" end="13047" title="Music of Africa" label="African music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14072" end="14091" title="Mieczyslaw Kolinski" label="Mieczyslaw Kolinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q98640039" start="14096" end="14110" title="Marcia Herndon" label="Marcia Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="15404" end="15415" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q78975" start="15421" end="15441" title="Erich von Hornbostel" label="Erich von Hornbostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q724178" start="15560" end="15564" title="Cent (music)" label="cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="15598" end="15609" title="Phonetics" label="phonetician"/>
<link wikidata="Q621776" start="15628" end="15646" title="Alexander John Ellis" label="Alexander J. Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78975" start="15834" end="15844" title="Hornbostel (musicologist)" label="Hornbostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="16012" end="16021" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="16026" end="16035" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="16109" end="16117" title="Interval (music)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="16185" end="16193" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="16381" end="16387" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="16431" end="16439" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="17249" end="17262" title="Scale (music)" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17508" end="17517" title="#Fieldwork" label="Fieldwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033857" start="17549" end="17561" title="cantometrics" label="cantometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="17666" end="17677" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614691" start="18573" end="18584" title="Steven Feld" label="Steven Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354583" start="18707" end="18720" title="Kaluli people" label="Kaluli people"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="18724" end="18740" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955278" start="18745" end="18757" title="Sociomusicology" label="sociomusical"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="18836" end="18844" title="Emeritus" label="Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="18876" end="18898" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="20173" end="20184" title="folklorists" label="folklorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="20186" end="20199" title="ethnographers" label="ethnographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="20381" end="20394" title="Phonograph cylinder" label="wax cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q821680" start="20441" end="20467" title="Berliner Phonogramm-Archiv" label="Berliner Phonogramm-Archiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="20492" end="20514" title="comparative musicology" label="comparative musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q57497" start="20537" end="20548" title="Carl Stumpf" label="Carl Stumpf"/>
<link wikidata="Q78975" start="20562" end="20585" title="Erich M. von Hornbostel" label="Erich M. von Hornbostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21305" end="21317" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153008" start="21996" end="22009" title="Zoltán Kodály" label="Zoltán Kodály"/>
<link wikidata="Q956324" start="22015" end="22027" title="László Lajtha" label="Lászo Lajtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579783" start="22165" end="22188" title="American Anthropologist" label="American Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="22469" end="22481" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791290" start="22490" end="22518" title="Bureau of American Ethnology" label="Bureau of American Ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243072" start="22520" end="22534" title="Natalie Curtis" label="Natalie Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725807" start="22540" end="22557" title="Alice Cunningham Fletcher" label="Alice C. Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="22608" end="22619" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="22708" end="22723" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230276" start="22821" end="22831" title="Jaap Kunst" label="Jaap Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238317" start="23085" end="23101" title="David P. McAllester" label="David McAllester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981664" start="23105" end="23117" title="Navajo music" label="Navajo music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24206" end="24210" title="[sic" label="[sic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769756" start="28051" end="28062" title="Mark Slobin" label="Mark Slobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650652" start="28948" end="28952" title="Suyá" label="Suyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="30651" end="30671" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31086" end="31102" title="Morris Friedrich" label="Morris Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649837" start="31781" end="31793" title="Alan P. Merriam" label="Alan Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33149" end="33161" title="Timothy Rice" label="Timothy Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="33540" end="33556" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76356" start="33558" end="33576" title="Hans-Georg Gadamer" label="Hans-Georg Gadamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192066" start="33582" end="33594" title="Paul Ricœur" label="Paul Ricoeur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34664" end="34676" title="Gregory Barz" label="Gregory Barz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34681" end="34691" title="Tim Cooley" label="Tim Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769756" start="35932" end="35943" title="Mark Slobin" label="Mark Slobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650652" start="36877" end="36881" title="Suyá" label="Suyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q78716" start="44949" end="44960" title="Guido Adler" label="Guido Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q75814" start="45559" end="45572" title="Wilhelm Wundt" label="Wilhelm Wundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066045" start="46240" end="46254" title="Charles Seeger" label="Charles Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="46848" end="46859" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238317" start="48016" end="48035" title="David P. McAllester" label="David P. McAllester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419976" start="49742" end="49760" title="Klaus P. Wachsmann" label="Klaus P. Wachsmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53427" end="53439" title="Dane Harwood" label="Dane Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55080" end="55100" title="Regular diatonic tuning#Syntonic temperament and timbre" label="syntonic temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668142" start="55745" end="55754" title="symbolic anthropology" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="55940" end="55951" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="56382" end="56394" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="56396" end="56407" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="56413" end="56423" title="musicology" label="musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="56671" end="56681" title="Structuralism (linguistics)" label="Structural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066045" start="56822" end="56836" title="Charles Seeger" label="Charles Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161507" start="56853" end="56873" title="Jean-Jacques Nattiez" label="Jean-Jacques Nattiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="57049" end="57070" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="57084" end="57106" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="57127" end="57146" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130431" start="57261" end="57274" title="Judith Becker" label="Judith Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018981" start="57279" end="57294" title="Alton L. Becker" label="Alton L. Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="57394" end="57401" title="gamelan" label="gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="57716" end="57733" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130780" start="57952" end="57965" title="John Blacking" label="John Blacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q848668" start="58097" end="58102" title="Venda" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649837" start="59421" end="59433" title="Alan P. Merriam" label="Alan Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614691" start="59734" end="59745" title="Steven Feld" label="Steven Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q558104" start="60357" end="60367" title="Alan Lomax" label="Alan Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033857" start="60383" end="60395" title="cantometrics" label="cantometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614691" start="60637" end="60648" title="Steven Feld" label="Steven Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="60898" end="60909" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q503315" start="63668" end="63685" title="William McDougall (psychologist)" label="William McDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q201538" start="66145" end="66149" title="Edward Said" label="Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574967" start="66167" end="66178" title="Orientalism (book)" label="Orientalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67809" end="67821" title="Timothy Rice" label="Timothy Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188450" start="68622" end="68642" title="culturally sensitive" label="culturally sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="76034" end="76047" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323877" start="76894" end="76905" title="Mantle Hood" label="Mantle Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649837" start="77234" end="77246" title="Alan Merriam" label="Alan Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982533" start="78112" end="78120" title="Ian Pace" label="Ian Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724354" start="78681" end="78696" title="Henry Kingsbury" label="Henry Kingsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776677" start="79835" end="79848" title="Martin Stokes" label="Martin Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794595" start="81076" end="81089" title="Thomas Turino" label="Thomas Turino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769756" start="83753" end="83764" title="Mark Slobin" label="Mark Slobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37533371" start="84335" end="84346" title="Ralph Beals" label="Ralph Beals"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="86174" end="86185" title="third world" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="87691" end="87697" title="zydeco" label="zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="87699" end="87706" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q545360" start="87735" end="87744" title="Graceland" label="Graceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="92899" end="92905" title="Gender" label="Gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q514337" start="93102" end="93114" title="androcentric" label="androcentric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94200" end="94213" title="Ellen Koskoff" label="Ellen Koskoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94555" end="94568" title="Ellen Koskoff" label="Ellen Koskoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="95094" end="95100" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="95105" end="95114" title="sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914319" start="95275" end="95294" title="Third-wave feminism" label="Third Wave feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="96723" end="96737" title="Intersectionality" label="intersectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="97325" end="97337" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993044" start="105709" end="105727" title="Katherine Hagedorn" label="Katherine Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="106175" end="106187" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="106199" end="106215" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q811075" start="106519" end="106528" title="Batá drum" label="bata drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="106786" end="106791" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="111803" end="111806" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="116794" end="116810" title="Mexican-American" label="Mexican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="116820" end="116831" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="116872" end="116879" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="121650" end="121667" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121673" end="121679" title="#Gender" label="Gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="125085" end="125098" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q748496" start="126676" end="126689" title="glocalization" label="glocalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="127736" end="127746" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027822" start="127831" end="127840" title="Graceland (album)" label="Graceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="128877" end="128888" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="128945" end="128954" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="129748" end="129755" title="bhangra (music)" label="bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="134177" end="134183" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162559" start="135033" end="135055" title="principles of grouping" label="principles of grouping"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="135762" end="135772" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="142022" end="142045" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="142052" end="142064" title="postcolonial" label="postcolonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="142202" end="142216" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="142333" end="142360" title="Society for Ethnomusicology" label="Society for Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885749" start="142636" end="142655" title="Linda Tuhiwai Smith" label="Linda Tuhiwai Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="144281" end="144297" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="147730" end="147735" title="BIPOC" label="BIPOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q821680" start="150455" end="150479" title="Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv" label="Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051426" start="150730" end="150739" title="Aaron Fox (musicologist)" label="Aaron Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331684" start="150814" end="150826" title="repatriation" label="repatriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051762" start="150990" end="151028" title="International Library of African Music" label="International Library of African Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q585056" start="162647" end="162677" title="World of Music, Arts and Dance" label="World of Music, Arts and Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="162954" end="162964" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027822" start="162980" end="162989" title="Graceland (album)" label="Graceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="163168" end="163182" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="163194" end="163208" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20379933" start="163499" end="163515" title="Pieces of Africa" label="Pieces of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369700" start="163697" end="163708" title="Karen Hesse" label="Karen Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752766" start="163724" end="163745" title="The Music of Dolphins" label="The Music of Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563168" start="164025" end="164043" title="Alaya Dawn Johnson" label="Alaya Dawn Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q842415" start="164425" end="164452" title="The Buena Vista Social Club" label="The Buena Vista Social Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="164479" end="164490" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298217" start="164665" end="164676" title="Songcatcher" label="Songcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087145" start="164738" end="164757" title="Olive Dame Campbell" label="Olive Dame Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q113877606" start="164768" end="164780" title="Inside Out 2" label="Inside Out 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555854" start="165149" end="165164" title="ethnochoreology" label="ethnochoreology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="168962" end="168989" title="Society for Ethnomusicology" label="Society for Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049892" start="169003" end="169046" title="International Council for Traditional Music" label="International Council for Traditional Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="169389" end="169425" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459406" start="169477" end="169491" title="Willard Rhodes" label="Willard Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238317" start="169493" end="169509" title="David P. McAllester" label="David McAllester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649837" start="169515" end="169530" title="Alan P. Merriam" label="Alan P. Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049892" start="169537" end="169580" title="International Council for Traditional Music" label="International Council for Traditional Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="169603" end="169632" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050938" start="169831" end="169861" title="Yearbook for Traditional Music" label="Yearbook for Traditional Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169894" end="169914" title="Bulletin of the ICTM" label="Bulletin of the ICTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667616" start="170063" end="170090" title="International Music Council" label="International Music Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="170173" end="170179" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049892" start="170398" end="170441" title="International Council for Traditional Music" label="International Council for Traditional Music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="170768" end="170794" title=":Category:Ethnomusicologists" label="List of ethnomusicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205977" start="170798" end="170814" title="Choreomusicology" label="Choreomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555854" start="170817" end="170832" title="Ethnochoreology" label="Ethnochoreology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="170835" end="170862" title="Society for Ethnomusicology" label="Society for Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508590" start="170865" end="170904" title="Fumio Koizumi Prize for Ethnomusicology" label="Fumio Koizumi Prize for Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630083" start="170907" end="170928" title="List of musicologists" label="List of musicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143148" start="170931" end="170956" title="List of musicology topics" label="List of musicology topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="170959" end="170969" title="Musicology" label="Musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q761684" start="170972" end="170989" title="Prehistoric music" label="Prehistoric music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168499" start="170992" end="171012" title="Smithsonian Folkways" label="Smithsonian Folkways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955278" start="171015" end="171030" title="Sociomusicology" label="Sociomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="171033" end="171044" title="World music" label="World music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049892" start="171047" end="171090" title="International Council for Traditional Music" label="International Council for Traditional Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="171093" end="171120" title="Society for Ethnomusicology" label="Society for Ethnomusicology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80079" wikidata="Q741627" url="?curid=80079" title="Daphnis">
<text>In Greek mythology, Daphnis (; , from , &quot;daphne&quot;, &quot;Bay Laurel&quot;) was a legendary Sicilian cowherd who was said to be the inventor of pastoral poetry. According to Diodorus the Sicilian (1st century BC), Daphnis was born in the Heraean Mountains of central Sicily.

== Mythology ==
According to tradition, he was the son of Hermes and a nymph, despite which fact Daphnis himself was mortal. As an infant, Daphnis&#x27; mother exposed him under a laurel tree, where he was found by some herdsmen and named after the tree (Greek &quot;daphnē&quot;) under which he was found. The cows that tended to him as an infant were said to be sisters to the ones owned by Helios. He was also sometimes said to be Hermes&#x27; &quot;eromenos&quot; (beloved) rather than his son. In some versions, Daphnis was taught how to play the panpipes by the god Pan himself, and eventually the two also became lovers.

Daphnis became a follower of the goddess Artemis, accompanying her in hunting and entertaining her with his singing of pastoral songs and playing of the panpipes. A naiad (possibly Echenais or Nomia) was in love with him and prophesied that he would be blinded if he loved another woman. However, he was seduced, with the aid of wine, by the daughter of a king, and, in revenge, this nymph blinded him or changed him into stone.

Daphnis, who endeavoured to console himself by playing the flute and singing herdsmen&#x27;s songs, soon afterwards died. He fell from a cliff, or was changed into a rock, or was taken up to heaven by his father Hermes, who caused a spring of water to gush out from the spot where his son had been carried off. 

Ever afterwards the Sicilians offered sacrifices at this spring as an expiatory offering for the youth&#x27;s early death. There is little doubt that Aelian in his account follows Stesichorus of Himera, who in like manner had been blinded by the vengeance of a woman (Helen) and probably sang of the sufferings of Daphnis in his recantation. Nothing is said of Daphnis&#x27;s blindness by Theocritus, who dwells on his amour with Nais; his victory over Menalcas in a poetical competition; his love for Xenea brought about by the wrath of Aphrodite; his wanderings through the woods while suffering the torments of unrequited love; his death just at the moment when Aphrodite, moved by compassion, endeavours (but too late) to save him; the deep sorrow, shared by nature and all created things, for his untimely end (Theocritus i. vii. viii.). A later form of the legend identifies Daphnis with a Phrygian hero, and makes him the teacher of Marsyas. The legend of Daphnis and his early death may be compared with those of Hyacinthus, Narcissus, Linus and Adonis—all beautiful youths cut off in their prime, typical of the luxuriant growth of vegetation in the spring, and its sudden withering away beneath the scorching summer sun.

==Daphnis (nymph)==
The geographer Pausanias mentions a mountain nymph called Daphnís (Greek , with a different accentuation). He writes: &quot;Many and different are the stories told about Delphoi (Delphi), and even more so about the oracle of Apollo. For they say that in earliest times the oracular seat belonged to Ge (Gaea, the Earth), who appointed as prophetess Daphnis, one of the Nymphai (Nymphs) of the mountain [Mount Parnassos].&quot; (Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot;, 10.5.5, trans. Jones).

==Cultural depictions==
* Daphnis is the subject of Theocritus&#x27;s first &quot;Idyll&quot;, which describes his death.
* Virgil&#x27;s Fifth Eclogue contains two songs sung by herdsmen, one lamenting the death of Daphnis, and the other celebrating his acceptance into heaven as a god. In his Tenth Eclogue he imagines his friend the poet Cornelius Gallus dying of love in Arcadia, taking parts of &quot;Idyll&quot; I as his model.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Rhoecus, blinded for being unfaithful to a nymph

==Notes==
==External links==
*Daphnis Encyclopædia Britannica
*The Death of Daphnis A poem by Theocritus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741627" start="20" end="27" title="Daphnis" label="Daphnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="66" end="76" title="Bay Laurel" label="Bay Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="100" end="108" title="Sicily" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152" end="167" title="Pastoral#Pastoral poetry" label="pastoral poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="182" end="203" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus the Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q609465" start="246" end="263" title="Heraean Mountains" label="Heraean Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="275" end="281" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="342" end="348" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="355" end="360" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062217" start="444" end="451" title="Infant exposure" label="exposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900652" start="663" end="667" title="Cattle of Helios" label="ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="677" end="683" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275894" start="737" end="745" title="eromenos" label="eromenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="836" end="844" title="panpipes" label="panpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="856" end="859" title="Pan (god)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="954" end="961" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="1078" end="1083" title="naiad" label="naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621995" start="1106" end="1111" title="Nomia (mythology)" label="Nomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554819" start="1676" end="1684" title="Sicilian people" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="1806" end="1812" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="1836" end="1847" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207273" start="2677" end="2687" title="Hyacinth (mythology)" label="Hyacinthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179256" start="2689" end="2698" title="Narcissus (mythology)" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315253" start="2700" end="2705" title="Linus (mythology)" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="2710" end="2716" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2923" end="2932" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="3087" end="3093" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="3458" end="3468" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120115671" start="3476" end="3499" title="Idyll I" label="first &amp;quot;Idyll&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="3530" end="3536" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q120524912" start="3544" end="3557" title="Eclogue 5" label="Fifth Eclogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q120524927" start="3701" end="3714" title="Eclogue 10" label="Tenth Eclogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8825" start="3747" end="3763" title="Cornelius Gallus" label="Cornelius Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="3781" end="3788" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12884159" start="3872" end="3879" title="Rhoecus of Cnidus" label="Rhoecus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80080" wikidata="Q398710" url="?curid=80080" title="Nomia">
<text>Nomia may refer to:
*Nomia, Laconia in Greece
*Nomia (mythology)
*&quot;Nomia&quot;, a genus of bees</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="21" end="35" title="Nomia, Laconia" label="Nomia, Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="39" end="45" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621995" start="47" end="64" title="Nomia (mythology)" label="Nomia (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045452" start="72" end="77" title="Nomia (bee)" label="Nomia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80082" wikidata="Q341847" url="?curid=80082" title="Dardania">
<text>Dardania, Dardanian or Dardanians may refer to ancient peoples or locations.
==People==
* Dardani, an ancient tribe in the Balkans
* Dardanians (Trojan) (&quot;Dardanoi&quot;), a people closely related to the Trojans and believed to be related to the Dardani
* Bato of Dardania (ruled c. 206–176 BC), Illyrian king of the Dardanian State
* Capys of Dardania, king of Dardania during the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Aeneid&quot;
* Cleitus of Dardania (ruled c. 356–335 BC), Illyrian ruler
* Erichthonius of Dardania, king of Dardania in Greek mythology
* Ilus of Dardania, king of Dardania in Greek mythology
* Monunius of Dardania (ruled c. 176–167 BC), Illyrian king of the Dardanian State

==Places==
* Kingdom of Dardania, an ancient kingdom in the Balkans established by the Dardani 
* Dardania (Roman province), a Roman and Byzantine province in the Balkans
* Dardania (Troad), a city and a district of the Troad, in Asia Minor on the Hellespont (the modern Dardanelles)
* Dardania (Samothrace), old name of Samothrace according to Pausanias

==Other==
* Democratic League of Dardania (&quot;Lidhja Demokratike e Dardanisë&quot;), a political party in Kosovo
* KF Dardania

==See also==
*Dardan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q341847" start="0" end="8" title="Dardania" label="Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q341847" start="10" end="19" title="Dardania" label="Dardanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q341847" start="23" end="33" title="Dardania" label="Dardanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="90" end="97" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165756" start="133" end="152" title="Dardanians (Trojan)" label="Dardanians (Trojan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869443" start="261" end="277" title="Bato of Dardania" label="Bato of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018046" start="340" end="357" title="Capys of Dardania" label="Capys of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269324" start="430" end="449" title="Cleitus of Dardania" label="Cleitus of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353705" start="490" end="514" title="Erichthonius of Dardania" label="Erichthonius of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q638979" start="554" end="570" title="Ilus of Dardania" label="Ilus of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q716264" start="610" end="630" title="Monunius of Dardania" label="Monunius of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11916620" start="705" end="724" title="Kingdom of Dardania" label="Kingdom of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q827501" start="790" end="815" title="Dardania (Roman province)" label="Dardania (Roman province)"/>
<link wikidata="Q950952" start="865" end="881" title="Dardania (Troad)" label="Dardania (Troad)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="978" end="999" title="Dardania (Samothrace)" label="Dardania (Samothrace)"/>
<link wikidata="Q420115" start="1060" end="1089" title="Democratic League of Dardania" label="Democratic League of Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q85772887" start="1166" end="1177" title="KF Dardania" label="KF Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015624" start="1193" end="1216" title="Dardan (disambiguation)" label="Dardan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80084" wikidata="Q461212" url="?curid=80084" title="Dardanus (son of Zeus)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Dardanus (; Ancient Greek: Δάρδανος, &quot;Dardanos&quot;) was the founder of the city of Dardanus at the foot of Mount Ida in the Troad.

Dardanus, a son of Zeus and the Pleiad Electra, was a significant figure in Greek mythology. He was the brother of Iasion and sometimes of Harmonia and Emathion. Originally from Arcadia, Dardanus married Chryse, with whom he fathered two sons, Idaeus and Deimas. After a great flood, Dardanus and his people settled in Samothrace before eventually moving to Asia Minor due to the land&#x27;s poor quality. In Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Dardanus is said to have originally come from Italy, where his mother Electra was married to Corythus, the king of Tarquinia.

Dardanus later married Batea, the daughter of King Teucer, and founded the city of Dardanus on Mount Ida, which became the capital of his kingdom. He also founded the city of Thymbra and expanded his kingdom by waging successful wars against his neighbors. Dardanus had several children with Batea, including Ilus, Erichthonius, Idaea, and Zacynthus. He reigned for 64 or 65 years before being succeeded by his son Erichthonius or, in some accounts, Ilus. 

Dardanus has been the subject of various operas by composers such as Jean-Philippe Rameau, Carl Stamitz, and Antonio Sacchini.

== Family ==
Dardanus was a son of Zeus and the Pleiad Electra, daughter of Atlas but one author claims that his real father was the Corythus, an Italian king. He was the brother of Iasion and sometimes of Harmonia and Emathion.

== Mythology ==
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (1.61–62) states that Dardanus&#x27; original home was in Arcadia, where Dardanus and his elder brother Iasus (elsewhere more commonly called Iasion) reigned as kings following Atlas. Dardanus married Chryse, daughter of Pallas, by whom he fathered two sons: Idaeus and Deimas. When a great flood occurred, the survivors, who were living on mountains that had now become islands, split into two groups: one group remained and took Deimas as king while the other sailed away, eventually settling in the island of Samothrace. There Iasus (Iasion) was slain by Zeus for lying with Demeter. Dardanus and his people found the land poor and so most of them set sail for Asia Minor.

A different account in Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot; (3.163f) has Aeneas in a dream learn from his ancestral Penates that &quot;Dardanus and Father Iasius&quot; and the Penates themselves originally came from Hesperia, afterwards renamed as Italy. This tradition holds that Dardanus was a Tyrrhenian prince, and that his mother Electra was married to Corythus, king of Tarquinia.

Other accounts make no mention of Arcadia or Hesperia, though they sometimes mention a flood and speak of Dardanus sailing on a hide-raft (as part of the flood story?) from Samothrace to the Troad near Abydos. All accounts agree that Dardanus came to the Troad from Samothrace and was there welcomed by King Teucer. Dardanus married Batea the daughter of Teucer. (Dionysius mentions that Dardanus&#x27; first wife Chryse had died.) Dardanus received land on Mount Ida from his father-in-law. There Dardanus founded the city of Dardanus which became the capital of his kingdom. He later founded the city of Thymbra in honor of his friend Thymbraeus, who is said to have been killed by Dardanus. Dardanus waged war successfully against his neighbors, especially distinguishing himself against the Paphlagonians and thereby extending the boundaries of his kingdom with considerable acquisitions.

Dardanus&#x27; children by Batea were Ilus, Erichthonius, Idaea and Zacynthus. Ilus died before his father. According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Zacynthus was the first settler on the island afterwards called Zacynthus. Dardanus&#x27; sons by Chryse, his first wife, were Idaeus and Dimas. Dionysius says (1.61.4) that Dimas and Idaeus founded colonies in Asia Minor. Idaeus gave his name to the Idaean mountains, that is Mount Ida, where he built a temple to the Mother of the Gods (Cybele) and instituted mysteries and ceremonies still observed in Phrygia in Dionysius&#x27;s time. According to Dictys Cretensis, his wife was called Olizone, daughter of Phineus and became the mother of Erichthonius. In other accounts, the wife of Dardanus was called Arisbe, daughter of King Teucer of Crete or King Macareus of Lesbos.

Dardanus reigned for 64 or 65 years and was succeeded by his son Erichthonius or in some accounts, Ilus.

== Cultural depictions ==
There are operas on the subject of Dardanus by Jean-Philippe Rameau (1739), Carl Stamitz (1770) and Antonio Sacchini (1784).

== Family tree ==
== Notes ==
== References ==

* Dictys Cretensis&quot;, from The Trojan War.&quot; &quot;The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian&quot; translated by Richard McIlwaine Frazer Jr. (1931–). Indiana University Press. 1966. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Dionysus of Halicarnassus, &quot;Roman Antiquities.&quot; English translation by Earnest Cary in the Loeb Classical Library, 7 volumes. Harvard University Press, 1937–1950. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Dionysius of Halicarnassus, &quot;Antiquitatum Romanarum quae supersunt&quot;, &quot;Vol I-IV&quot;. . Karl Jacoby. In Aedibus B.G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1885. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Lactantius, Divine Institutes, Translated by William Fletcher (1810–1900). From Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 7. Edited by Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe. (Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 1886.) Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Maurus Servius Honoratus, &quot;In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii;&quot; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Stephanus of Byzantium, &quot;Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt,&quot; edited by August Meineike (1790–1870), published 1849. A few entries from this important ancient handbook of place names have been translated by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q461212" start="20" end="28" title="Dardanus (son of Zeus)" label="Dardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="32" end="45" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q950952" start="110" end="118" title="Dardanus (city)" label="Dardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421270" start="134" end="143" title="Mount Ida" label="Mount Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="151" end="156" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="588" end="594" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145" start="1256" end="1276" title="Jean-Philippe Rameau" label="Jean-Philippe Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q157898" start="1278" end="1290" title="Carl Stamitz" label="Carl Stamitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q366727" start="1296" end="1312" title="Antonio Sacchini" label="Antonio Sacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1350" end="1354" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="1363" end="1369" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q858663" start="1370" end="1377" title="Electra (Pleiad)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="1391" end="1396" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693599" start="1448" end="1456" title="Corythus" label="Corythus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849438" start="1497" end="1503" title="Iasion" label="Iasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q978079" start="1521" end="1529" title="Harmonia" label="Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334961" start="1534" end="1542" title="Emathion" label="Emathion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="1561" end="1587" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="1646" end="1653" title="Arcadia (region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q126947819" start="1692" end="1697" title="Iasus" label="Iasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088475" start="1789" end="1795" title="Chryse (mythology)" label="Chryse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892261" start="1809" end="1815" title="Pallas (son of Lycaon)" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q113156437" start="1847" end="1853" title="Idaeus" label="Idaeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1858" end="1864" title="Deimas" label="Deimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="1873" end="1884" title="deluge (mythology)" label="great flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="2100" end="2110" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2146" end="2150" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="2166" end="2173" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2252" end="2262" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2288" end="2294" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="2308" end="2314" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q918202" start="2377" end="2384" title="Penates" label="Penates"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2509" end="2514" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355160" start="2557" end="2567" title="Tyrrhenians" label="Tyrrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="2637" end="2646" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="2822" end="2832" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="2840" end="2845" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q336446" start="2851" end="2857" title="Abydos, Hellespont" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513788" start="2952" end="2963" title="King Teucer" label="King Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126319" start="2982" end="2987" title="Batea (daughter of Teucer)" label="Batea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421270" start="3107" end="3116" title="Mount Ida" label="Mount Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q950952" start="3176" end="3184" title="Dardanus (city)" label="Dardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878026" start="3255" end="3262" title="Thymbra" label="Thymbra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3286" end="3296" title="Thymbraeus (mythology)" label="Thymbraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622032" start="3444" end="3457" title="Paphlagonia" label="Paphlagonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q638979" start="3581" end="3585" title="Ilus (son of Dardanus)" label="Ilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353705" start="3587" end="3599" title="Erichthonius (son of Dardanus)" label="Erichthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568394" start="3601" end="3606" title="Idaea" label="Idaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065259" start="3611" end="3620" title="Zakynthos (mythology)" label="Zacynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="3664" end="3690" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q144880" start="3756" end="3765" title="Zacynthus" label="Zacynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421270" start="3969" end="3978" title="Mount Ida" label="Mount Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="4031" end="4037" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="4097" end="4104" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="4144" end="4160" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4182" end="4189" title="Olizone" label="Olizone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353705" start="4236" end="4248" title="Erichthonius of Dardania" label="Erichthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q72211" start="4301" end="4307" title="Arisbe (mythology)" label="Arisbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="4336" end="4341" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817243" start="4350" end="4358" title="Macareus of Rhodes" label="Macareus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="4362" end="4368" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="4513" end="4518" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q167222" start="4550" end="4570" title="Dardanus (opera)" label="Jean-Philippe Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q157898" start="4579" end="4591" title="Carl Stamitz" label="Carl Stamitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702500" start="4603" end="4619" title="Dardanus (Sacchini)" label="Antonio Sacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="4679" end="4695" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="4774" end="4792" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="4927" end="4952" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysus of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="5639" end="5663" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Maurus Servius Honoratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5915" end="5924" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="6321" end="6343" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80085" wikidata="Q10858489" url="?curid=80085" title="Batea">
<text>Batea may refer to:

* &quot;Batea&quot; (crustacean), a genus of Amphipoda
* Batea (mythology), two characters in Greek mythology
* Batea, Tarragona, a municipality in the comarca of Terra Alta, Catalonia, Spain
* Batea, a pan used in gold panning</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4868750" start="23" end="53" title="Batea (crustacean)" label="&amp;quot;Batea&amp;quot; (crustacean)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636168" start="78" end="95" title="Batea (mythology)" label="Batea (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810755" start="133" end="149" title="Batea, Tarragona" label="Batea, Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113494" start="236" end="248" title="gold panning" label="gold panning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80086" wikidata="Q334419" url="?curid=80086" title="Dương Văn Minh">
<text>Dương Văn Minh (; 16 February 19166 August 2001), popularly known as Big Minh, was a South Vietnamese politician and a senior general in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) and a politician during the presidency of Ngô Đình Diệm. In 1963, he became chief of a military junta after leading a coup in which Diệm was assassinated. Minh lasted only three months before being toppled by Nguyễn Khánh, but assumed power again as the fourth and last President of South Vietnam in April 1975, two days before surrendering to North Vietnamese forces. He earned his nickname &quot;Big Minh&quot;, because he was approximately 1.83 m (6 ft) tall and weighed 90 kg (198 lb).

Born in Tiền Giang province in the Mekong Delta region of southern Vietnam, Minh joined the French Army at the start of World War II, and was captured and tortured by the Imperial Japanese, who invaded and seized French Indochina. After his release, he joined the French-backed Vietnamese National Army (VNA) and was imprisoned by the communist-dominated Viet Minh before breaking out. In 1955, after Vietnam was partitioned and the State of Vietnam controlled the southern half under Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm, Minh led the VNA in decisively defeating the Bình Xuyên paramilitary crime syndicate in street combat and dismantling the Hòa Hảo religious tradition&#x27;s private army. This made him popular with the people and Diệm, but the latter later put him in a powerless position, regarding him as a threat.

In 1963, the authoritarian Diệm became increasingly unpopular due to the Buddhist crisis and the ARVN generals decided to launch a coup, which Minh eventually led. Diệm was assassinated on 2 November 1963 shortly after being deposed. Minh was accused of ordering an aide, Nguyễn Văn Nhung, to kill Diệm. Minh then led a junta for three months, but he was an unsuccessful leader and was heavily criticized for being lethargic and uninterested. During his three months of rule, many civilian problems intensified and the communist Viet Cong made significant gains. Angered at not receiving his desired post, General Nguyễn Khánh led a group of similarly motivated officers in a January 1964 coup. Khánh allowed Minh to stay on as a token head of state in order to capitalize on Minh&#x27;s public standing, but retained real power. After a power struggle, Khanh had Minh exiled. Minh stayed away before deciding to return and challenge General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu in the presidential election of 1971. When it became obvious that Thieu would rig the poll, Minh withdrew and did not return until 1972, keeping a low profile.

Minh then advocated a &quot;third force&quot;, maintaining that Vietnam could be reunified without a military victory to a hardline communist or anti-communist government. However, this was not something that Thiệu agreed with. In April 1975, as South Vietnam was on the verge of being overrun, Thieu resigned. A week later, Minh was forcibly chosen by the legislature and became president on 28 April. Saigon fell two days later on 30 April, and Minh ordered a surrender to prevent bloody urban street fighting. Minh was spared the lengthy incarceration meted out to South Vietnamese military personnel and civil servants, and lived quietly until being allowed to emigrate to France in 1983. He later moved to California, in the US, where he died.

== Early years ==
Minh was born on 16 February 1916 in Mỹ Tho Province in the Mekong Delta, to a wealthy landowner who served in a prominent position in the Finance Ministry of the French colonial administration. He went to Saigon where he attended a top French colonial school, now Le Quy Don High School, where King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia also studied. Unlike many of his classmates, Minh declined French citizenship and joined the &quot;Corps Indigène&quot;, the local component of the French colonial army.

He began his military career in 1940, and was one of only 50 Vietnamese officers to be commissioned when he graduated from the &quot;École Militaire&quot; in France. During the 1940s, Imperial Japan invaded Indochina and seized control from France. Minh was captured and later had only a single tooth that remained from the torture he had suffered at the hands of the &quot;Kempeitai&quot; (Japanese military police). He always smiled displaying the single tooth, which he regarded as a symbol of his toughness.

==Vietnamese National Army/battles against Bình Xuyên and Hòa Hảo==
Minh then transferred to the French-backed State of Vietnam&#x27;s Vietnamese National Army in 1952. In 1954, Minh was captured by the Việt Minh. He escaped after strangling a communist guard and fighting off a few others.

In May 1955, he led VNA forces in the Battle of Saigon, when they dismantled the private army of the Bình Xuyên crime syndicate in urban warfare in the district of Chợ Lớn. With the Bình Xuyên vanquished, Diệm turned his attention to conquering the Hòa Hảo. As a result, a battle between Minh&#x27;s VNA troops and Ba Cụt&#x27;s men commenced in Cần Thơ on 5 June. Five Hòa Hảo battalions surrendered immediately; Ba Cụt and three remaining leaders had fled to the Cambodian border by the end of the month. The soldiers of the three other leaders eventually surrendered in the face of Minh&#x27;s onslaught, but Ba Cụt&#x27;s men fought to the end. Understanding that they could not defeat Minh&#x27;s men in open conventional warfare, Ba Cụt&#x27;s forces destroyed their own bases so that the VNA could not use their abandoned resources, and retreated into the jungle. Ba Cụt&#x27;s 3,000 men spent the rest of 1955 evading the 20,000 VNA troops commanded by Minh. Ba Cụt was arrested by a patrol on 13 April 1956, and later executed, and his remaining forces were defeated by Minh.

The victories over the Hòa Hảo and the Bình Xuyên were the zenith of Minh&#x27;s battlefield career. When Minh arrived at a military parade in his jeep before the reviewing stand after the victories, Diệm embraced him and kissed both cheeks. He was particularly popular among the population of Saigon, having purged their city of the Bình Xuyên. This earned him the respect of US officials and he was sent to the United States to study, despite his poor English, at the US Command and General Staff College at Leavenworth, Kansas.

In November 1960, a coup attempt was made against Diệm. Minh, by this time disillusioned, did not come to Diệm&#x27;s defense during the siege and instead stayed at his Saigon home. Diệm responded by appointing Minh to the post of Presidential Military Advisor, where he had no influence or troops to command in case the thought of coup ever crossed his mind. According to historian Howard Jones, Minh was &quot;in charge of three telephones&quot;, and remained in the post until Diệm&#x27;s overthrow.

==Overthrow of Diệm==

Minh and Trần Văn Đôn, the ARVN Chief of Staff who had no troops due to Diệm&#x27;s suspicion of him, went to observe the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO)&#x27;s military exercises in Thailand, where they were informed about the regional disquiet over Diệm&#x27;s policies toward Buddhists.

Minh frequently railed against Diệm in his September meeting with Lodge, decrying the police state that was being created by the Cần Lao Party of the Ngô family. Harkins reported that Minh &quot;has done nothing but complain to me about the government and the way it is handled since I have been here&quot;. Harkins was skeptical about Minh&#x27;s claims of widespread public disenchantment.

During late-September, President Kennedy dispatched the McNamara Taylor mission to investigate the political and military situation in South Vietnam. This included investigating an ARVN coup. Minh expressed an interest in meeting McNamara and Taylor, so a game of doubles tennis was organized. McNamara watched on as Taylor played with Minh, giving &quot;broad hints of our interest in other subjects which we gave him during breaks in the game&quot;. Minh revealed nothing of his thoughts about a possible coup, leaving his guests bewildered. Minh later messaged Taylor with a complaint about a perceived lack of support from Washington for a coup. Diệm became very unpopular during the Buddhist crisis of 1963; the US informed the Vietnamese generals (through the CIA) that it would not object if Diệm were to be overthrown. Minh was the second highest ranking general at the time, and he led the coup to overthrow Diệm on 1 November 1963.

In the afternoon, Minh ordered his bodyguard, Nguyễn Văn Nhung, to arrest, and later execute, Colonel Lê Quang Tung, one of Diệm&#x27;s closest and most faithful associates. The generals hated Tung, because, at Ngô Đình Nhu&#x27;s instructions, he had disguised his men in regular army uniforms and framed the army for the Xá Lợi Pagoda raids several months earlier, in August. At nightfall, Nhung took Tung and Major Lê Quảng Trịeu, his brother and deputy and drove them to the edge of Tan Son Nhut Air Base. Forced to kneel over two freshly dug holes, the brothers were shot into their graves and buried. In the early morning of 2 November, Diệm agreed to surrender. The ARVN officers had reportedly originally intended merely to exile Diệm and Nhu, having promised them safe passage&quot;.

Minh and Đôn asked Colonel Lucien Conein to secure an American aircraft to take the brothers out of the country. Assistant Secretary of State Roger Hilsman recommended that if the generals decide to exile Diệm, he should also be sent outside Southeast Asia. He went on to anticipate what he termed a &quot;Götterdämmerung in the palace&quot;.

Minh then went to Gia Long Palace, and Minh sent an armored personnel carrier to transport Diệm and Nhu, while the others prepared for the ceremonial and televised handover of power to the junta. Minh arrived in full military ceremonial uniform to supervise the arrest of the Ngô brothers, only to find that they had escaped and humiliated him, having talked to him from a safe house. Minh was reported to be mortified when he realised that Diệm and Nhu had escaped in the middle of the night leaving the rebels to fight for an empty building. However, Diệm&#x27;s hideout was found and surrounded, and Minh sent General Mai Hữu Xuân, his deputy Colonel Nguyễn Văn Quan, his bodyguard Nguyễn Văn Nhung and Dương Hiếu Nghĩa to arrest both brothers.

Nhung and Nghĩa sat with the brothers in the APC as the convoy headed off after the arrest. Before the convoy had departed for the church, Minh was reported to have gestured to Nhung, who was a contract killer and Minh&#x27;s bodyguard, with two right-hand fingers. This was taken to be an order to kill both brothers. During the journey, the brothers were killed in the APC, with Nhung riddling their bodies with many bullets. An investigation by Đôn later determined that Nghĩa and Nhung sprayed them with bullets before repeatedly stabbing them. When the corpses arrived at military headquarters, the generals were shocked. Đôn ordered another general to tell reporters that the brothers had died in an accident and went to confront Minh in his office.
*Đôn: Why are they dead?
*Minh: And what does it matter that they are dead?

Đôn later reported that Minh had answered his question in a &quot;haughty&quot; tone. At this time, Xuân walked into Minh&#x27;s office through the open door, unaware of Đôn&#x27;s presence. Xuân snapped to attention and stated &quot;Mission accomplie&quot;.

Minh had his subordinates report that the Ngô brothers had committed suicide. Unclear and contradictory stories abounded on the exact method used by the brothers. Minh said &quot;Due to an inadvertence, there was a gun inside the vehicle. It was with this gun that they committed suicide.&quot; Conein soon realized that the generals&#x27; story was false. Soon after, photos of the bloodied corpses of the brothers appeared in the media, discrediting the generals&#x27; lies. Đôn&#x27;s assertion that the assassinations were unplanned proved sufficient for Lodge, who told the State Department that &quot;I am sure assassination was not at their direction.&quot; Minh and Đôn reiterated their position in a meeting with Conein and Lodge a few days after the coup.

===Culpability regarding killings of Diệm and Nhu===
The assassinations caused a split within the junta and repulsed world opinion. The killings damaged the public belief that the new regime would be an improvement over Diệm, throwing the generals into discord. Criticism over the killings caused the officers to battle one another for positions in the new government. The responsibility for the assassinations has generally been laid at the doorstep of Minh. Conein asserted that &quot;I have it on very good authority of very many people, that Big Minh gave the order&quot;, as did William Colby, the director of the CIA&#x27;s Far Eastern division. Đôn, however, was equally emphatic, saying &quot;I can state without equivocation that this was done by General Dương Văn Minh and by him alone.&quot; Lodge believed Xuân was at least partly culpable, asserting: &quot;Diệm and Nhu had been assassinated, if not by Xuan personally, at least at his direction.&quot; Some months after the event, Minh was reported to have privately told an American official that &quot;We had no alternative. They had to be killed. Diệm could not be allowed to live because he was too much respected among simple, gullible people in the countryside, especially the Catholics and the refugees. We had to kill Nhu because he was so widely feared – and he had created organizations that were arms of his personal power.&quot;

When Nguyễn Văn Thiệu became president, Minh blamed him for the assassinations. In 1971, Minh claimed that Thiệu had caused the deaths by hesitating and delaying the attack by his 5th Division on Gia Long Palace. Đôn was reported to have pressured Thiệu during the night of the siege, asking him on the phone &quot;Why are you so slow in doing it? Do you need more troops? If you do, ask Đính to send more troopsand do it quickly because after taking the palace you will be made a general.&quot; Thiệu denied responsibility and issued a statement: &quot;Dương Văn Minh has to assume entire responsibility for the death of Ngô Đình Diệm.&quot;

Trần Văn Hương, an opposition politician who was jailed by Diệm, and a future prime minister and president, gave a scathing analysis of the generals&#x27; action. He said &quot;The top generals who decided to murder Diệm and his brother were scared to death. The generals knew very well that having no talent, no moral virtues, no political support whatsoever, they could not prevent a spectacular comeback of the president and Mr. Nhu if they were alive.&quot;

Conein asserted that Minh&#x27;s humiliation by Diệm and Nhu was a major motivation for ordering their executions. Conein reasoned that the brothers were doomed to death once they escaped from the palace, instead of surrendering and accepting the offer of safe exile. Having successfully stormed the palace, Minh had arrived at the presidential residence in full ceremonial military uniform &quot;with a sedan and everything else&quot;. Conein described Minh as a &quot;very proud man&quot; who had lost face by turning up at the palace, ready to claim victory, only to find an empty building. He claimed that Diệm and Nhu would not have been killed if they were in the palace, because there were too many people present.

American policy makers later came to believe that the coup and the murders of Diệm and his brother more deeply entrenched the United States in the war, by increasing its responsibility for what had occurred after the deposing of Diệm&#x27;s administration.

In the view of Stanley Karnow, a former journalist in Saigon for The Saturday Evening Post, &quot;Minh was not the main mover. But as the senior general, he was the man who crystallized the various factions who were all plotting against Diệm. Everybody and his brother had a plot.&quot;

==Rule==
Minh took over the government under a military junta on 6 November, which consisted of 12 generals. To give the regime a civilian veneer, Diệm&#x27;s figurehead Vice President, Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ, was appointed Prime Minister of a provisional civilian government overseen by the Military Revolutionary Council (MRC). Despite his nominally being the second most important person in the Diệm regime, Thơ was a figurehead with little influence, which lay with Diệm&#x27;s brothers. Diệm held Thơ in contempt and did not allow him to take part in policy decisions. Tho entered into intensive bargaining with Minh on 2 November on the composition of the interim government. Thơ knew that the generals wanted to have him head a new government to provide continuity, and he used this as leverage in bargaining with them about the makeup of the cabinet. The Americans recognized Minh and immediately restored the aid programs and that had been cut to punish Diệm in the last days of his rule.

With the fall of Diệm, various American sanctions that were imposed in response to the repression of the Buddhist crisis and Nhu&#x27;s Special Forces&#x27; attacks on the Xá Lợi Pagoda, were lifted. The freeze on US economic aid, the suspension of the Commercial Import Program and various capital works initiatives were lifted, and Thơ and Minh were recognised. The first order of the new regime was Provisional Constitutional Act No. 1, signed by Minh, formally suspending the 1956 constitution created by Diệm. Minh was said to have preferred playing mah-jongg, playing tennis at the elite Cercle Sportif, tending to his garden and giving tea parties to fighting the Viet Cong (VC) or running the country. He was criticised for being lethargic and uninterested. Stanley Karnow said &quot;&quot;He was a model of lethargy, lacking both the skill and the inclination to govern&quot;. According to Karnow, Minh lamented to him that because of his role as the junta head, he &quot;didn&#x27;t have enough time to grow his orchids or play tennis&quot;&quot;.

Saigon newspapers, which Minh had allowed to re-open following the end of Diệm&#x27;s censorship, reported that the junta was paralysed because all twelve generals in the MRC had equal power. Each member had the power of veto, enabling them to stonewall policy decisions. Thơ&#x27;s civilian government was plagued by infighting. According to Thơ&#x27;s assistant, Nguyễn Ngọc Huy, the presence of Generals Đôn and Đính in both the civilian cabinet and the MRC paralysed the governance process. Đính and Đôn were subordinate to Tho in the civilian government, but as members of the MRC they were superior to him. Whenever Thơ gave an order in the civilian hierarchy with which the generals disagreed, they would go to the MRC and make a counter-order.

The press strongly attacked Thơ, accusing his civilian government of being &quot;tools&quot; of the MRC. Thơ&#x27;s acquiescence to and corruption under Diệm&#x27;s presidency was also called into question, and he was accused of helping to repress the Buddhists by Diệm and Nhu. Tho claimed that he had countenanced the pagoda raids, claiming that he would have resigned were it not for Minh&#x27;s pleas to stay. Minh defended Thơ&#x27;s anti-Diệm credentials by declaring that Tho had taken part in the planning of the coup &quot;from the very outset&quot; and that he enjoyed the &quot;full confidence&quot; of the junta.

On 1 January 1964, a &#x27;Council of Notables&#x27; comprising sixty leading citizens met for the first time, having been selected by Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo for Minh&#x27;s junta. Its job was to advise the military and civilian wings of the government with a view towards reforming human rights, the constitution and the legal system. The council consisted almost entirely of professionals and academic leaders, with no representatives from the agricultural or labour movement. It soon became engaged in endless debate and never achieved its initial task of drafting a new constitution.

Minh and Thơ halted Nhu&#x27;s Strategic Hamlet Program. Nhu had trumpeted the program as the solution to South Vietnam&#x27;s difficulties with VC insurgents, believing that the mass relocation of peasants into fortified villages would isolate the VC from their peasant support base. According to the junta, only 20% of the 8,600 existing strategic hamlets were under Saigon&#x27;s control, with the rest having been taken over by the VC, contradicting Nhu&#x27;s claims of widespread success. Those hamlets that were deemed to be tenable were consolidated, while the remainder were dismantled and their inhabitants returned to their ancestral land.

Under Minh&#x27;s rule, there was a large turnover of officials aligned with Diệm. Many were indiscriminately arrested without charge, most of whom were later released. Đính and the new national police chief General Mai Hữu Xuân were given control of the interior ministry and were accused of arresting people en masse, before releasing them in return for bribes and pledges of loyalty. The government was criticised for firing large numbers of district and provincial chiefs directly appointed by Diệm, causing a breakdown in law and order during the abrupt transition of power.

The provisional government lacked direction in policy and planning, resulting in its quick collapse. The number of rural attacks instigated by the VC surged in the wake of Diệm&#x27;s deposal, due to the displacement of troops into urban areas for the coup. The increasingly free discussion generated from the surfacing of new and accurate data following the coup revealed that the military situation was far worse than what was reported by Diệm. The incidence of VC attacks continued to increase as it had done during the summer of 1963, the weapons loss ratio worsened and the rate of VC defections fell. The units that participated in the coup were returned to the field to guard against a possible major VC offensive in the countryside. The falsification of military statistics by Diệm&#x27;s officials had led to miscalculations, which manifested themselves in military setbacks after Diệm&#x27;s death.

==Overthrow by Nguyễn Khánh==

General Nguyễn Khánh began to plot against the MRC after it was created. Khánh expected a large reward for his part in the coup, but the other generals regarded him as untrustworthy and excluded him from the MRC. They further moved him to the command of the I Corps in the far north to keep him far away from Saigon. Khánh later claimed that he had built up intelligence infrastructure to weed out the VC under Diệm, but that Minh&#x27;s MRC had disbanded it and released VC prisoners. Khánh was assisted by Generals Trần Thiện Khiêm, who controlled the forces around Saigon, Đỗ Mậu and Nguyễn Chánh Thi. Khánh and his colleagues spread rumours to American officials that Minh and his colleagues were about to declare South Vietnam&#x27;s neutrality and sign a peace deal to end the war with the North.

Khánh overthrew Minh and his colleagues on 30 January 1964, in a bloodless coup, completely catching the MRC off guard. Minh, Đôn and Lê Văn Kim woke up to find hostile forces surrounding their houses and thought it to be a quixotic stunt by some disgruntled young officers.

Khánh used the coup to enact retribution against Minh, Đôn, Kim, Đính and Xuân. He had them arrested, claiming that they were part of a neutralist plot with the French. Khánh cited their service in the Vietnamese National Army in the early 1950s, under the French colonial administration as evidence, although he did as well. Khánh also had Major Nhung, the bodyguard of Minh, shot, causing riots among parts of the population who feared that Khánh would wind back the clock to the Diệm era. Khánh later persuaded Minh to remain as a figurehead head of state. This was partly due to pressure from American officials, who felt that the popular Minh would be a unifying and stabilising factor in the new regime. However, Khánh soon sidelined Minh.

Minh reportedly resented the fact that he had been deposed by a younger officer whom he viewed as an unscrupulous upstart. He was also upset with the detention of his fellow generals and around 30 of his junior officers. The junior officers were set free when Minh demanded that Khánh release them in return for his service. In the meantime, Khánh could not substantiate his claims against the generals.

Khánh presided over the trial, which took place in May. Minh was perfunctorily accused of misusing a small amount of money, before being allowed to serve as an advisor on the trial panel. The other generals were eventually asked by Khánh to &quot;once you begin to serve again in the army, you do not take revenge on anybody&quot;. The tribunal then &quot;congratulated&quot; the generals, but found that they were of &quot;lax morality&quot;, unqualified to command due to a &quot;lack of a clear political concept&quot; and confined to desk jobs. Khánh&#x27;s actions left divisions among the officers of the ARVN. When Khánh was himself deposed in 1965, he handed over dossiers proving that Minh and the other generals were innocent. Robert Shaplen said that &quot;the case … continued to be one of Khánh&#x27;s biggest embarrassments&quot;.

==August and September power struggle with Khánh==

In August, Khánh drafted a new constitution, which would have augmented his personal power and hamstrung Minh of what authority he had left as well as ousting him from power. However, this only served to weaken Khánh as large urban demonstrations broke out, led by Buddhists, calling for an end to the state of emergency and the new constitution. In response to claims that he was harking back to the Diệm era of Roman Catholic domination, Khánh made concessions to the Buddhists, sparking opposition from Khiêm and Thiệu, both Catholics. They then tried to remove him in favour of Minh, and they recruited many officers. Khiêm and Thiệu sought out Taylor and sought a private endorsement to install Minh by staging a coup against Khánh, but the US ambassador did not want any more changes in leadership, fearing a corrosive effect on the government. This deterred Khiêm&#x27;s group from staging a coup.

The division among the generals came to a head at a meeting of the MRC on 26–27 August. Khánh and Khiêm blamed one another for the increasing unrest across the nation. Thiệu and another Catholic, General Nguyễn Hữu Có, called for the replacement of Khánh with Minh, but the latter refused. Minh reportedly claimed that Khánh was the only one who would get financial assistance from Washington, so they supported him, prompting Khiêm to angrily say, &quot;Obviously, Khánh is a puppet of the U.S. government, and we are tired of being told by the Americans how we should run our internal affairs&quot;. Khánh said that he would resign, but no agreement over the leadership could be found, and after more arguing between the senior officers, on 27 August they agreed that Khánh, Minh, and Khiêm would rule as a triumvirate for two months, until a new civilian government could be formed. The trio then brought paratroopers into Saigon to end the rioting. However, the triumvirate did little due to their disunity. Khánh dominated the decision-making and sidelined Khiêm and Minh.

On 13 September, Generals Lâm Văn Phát and Dương Văn Đức, both Roman Catholics demoted by Khánh after Buddhist pressure, launched a coup attempt with the support of Catholic elements. After a one-day stand-off the putsch failed. During the coup, Minh had remained aloof from the proceedings, angering Khánh and keeping their long-running rivalry going. By the end of October, the Johnson administration became more supportive of Taylor&#x27;s negative opinion of Minh and concluded that US interests would be optimized if Khánh prevailed in the power struggle. As a result, the Americans eventually paid for Minh to go on a &quot;good will tour&quot; so that he could be pushed off the political scene without embarrassment, while Khiêm was exiled to Washington as an ambassador after being implicated in the coup.

A short while earlier in September, before Minh was sent overseas, the junta decided to create a semblance of civilian rule by creating the High National Council (HNC), an appointed advisory body that was to begin the transitional to constitutional rule. Khánh put Minh in charge of picking the 17 members of the group, and he filled it with figures sympathetic to him. They then made a resolution to recommend a model with a powerful head of state, which would likely be Minh. Khánh did not want his rival taking power, so he and the Americans convinced the HNC to dilute the power inherent in the position to make it unappealing to Minh. The HNC then selected Phan Khắc Sửu as chief of state, and Sửu selected Trần Văn Hương as prime minister, although the junta remained the real power. By the end of the year, Minh was back in Vietnam after his tour.

===Khánh prevails===

Khánh and a group of younger officers decided to forcibly retire officers with more than 25 years of service, such as Minh and the other generals deposed in Khánh&#x27;s January coup; nominally this was because they thought them to be lethargic and ineffective, but tacitly, and far more importantly, because they were potential rivals for power. According to Khánh and the Young Turks, this older group was led by Minh and had been crafting plots with the Buddhists to regain power.

Sửu&#x27;s signature was required to pass the ruling, but he referred the matter to the HNC, which turned down the request. On 19 December, the generals dissolved the HNC; several of its members, other politicians and student leaders were arrested, while Minh and the other older generals were arrested and flown to Pleiku, and later removed from the military.

==Exile==
Minh went into exile in Bangkok, where he occupied himself with hobbies such as gardening and playing tennis. He still had many American friends, especially among the CIA, who gave him support during this period and paid for his dental bills. The US ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, was openly contemptuous of him and referred to him in public with obscenities. In return, he wrote a pro-war article for the respected &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; quarterly in 1968, condemning the communists and rejecting a power-sharing agreement. This helped to end his exile, with the support of the United States.

Minh opposed Thiệu, who as part of the so-called &quot;Young Turks&quot; had meanwhile put a stop to the seemingly endless power struggles and coups alongside Nguyễn Cao Kỳ, Nguyễn Chánh Thi and Chung Tấn Cang, by finally outmaneuvering Khánh in 1965, had been governing as constitutional president since 1967 and was permanently supported by the United States. Minh was going to run against Thiệu in the 1971 election but he withdrew because it became obvious to him (and most other observers) that the election would be rigged, due to a series of restrictions against would-be opponents. Thiệu was then the only candidate and retained power. Minh kept a low profile after this and was relatively politically inert.

Minh was regarded as a potential leader of a &quot;third force&quot; which could come to a compromise with North Vietnam that would allow eventual reunification without a military takeover by one of the parties. The North Vietnamese government carefully avoided either endorsing or condemning Minh, whose brother, Dương Văn Nhut, was a one-star general in the People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam (PAVN). In 1973, Minh proposed his own political program for Vietnam, which was a middle way between the proposals of Thiệu and the communists. Thiệu, however, reportedly opposed any compromise.

==Second presidency==
On 21 April 1975, Thiệu handed over power to Vice President Trần Văn Hương and fled to Taiwan. Hương prepared for peace talks with North Vietnam. However, after his overtures were rejected, he resigned. As the main attack on Saigon developed on 27 April 1975, in a joint sitting of the bicameral National Assembly, the presidency was unanimously handed over to Minh, who was sworn in the following day. The French government thought that Minh could broker a cease-fire and had advocated his ascension to power. There was also an assumption that, as Minh had a reputation for indecision, the various groups thought that they could manipulate him for their own ends relatively easily. It was widely known that Minh had long-standing contacts with the communists, and it was assumed that he would be able to establish a cease-fire and re-open negotiations. This expectation was totally unrealistic, as the North Vietnamese were in an overwhelmingly dominant position on the battlefield and final victory was within reach, so they saw no need for power-sharing, regardless of any political changes in Saigon.

On 28 April 1975, PAVN forces fought their way into the outskirts of the capital. Later that afternoon, as Minh finished his acceptance speech, in which he called for an immediate cease-fire and peace talks, a formation of five A-37s, captured from the Republic of Vietnam Air Force, bombed Tan Son Nhut Air Base. As Biên Hòa fell, General Nguyễn Văn Toàn, the III Corps commander, fled to Saigon, saying that most of the top ARVN leadership had virtually resigned themselves to defeat. The inauguration of Minh had served as a signal to South Vietnamese officers who would not compromise with the communists. They began to pack up and leave, or commit suicide to avoid capture.

PAVN columns advanced into the city center encountering very little resistance. Except in the Mekong Delta, where South Vietnamese military forces were still intact and aggressive, the South Vietnamese military had virtually ceased to exist. Just before 05:00 on 30 April, US Ambassador Graham Martin boarded a helicopter and departed and at 07:53 the last Marines were evacuated from the US Embassy&#x27;s rooftop. At 10:24, being advised by General Nguyễn Hữu Hạnh, Minh went on Saigon Radio and ordered all South Vietnamese forces to cease fighting and later declared an unconditional surrender. He announced, &quot;The Republic of Vietnam policy is the policy of peace and reconciliation, aimed at saving the blood of our people. We are here waiting for the Provisional Revolutionary Government to hand over the authority in order to stop useless bloodshed.&quot; 

According to General Nguyen Huu Hanh&#x27;s interview from BBC, Minh did not want to evacuate the Saigon government to the Mekong Delta to continue military resistance. Hanh also stated Minh planned a peace to end the war.

Around noon, a PAVN tank crashed through the gates of the Independence Palace. When the PAVN troops entered the Independence Palace they found Minh and his cabinet sitting around the big oval table in the cabinet room, waiting for them. As they entered, Minh said &quot;The revolution is here. You are here.&quot; He added, &quot;We have been waiting for you so that we could turn over the government.&quot; The ranking North Vietnamese officer, Colonel Bùi Văn Tùng replied, &quot;There is no question of your transferring power. Your power has crumbled. You cannot give up what you do not have.&quot; Later in the afternoon, he went on radio again and said, &quot;I declare the Saigon government is completely dissolved at all levels.&quot;

After his official surrender, he was summoned to report back. After a few days he was permitted to return to his villa, unlike almost all remaining military personnel and public servants, who were sent to re-education camps, often for over a decade in the case of senior officers. He lived there in seclusion for eight years, where he continued to raise birds and grow exotic orchids. It was assumed that Hanoi had resolved that as Minh had not actively opposed them in the final years of the war, he would be allowed to live in peace as long as he remained quiet and did not engage in political activities.

==Life in exile==
Minh was allowed to emigrate to France in 1983 and settled near Paris, and it was again assumed that the communists had permitted him to leave on the basis that he remain aloof from politics and history. In the late 1980s, there was speculation he would be allowed to return to Vietnam to live out his last years, but this did not happen. In 1988, he emigrated to the United States, and he lived in Pasadena, California, with his daughter, Mai Duong. He later needed a wheelchair for mobility. In exile, Minh kept his silence, did not talk about the events in Vietnam, and did not produce a memoir.

==Death==
On 5 August 2001, Minh fell at his home in Pasadena, California. He was taken to Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, where he died the following night at the age of 85. He was buried in Rose Hills Memorial Park in Whittier, California. Minh&#x27;s death was largely unmourned by overseas Vietnamese, who were still angry at him for ordering South Vietnamese soldiers to put their weapons down, and who saw him as the officer responsible for South Vietnam&#x27;s fall.

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*&quot;General Duong Van Minh Dies at 86&quot;, &quot;Asian Week&quot;, 17–23 August 2001 
*&quot;Gen. Duong Van Minh Buried at Rose Hills&quot;, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, 19 August 2001
*&quot;Duong Van Minh, 85, Saigon Plotter, Dies&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 8 August 2001</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="0" end="14" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Dương Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="69" end="77" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Big Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="141" end="172" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="222" end="235" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="288" end="302" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="leading a coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003866" start="317" end="333" title="Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem" label="was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571631" start="372" end="385" title="January 1964 South Vietnamese coup" label="being toppled"/>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="389" end="401" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="501" end="520" title="Fall of Saigon" label="before surrendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="524" end="547" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="North Vietnamese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q36666" start="679" end="698" title="Tiền Giang province" label="Tiền Giang province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="706" end="718" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289221" start="729" end="745" title="southern Vietnam" label="southern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="763" end="774" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="791" end="803" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="842" end="856" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="884" end="900" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738088" start="949" end="973" title="Vietnamese National Army" label="Vietnamese National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1006" end="1015" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="1026" end="1035" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="1104" end="1120" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019520" start="1231" end="1241" title="Bình Xuyên" label="Bình Xuyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380491" start="1274" end="1287" title="Battle of Saigon (1955)" label="street combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="1308" end="1315" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="1560" end="1575" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023046" start="1759" end="1775" title="Nguyễn Văn Nhung" label="Nguyễn Văn Nhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="2016" end="2025" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="2429" end="2445" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="2752" end="2766" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="3435" end="3447" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="3538" end="3568" title="French Indochina" label="French colonial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="3581" end="3587" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="3675" end="3691" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3695" end="3703" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273480" start="4008" end="4023" title="École Militaire" label="École Militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="4059" end="4073" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q665124" start="4249" end="4258" title="Kempeitai" label="Kempeitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="4499" end="4515" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738088" start="4523" end="4547" title="Vietnamese National Army" label="Vietnamese National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380491" start="4718" end="4734" title="Battle of Saigon (1955)" label="Battle of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019520" start="4781" end="4791" title="Bình Xuyên" label="Bình Xuyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405555" start="4844" end="4851" title="Chợ Lớn, Ho Chi Minh City" label="Chợ Lớn"/>
<link wikidata="Q216075" start="5026" end="5033" title="Cần Thơ" label="Cần Thơ"/>
<link wikidata="Q460252" start="5094" end="5100" title="Ba Cụt" label="Ba Cụt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762867" start="6276" end="6295" title="Leavenworth, Kansas" label="Leavenworth, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935163" start="6318" end="6352" title="1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt" label="coup attempt was made against Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="6834" end="6846" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="6947" end="6981" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="7019" end="7027" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="7256" end="7269" title="Cần Lao Party" label="Cần Lao Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802475" start="7576" end="7599" title="McNamara Taylor mission" label="McNamara Taylor mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="8419" end="8441" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup" label="coup to overthrow Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023046" start="8509" end="8525" title="Nguyễn Văn Nhung" label="Nguyễn Văn Nhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507551" start="8565" end="8578" title="Lê Quang Tung" label="Lê Quang Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="8674" end="8686" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="Ngô Đình Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108995" start="8786" end="8805" title="Xá Lợi Pagoda raids" label="Xá Lợi Pagoda raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115006" start="8950" end="8971" title="Tan Son Nhut Air Base" label="Tan Son Nhut Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424885" start="9284" end="9297" title="Lucien Conein" label="Lucien Conein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358341" start="9399" end="9412" title="Roger Hilsman" label="Roger Hilsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q272029" start="9563" end="9578" title="Götterdämmerung" label="Götterdämmerung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735139" start="10222" end="10234" title="Mai Hữu Xuân" label="Mai Hữu Xuân"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10255" end="10270" title="Nguyễn Văn Quan" label="Nguyễn Văn Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197972" start="10307" end="10323" title="Dương Hiếu Nghĩa" label="Dương Hiếu Nghĩa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="10544" end="10559" title="contract killer" label="contract killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915198" start="11387" end="11399" title="At attention" label="to attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q482827" start="12794" end="12807" title="William Colby" label="William Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="13621" end="13637" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298398" start="13796" end="13808" title="5th Division (South Vietnam)" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="14004" end="14008" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="14260" end="14274" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="15719" end="15733" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="16039" end="16053" title="military dictatorship" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q926510" start="16178" end="16193" title="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ" label="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="17089" end="17104" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767851" start="17237" end="17262" title="Commercial Import Program" label="Commercial Import Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263" start="17539" end="17548" title="mahjong" label="mah-jongg"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="17655" end="17664" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950482" start="19565" end="19579" title="Phạm Ngọc Thảo" label="Phạm Ngọc Thảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="20042" end="20066" title="Strategic Hamlet Program" label="Strategic Hamlet Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="22193" end="22205" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976677" start="22443" end="22450" title="I Corps (South Vietnam)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937110" start="22702" end="22718" title="Trần Thiện Khiêm" label="Trần Thiện Khiêm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286113" start="22761" end="22767" title="Đỗ Mậu" label="Đỗ Mậu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799000" start="22772" end="22788" title="Nguyễn Chánh Thi" label="Nguyễn Chánh Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507839" start="23123" end="23133" title="Lê Văn Kim" label="Lê Văn Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022852" start="26425" end="26438" title="Nguyễn Hữu Có" label="Nguyễn Hữu Có"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480719" start="27326" end="27338" title="Lâm Văn Phát" label="Lâm Văn Phát"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315886" start="27343" end="27356" title="Dương Văn Đức" label="Dương Văn Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="27514" end="27520" title="putsch" label="putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q707287" start="28778" end="28791" title="Phan Khắc Sửu" label="Phan Khắc Sửu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="29795" end="29801" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="29875" end="29882" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q63708" start="30113" end="30129" title="Ellsworth Bunker" label="Ellsworth Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="30272" end="30287" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="30609" end="30622" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116336" start="30645" end="30659" title="Chung Tấn Cang" label="Chung Tấn Cang"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="31275" end="31288" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315888" start="31482" end="31496" title="Duong Van Nhut" label="Dương Văn Nhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="31528" end="31557" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="31836" end="31850" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="31863" end="31869" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q488204" start="33110" end="33114" title="Cessna A-37 Dragonfly" label="A-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="33135" end="33164" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="33199" end="33207" title="Biên Hòa" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934397" start="33222" end="33237" title="Nguyễn Văn Toàn (general)" label="Nguyễn Văn Toàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q724360" start="33849" end="33862" title="Graham Martin" label="Graham Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799165" start="34013" end="34028" title="Nguyễn Hữu Hạnh" label="Nguyễn Hữu Hạnh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34043" end="34055" title="Saigon Radio" label="Saigon Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q933384" start="34714" end="34733" title="Independence Palace" label="Independence Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35110" end="35122" title="Bùi Văn Tùng" label="Bùi Văn Tùng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896947" start="35605" end="35622" title="Re-education camp (Vietnam)" label="re-education camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="35776" end="35783" title="Orchidaceae" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="36426" end="36446" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="36496" end="36506" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945374" start="36718" end="36746" title="Huntington Memorial Hospital" label="Huntington Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398719" start="36829" end="36853" title="Rose Hills Memorial Park" label="Rose Hills Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="36857" end="36877" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="36922" end="36941" title="overseas Vietnamese" label="overseas Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37464" end="37482" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80092" wikidata="Q650194" url="?curid=80092" title="Ngô Đình Nhu">
<text>Ngô Đình Nhu (7 October 19102 November 1963) baptismal name James, (Vietnamese: Giacôbê) was a Vietnamese archivist and politician. He was the younger brother and State Counsellor of South Vietnam&#x27;s first president, Ngô Đình Diệm. Although he held no formal executive position, he wielded immense unofficial power, exercising personal command of both the ARVN Special Forces (a paramilitary unit which served as the Ngô family&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; private army) and the Cần Lao political apparatus (also known as the Personalist Labor Party) which served as the regime&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; secret police.

In his early years, Nhu was a quiet and bookish individual who showed little inclination towards the political path taken by his elder brothers. While training as an archivist in France, Nhu adopted the Roman Catholic ideology of personalism to create the Person Dignity Theory, although critics claimed that he misused that philosophy. Upon returning to Vietnam, he helped his brother in his quest for political power, and Nhu proved an astute and ruthless tactician and strategist, helping Diệm to gain more leverage and outwit rivals. During this time, he formed and handpicked the members of the secret Cần Lao Party, which swore its personal allegiance to the Ngô family, provided their power base and eventually became their secret police force. Nhu remained as its head until his own assassination.

In 1955, Nhu&#x27;s supporters helped intimidate the public and rig the 1955 State of Vietnam referendum that ensconced his elder brother, Diệm, in power. Nhu used the Cần Lao, which he organised into cells, to infiltrate every part of society to root out opposition to the Ngô family. In 1959, he organized a failed assassination attempt via mail bomb on Prince Sihanouk, the prime minister of neighbouring Cambodia, with whom relations had become strained. Nhu publicly extolled his own intellectual abilities. He was known for making such public statements as promising to demolish the Xá Lợi Pagoda and vowing to kill his estranged father-in-law, Trần Văn Chương, who was the regime&#x27;s ambassador to the United States, after the elder man condemned the Ngô family&#x27;s behavior and disowned his daughter, Nhu&#x27;s wife, Madame Nhu.

In 1963, the Ngô family&#x27;s grip on power became unstuck during the Buddhist crisis, during which the nation&#x27;s Buddhist majority rose up against the pro-Catholic regime. Nhu tried to break the Buddhists&#x27; opposition by using the Special Forces in raids on prominent Buddhist temples that left hundreds dead, and framing the regular army for it. However, Nhu&#x27;s plan was uncovered, which intensified plots by military officers, encouraged by the Americans, who turned against the Ngô family after the pagoda attacks. Nhu was aware of the plots, but remained confident he could outmaneuver them, and began to plot a counter-coup, as well as the assassinations of US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. and other American and opposition figures. Nhu was fooled by the loyalist General Tôn Thất Đính, who had turned against the Ngô family. On 1 November 1963, the coup proceeded, and the Ngô brothers (Nhu and Diệm) were detained and assassinated the next day.

==Early years==
Nhu&#x27;s family originated from the central Vietnamese village of Phú Cam. His family had served as mandarins in the imperial court in Huế. His father, Ngô Đình Khả, was a counselor to Emperor Thành Thái during the French colonisation. After the French deposed the emperor on the pretext of insanity, Khả retired in protest and became a farmer. Nhu was the fourth of six sons, born in 1910.

In his early years, Nhu was aloof from politics and was regarded as a bookish and quiet personality who preferred academic pursuits. By the 1920s, his three elder brothers Ngô Đình Khôi, Ngô Đình Thục and Ngô Đình Diệm were becoming prominent figures in Vietnam. Thục became the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Huế in 1960. In 1932, Diệm became the interior minister but resigned within a few months after realising that he would not be given any real power. Nhu showed little interest in following in their footsteps.

Nhu completed a bachelor&#x27;s degree in literature in Paris and then studied paleography and librarianship, graduating from the École Nationale des Chartes, an archivists&#x27; school in Paris. He returned to Vietnam from France at the outbreak of World War II. He was influenced by personalism, a concept he had acquired in the Latin Quarter. It had been conceived in the 1930s by Catholic progressives such as Emmanuel Mounier. Mounier&#x27;s heirs in Paris, who edited the left wing Catholic review &quot;Esprit&quot; denounced Nhu as a fraud. Personalism blamed liberal capitalism for the Great Depression and individualistic greed and exploitation, and disagreed with communism due to its opposition to spirituality.

Nhu worked at Hanoi&#x27;s National Library and in 1943, he married Trần Lệ Xuân, later known as &quot;Madame Nhu&quot;. She was a Buddhist but converted to her husband&#x27;s religion. The French dismissed Nhu from his high-ranking post, due to Diệm&#x27;s nationalist activities, and he moved to the Central Highlands resort town of Đà Lạt and lived comfortably, editing a newspaper. He raised orchids during his time in Đà Lạt.

After the August Revolution of 1945, when Hồ Chí Minh&#x27;s communist Viet Minh declared independence, various groups as well as the French colonialists jockeyed for political control. Nhu became more politically active, especially in helping his brothers to establish a political base among Vietnamese Catholics. By this time, Khôi had been assassinated by the communists, so Diệm became the leading political figure in the family. Diệm had little success in the late 1940s and went into exile in 1950 to campaign from abroad after the communists sentenced him to death in absentia.

Up to this point, Nhu had kept a relatively low-key profile. However, he appeared to imbue personalist ideas into his elder brother, who used the philosophy&#x27;s terminology in his speeches. Diệm and Nhu thought that personalism went well with their &quot;Third Force&quot; anti-communist and anti-colonial ideology. After 1950, Nhu became a leading figure in the mobilizing of his elder brother&#x27;s support based among anti-communist Vietnamese. He became assertive in pushing personalism as a guiding ideology for Vietnam&#x27;s social development. In April 1952, Nhu gave a talk on the topic at the newly opened Vietnamese National Military Academy in Đà Lạt. He said the Catholic concept was applicable to people from all backgrounds, especially in the fight against communist and unadulterated capitalism. He called on all Vietnamese to engage in a personalist-driven social revolution to strengthen the society and country.

Nhu was known for making long, abstract and difficult-to-understand speeches, something which many Vietnamese resented. Although Nhu was known for his pretensions as an intellectual and political philosopher, he was to become quite effective as a political organizer. Around 1950, Nhu started the forerunner of what would become Cần Lao (Personalist Labor Party), forming the power base and control mechanism of the Ngô family. A secret organization, initially, little is known of the Cần Lao&#x27;s early years. The body consisted of a network of cells, and most members knew the identities of only a few colleagues. After 1954, its existence was declared, but the public knew little of its activities, which were mostly hidden from public view or oversight. In the early 1950s, the Cần Lao was used to mobilize support for Diệm&#x27;s political campaign. Around 1953, Nhu began an alliance with Trần Quốc Bửu, a trade unionist who headed the Vietnamese Confederation of Christian Workers. Nhu and his supporters began publishing a Saigon journal called &quot;Xa Hoi&quot; (&quot;Society&quot;), which endorsed Bửu&#x27;s movement and trade unionism in general.

At the time, opportunities for opposition politicians began to open up. Bảo Đại, head of state of the State of Vietnam, an associated state of the French Union became increasingly unpopular as the citizens became increasingly impatient with his strategy of allying with the French against the communists in return for gradually increased autonomy and eventual independence. Many felt that the Bảo Đại&#x27;s policies would never deliver meaningful self-determination.

In late-1953, Nhu began to try to foment and exploit anti-Bảo Đại sentiment. He organised a Unity Congress, a forum of various anti-communist nationalists such as Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn&#x27;s Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam, various Catholic groups and activists, as well as the Hòa Hảo and Cao Đài religious sects, and the Bình Xuyên organised crime syndicate. Nhu&#x27;s real objective was to gain publicity for Diệm, especially while Bảo Đại was overseas and unable to respond effectively. The conference turned into chaos, but Nhu achieved his objective of gaining publicity for his brother; additionally, the other groups had engaged in angry denunciations against Bảo Đại.

The Emperor Bảo Đại announced that a National Congress would be opened in October. The leaders of most of the other parties agreed to participate, but Nhu and his organizations were absent. He was worried that the body might play into Bảo Đại&#x27;s hands by endorsing him. This appeared to be the way the delegates were heading at first, but a sudden change saw an upsurge of condemnation against Bảo Đại&#x27;s policies of coexistence with France.

==Rise to power==

Nhu&#x27;s brother Diệm had been appointed Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam by Bảo Đại after the French had been defeated at Điện Biên Phủ. At the start of 1955, French Indochina was dissolved, leaving Diệm in temporary control of the south. A referendum was scheduled for 23 October 1955 to determine the future direction of the south. It was contested by Bảo Đại, who advocated for the restoration of the monarchy, while Diệm ran on a &quot;republican&quot; platform. The elections were held, with Nhu and the family&#x27;s Cần Lao political apparatus, which supplied Diệm&#x27;s electoral base, as well as organising and supervising elections.

Campaigning for Bảo Đại was prohibited, and the result was rigged, with Bảo Đại supporters attacked by Nhu&#x27;s workers. Diệm recorded 98.2% of the vote, including 605,025 votes in Saigon, where only 450,000 voters were registered. Diệm&#x27;s tally also exceeded the registration numbers in other districts. Nhu created a web of covert political, security, labor and other organizations, and built a structure of five-man cells to spy on dissidents and promote those loyal to Diệm&#x27;s regime.

==Power==

Nhu held no official role in the government, but ruled the southern region of South Vietnam, commanding private armies and secret police. Along with his wife and Archbishop Thục, he lived in the Presidential Palace with Diệm. Pervaded by family corruption, Nhu competed with his brother Ngô Đình Cẩn, who ruled the northern areas, for U.S. contracts and rice trade. He controlled the Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces commanded by Colonel Lê Quang Tung, not for fighting the Viet Cong but in Saigon to maintain the authoritarian rule of his family. Tortures and killings of &quot;communist suspects&quot; were committed on a daily basis, and extended beyond communists to anti-communist dissidents and anti-corruption whistleblowers. His agents infiltrated labor unions and social organizations, and he expanded the police forces from 20 to 32 officers. They conducted arrests without warrants and selective suppression of criminal activity and graft while turning a blind eye to regime loyalists.

Nhu and his wife amassed a fortune by running numbers and lottery rackets, manipulating currency and extorting money from Saigon businesses. In 1956, Diệm created a rubber stamp unicameral legislature, the National Assembly. Nhu won a seat in the body, ostensibly as an independent, but never bothered to attend a single session of debate or vote, but this made no difference as Diệm&#x27;s policies were overwhelmingly approved in any formal show of numbers.

In June 1958, the ARVN were involved in border clashes with Cambodia and made gains in the northeastern Cambodian province of Stung Treng. This provoked a war of words between Diệm and Sihanouk. On 31 August 1959, Nhu failed in an attempt to assassinate Sihanouk. He ordered his agents to send parcel bombs to the Cambodian leader. Two suitcases were delivered to the Sihanouks&#x27; palace, one addressed to the head of state, and the other to Prince Vakrivan, his head of protocol. The deliveries were labeled as originating from an American engineer who had previously worked in Cambodia and purported to contain gifts from Hong Kong. Sihanouk&#x27;s package contained a bomb, but the other did not; however, Vakrivan opened both on behalf of the monarch and was killed instantly, as was a servant. The explosion happened adjacent to a room in the palace where Sihanouk&#x27;s parents were present. At the same time, anti-Sihanouk broadcasts emanated from a secret transmitter located somewhere in South Vietnam, widely attributed to Nhu. Sihanouk quickly blamed the Ngôs and his aides made statements implying the United States might have played a role in the assassination attempt.

The relationship between the two countries became strained thereafter, and Cambodia gave refuge to Vietnamese military personnel involved in attempts to overthrow Diệm. Colonel Nguyễn Chánh Thi and Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông were given immediate refuge after a failed coup in November 1960, and Republic of Vietnam Air Force pilot Lieutenant Nguyễn Văn Cử was accorded the same treatment after he failed to kill the Ngôs in February 1962.

==Strategic Hamlet Program==

In 1962, Nhu began work on the ambitious Strategic Hamlet Program, which was informed by his philosophy of Personalism. The problem was an attempt to build fortified villages that would provide security for rural Vietnamese. The objective was to lock the Viet Cong out so that they could not operate among the villagers. Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo supervised these efforts, and when told that the peasants resented being forcibly removed from their ancestral lands and put into forts they were compelled to build, he advised Nhu it was imperative to build as many hamlets as fast as possible. The Ngôs were unaware Thảo, ostensibly a Catholic, was in fact a communist double agent acting to turn the rural populace against Saigon. Thảo helped to ruin Nhu&#x27;s scheme by having strategic hamlets built in communist strongholds. This increased the number of communist sympathisers who were placed inside the hamlets and given identification cards. As a result, the Viet Cong were able to more effectively penetrate the villages to access supplies and personnel.

==Buddhist crisis==
In May 1963, the Buddhist crisis broke out after nine Buddhist protesters were killed in Huế while protesting a ban on the Buddhist flag on Vesak, the birthday of Gautama Buddha. This prompted the Buddhist majority to stage widespread demonstrations against Diệm, who discriminated in favour of Catholics, for religious equality. The movement threatened the stability of the family&#x27;s rule. Nhu was known to favor a stronger line against the Buddhists. He had made statements calling for the suppression of the protests through his English-language newspaper, the &quot;Times of Vietnam&quot;. During this time, his wife Madame Nhu, herself a Catholic convert from Buddhism and the de facto first lady (due to Diệm&#x27;s bachelor life), inflamed the situation by mockingly applauding the suicides of Thích Quảng Đức and others, referring to them as &quot;barbecues&quot;, while Nhu stated &quot;if the Buddhists want to have another barbecue, I will be glad to supply the gasoline&quot;.

7 July was the ninth anniversary of Diệm&#x27;s 1954 ascension to Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam. American pressmen had been alerted to a Buddhist demonstration to coincide with Double Seven Day at the Chanatareansey Pagoda in northern Saigon. When the Buddhists filed out of the pagoda into an adjacent alley, they were blocked by Nhu&#x27;s secret police. When Peter Arnett and Malcolm Browne began taking photos, the police punched Arnett in the nose, floored him, threw rocks and broke his camera. This incident became known as the Double Seven Day scuffle. Browne took photos of Arnett&#x27;s bloodied face, and while the police smashed his camera, the film survived. Photos of Arnett&#x27;s bloodied face were circulated in US newspapers and caused further embarrassment for Diệm and Nhu. The Saigon press corps officially protest Nhu&#x27;s &quot;open physical intimidation to prevent the covering of news which we feel Americans have a right to know&quot;.

There were persistent reports that Nhu was seeking to usurp real power from Diệm and would attack the Buddhists. In a media interview, Nhu said that if the Buddhist crisis was not resolved, he would stage a coup, quickly demolish the Xá Lợi Pagoda, where the Buddhists were massing to coordinate their activities, and head a new anti-Buddhist government. The news was promptly published, although the Americans were not sure if Nhu was serious.

On the evening of 18 August, a group of senior ARVN generals met to discuss the Buddhist crisis and decided that the imposition of martial law was needed to disperse the monks who had gathered in Saigon and other regional cities and return them to their original pagodas in the rural areas. On 20 August they met Nhu for consultations and made their request. Most of the group were already involved in plotting against the Ngô family by this time. The generals played on Nhu&#x27;s prejudices by saying that the pagodas were infiltrated with communists and that they needed to be dispersed. Hearing this, the brothers agreed to declare martial law effective on the next day, without consulting the cabinet. The real purpose of the generals&#x27; request was to maneuver troops in readiness for a coup, and they had no concrete plans to use the regular army to raid the pagodas. However, Nhu took the opportunity to discredit the army by using Tung&#x27;s Special Forces and the combat police to attack the pagodas.

With the approval of Diệm, Nhu used the declaration of martial law to order armed men into the Buddhist pagodas. Nhu purposely chose a time when the U.S. Embassy was leaderless. Frederick Nolting had returned to the United States and his successor Lodge was yet to arrive. As the high command of the ARVN worked closely with the American advisers, Nhu used the combat police and Tung&#x27;s Special Forces, who took his orders directly from Nhu. The men were dressed in regular army uniforms, such as paratrooper uniforms, in order to frame the army for the raids. Nhu&#x27;s motive was to shift the responsibility for a violent operation that would anger the Vietnamese public and the American officials onto the army. In doing so, he intended to dent the public and American confidence in the senior army officers, who were plotting against him. Nhu hoped the Buddhist majority and the Americans would blame the army for the raids and become less inclined to support a coup by the generals. In the past, Nhu&#x27;s Machiavellian tactics in playing the generals against one another had kept conspirators off-balance and thwarted coup attempts.

Squads of Special Forces and combat police flattened the gates of the Xá Lợi Pagoda and smashed their way in at around 00:20, 21 August 1963. Nhu&#x27;s men were armed with pistols, submachine guns, carbines, shotguns, grenades and tear gas. The red bereted Special Forces were joined by truckloads of steel-helmeted combat police in army camouflage uniforms. Two of Nhu&#x27;s senior aides were seen outside Xá Lợi directing the operation. Monks and nuns were attacked with rifle butts and bayonets, and overpowered by automatic weapons fire, grenades and battering rams. It took around two hours to complete the raids because many of the occupants had barricaded themselves inside the various rooms.

Nhu&#x27;s men vandalized the main altar and confiscated the intact charred heart of Thích Quảng Đức, the monk who had self-immolated in protest against the policies of the regime. However, some of the Buddhists were able to flee the pagoda with a receptacle with the remainder of his ashes. Two monks jumped the back wall of the pagoda into the grounds of the adjoining United States Agency for International Development (USAID) mission, where they were given asylum. Thich Tinh Khiet, an eighty-year-old Buddhist patriarch, was seized and taken to a military hospital on the outskirts of Saigon. Military control, press censorship and the airport closures were enacted in Saigon.

The violence was worse in heavily Buddhist Huế. Pro-Buddhist civilians left their homes upon hearing of the raids to defend the city&#x27;s pagodas. At Từ Đàm Pagoda, which was the temple of Buddhist protest leader Thích Trí Quang, government soldiers, firing M1 rifles, overran the building and demolished a statue of Gautama Buddha and looted and vandalized the building, before leveling much of the pagoda with explosives. Many Buddhists were shot or clubbed to death. The most determined resistance occurred outside the Diệu Đế Pagoda in Huế. As troops attempted to erect a barricade across the bridge leading to the pagoda, the crowd fought back, and the military finally took control after five hours, leaving an estimated 30 dead and 200 wounded.

Some 500 people were arrested in the city, and 17 of the 47 professors at Huế University, who had resigned earlier in the week in protest against the family&#x27;s policies, were arrested. The raids were repeated in cities and towns across the country. The total number of dead and disappeared was never confirmed, but estimates range up to several hundred. At least 1,400 were arrested. No further mass Buddhist protests occurred during the remainder of Diệm&#x27;s rule, which would amount to little more than two more months, in any event.

Government sources claimed that at the Xá Lợi, Ấn Quang and other pagodas, soldiers had found machine guns, ammunition, plastic explosives, homemade mines, daggers, and Viet Cong documents; these had been planted by Nhu&#x27;s men. A few days later, Madame Nhu said that the raids were &quot;the happiest day in my life since we crushed the Bình Xuyên in 1955&quot;, and assailed the Buddhists as &quot;communists&quot;. Nhu accused the Buddhists of turning their pagodas into headquarters for plotting insurrections. He claimed the Buddhist Intersect Committee operated under the control of &quot;political speculators who exploited religion and terrorism&quot;.

Nhu&#x27;s actions prompted riots from university students, which were met by arrests, imprisonment, and university shutdowns. The high school students followed suit, and followed their university counterparts into jail. Thousands of students from Saigon&#x27;s leading high school, most of them children of public servants and military officers, were sent to re-education camps. The result was a further drop in morale amongst the putative defenders of the Ngô family. In a media interview, Nhu vowed to kill his father-in-law (for publicly renouncing him), saying: &quot;I will have his head cut off. I will hang him in the center of a square and let him dangle there. My wife will make the knot on the rope because she is proud of being a Vietnamese and she is a good patriot.&quot; In the same interview, Nhu claimed to have invented helicopters and pioneered their use in military combat.

On 24 August, the Kennedy administration sent Cable 243 to Lodge in Saigon, marking a change in American policy. The message advised Lodge to seek the removal of the Nhus from power, and to look for alternative leadership options if Diệm refused to remove them. As the probability of Diệm doing so was seen as highly unlikely, the message effectively meant the fomenting of a coup. Lodge replied that there was no hope of Diệm removing Nhu, and began to make contact with possible coup plotters through CIA agents. The &quot;Voice of America&quot; broadcast a statement blaming Nhu for the pagoda raids and absolving the army of culpability. Lodge believed Nhu&#x27;s influence had risen to unprecedented levels and that Nhu&#x27;s divide and conquer tactics had split the military into three power groups.

At the same time as Buddhist crisis was raging, a French diplomatic initiative known to the historians as the &quot;Maneli affair&quot; was taking place. On 25 August 1963, at a diplomatic reception at Gia Long Palace, Roger Lalouette, the French ambassador to South Vietnam and Ramchundur Goburdhun, the Indian Chief Commissioner of the International Control Commission (ICC), introduced Nhu to Mieczysław Maneli, the Polish Commissioner to the ICC. Lalouette had promoting a peace plan calling for a federation of the two Vietnams. During a visit to Hanoi, Maneli had met with Ho Chi Minh and Phạm Văn Đồng and been asked to take a message to Nhu to discuss the peace offer. On 2 September 1963, Maneli followed up his first meeting with Nhu with another at Nhu&#x27;s office in the Gia Long Palace. Nhu spoke at much length to Maneli about his wish to achieve a synthesis of Catholicism and Marxism as he maintained that his real enemy was not Communism, but capitalism.

Shortly afterwards, Nhu met with the American columnist Joseph Alsop who was visiting Saigon, and leaked to him the news that he had met Maneli. On 18 September 1963, Alsop revealed the Nhu-Menali meeting in his &quot;A Matter of Fact&quot; column in the &quot;Washington Post&quot;. Nhu told Alsop that the offer presented by Maneli was &quot;almost an attractive offer&quot;, but he rejected it because &quot;I could not open negotiations behind the backs of the Americans...That was of course out of the question&quot;. Through Nhu&#x27;s intention in leaking the meeting was to blackmail the United States with the obvious message that the Diem regime would reach an understanding with the Communists if Kennedy continued his criticism of the regime, senior members of the Kennedy administration reacted with fury to what Alsop had revealed, and now began to press even more strongly for a coup.
One of the recommendations of the Krulak Mendenhall mission, was to stop American funding for the Motion Picture Center, which produced hagiographic films (propaganda) about the Nhus. and to pursue covert actions aimed at dividing and discrediting Tung and Major General Tôn Thất Đính. Đính was the youngest general in ARVN history, primarily due to his loyalty to the Ngô family. He was given command of the III Corps forces surrounding the capital as he and Tung were the most trusted officers and could be relied upon to defend the family against any coup.

The McNamara Taylor mission resulted in the suspension of funding for Nhu&#x27;s special forces until they were placed under the command of the army&#x27;s Joint General Staff (JGS) and sent into battle. The report noted that one of the reasons for sending Tung&#x27;s men into the field was because they &quot;are a continuing support for Diệm&quot;. The Americans were also aware that removing the special forces from Saigon would increase the chances that a coup attempt would succeed, thereby encouraging the army to overthrow the president. Diệm and Nhu were undeterred by suspension of aid, keeping Tung and his men in the capital. Nhu accused the Americans of &quot;destroying the psychology of our country&quot; and called the U.S. ambassador, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., a &quot;man of no morality&quot;.

At Nhu&#x27;s request, Tung was reported to have been planning an operation under the cover of a government-organised student demonstration outside the U.S. embassy. In this plan, Tung&#x27;s men would assassinate Lodge and other key officials among the confusion. Another target was the Buddhist leader Thích Trí Quang, who had been given asylum in the embassy after being targeted in the pagoda raids. According to the plan, Tung&#x27;s men would then burn down the embassy and stage it as a riot provoked by communists and other enemies of the United States.

Another notable instance of religious warfare was perpetrated by Nhu&#x27;s right-hand man in 1963. A hugely oversized carp was found swimming in a small pond near Đà Nẵng. Local Buddhists began to believe that the fish was a reincarnation of one of Gautama Buddha&#x27;s disciples. As more people made pilgrimages to the pond, Ngô family officials mined the pond and raked it with machine gun fire, but the fish survived. Nhu&#x27;s special forces grenaded the pond, finally killing the fish. This backfired, however, because it generated more publicity — newspapers across the world ran stories about the miraculous fish. ARVN helicopters began landing at the site, and paratroopers filled their bottles with water they believed to be magical.

==Coup and death==

By this time, Diệm and Nhu knew that a group of ARVN generals and colonels were planning a coup, but didn&#x27;t know Tôn Thất Đính was among them. Nhu ordered Đính and Tung to plan a fake coup against the Ngô family. One of Nhu&#x27;s objectives was to trick dissidents into joining the false uprising so that they could be identified and eliminated. Another objective of the stunt was to give a false impression of the strength of the regime.

Codenamed Operation Bravo, the first stage of the scheme would involve some of Tung&#x27;s loyalist soldiers, disguised as insurgents led by apparently renegade junior officers, faking a coup and vandalising the capital. During the orchestrated chaos of the first coup, the disguised loyalists would riot and in the ensuing mayhem, kill the leading coup plotters, such as Generals Dương Văn Minh, Trần Văn Đôn, Lê Văn Kim and junior officers assisting them. The loyalists and some of Nhu&#x27;s underworld connections were also to kill some figures who were assisting the conspirators, such as the titular but relatively powerless Vice President Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ, CIA officer Lucien Conein, who was on assignment in Vietnam as a military adviser, and Lodge. These would then be blamed on &quot;neutralist and pro-communist elements&quot;. Tung would then announce the formation of a &quot;revolutionary government&quot; consisting of opposition activists who had not consented to being named in the government, while Diệm and Nhu would pretend to be on the run and move to Vũng Tàu. A fake &quot;counter-coup&quot; was to follow, whereupon Tung&#x27;s men, having left Saigon on the pretext of fighting communists, as well as Đình&#x27;s forces, would triumphantly re-enter Saigon to reaffirm the Diệm regime. Nhu would then round up opposition figures.

Đình was put in charge of the fake coup and was allowed the additional control of the 7th Division based in Mỹ Tho, south of the capital, which was previously assigned to Diệm loyalist General Huỳnh Văn Cao, who was in charge of the IV Corps in the Mekong Delta. The reassignment of the 7th Division to Đính gave his III Corps complete encirclement of Saigon. The encirclement would prevent Cao from storming the capital to save Diệm as he had done during the 1960 coup attempt.

Nhu and Tung remained unaware of Đình&#x27;s switch in loyalties. Đình told them fresh troops were needed in the capital, opining that &quot;If we move reserves into the city, the Americans will be angry. They&#x27;ll complain that we&#x27;re not fighting the war. So we must camouflage our plan by sending the special forces out to the country. That will deceive them.&quot; Nhu had no idea that Đình&#x27;s real intention was to engulf Saigon with rebel units and lock Tung&#x27;s loyalists in the countryside where they could not defend the Ngô family. Tung and Nhu agreed to send all four Saigon-based special forces companies out of the capital on 29 October 1963.
On 1 November 1963, the real coup went ahead, with Cao and Tung&#x27;s troops isolated outside Saigon, unable to rescue Diệm and Nhu from the rebel encirclement. By the time the Ngô brothers realised that coup was not the fake action organised by the loyalists, Tung had been called to the Joint General Staff headquarters at the airbase, under the pretense of a routine meeting, and was seized and executed. Attempts by Diệm and Nhu to make contact with Đình were blocked by other generals, whose staff claimed that Đình was elsewhere, leading Nhu and Diệm to believe he had been captured. Around 20:00, with the Presidential Guard hopelessly outnumbered, Diệm and Nhu hurriedly packed and escaped the palace, with two loyalists: Cao Xuân Vỹ, head of Nhu&#x27;s Republican Youth, and Air Force Captain Đỗ Thọ, Diệm&#x27;s aide-de-camp. Thọ&#x27;s uncle was Colonel Đỗ Mậu, the director of military security and a participant in the coup plot. The brothers were believed to have escaped through a secret tunnel, and emerged in a wooded area in a nearby park, where they were picked up and taken to a supporter&#x27;s house in the Chinese merchant district of Cholon. Nhu was reported to have suggested to Diệm that the brothers split up, arguing that this would enhance their chances of survival. Nhu proposed that one travel to join Cao&#x27;s IV Corps, while the other would go to the II Corps of General Nguyễn Khánh in the Central Highlands. Nhu believed the rebel generals would not dare kill one of them while the other was free, in case the surviving brother were to regain power. Diệm turned down this idea because he didn&#x27;t want to leave Nhu alone.

The brothers sought asylum from the embassy of the Republic of China, but were turned down and stayed in the safehouse as they appealed to ARVN loyalists and attempted to negotiate with the coup leaders. Nhu&#x27;s agents had fitted the home with a direct phone line to the palace, so the coup generals believed that the brothers were still besieged inside Gia Long. Neither the rebels nor the loyalist Presidential Guard had any idea that at 21:00 they were about to fight for an empty building, leading to futile deaths. Diệm and Nhu refused to surrender, so the 5th Division of Colonel Nguyễn Văn Thiệu besieged the palace and captured it by dawn.

In the early morning of 2 November, Diệm and Nhu agreed to surrender. The ARVN officers had promised the Ngô brothers safe exile and an &quot;honorable retirement&quot;. The U.S. did not want Diệm or Nhu near Vietnam &quot;because of the plots they will mount to try to regain power&quot;. When Dương Văn Minh found the palace empty, he was angered, but was soon informed of the Ngô brothers&#x27; location. Nhu and Diệm fled to the nearby Catholic Church of St. Francis Xavier, where they were taken into custody and put into an armoured personnel carrier, to be taken back to military headquarters. The convoy was led by General Mai Hữu Xuân and the brothers were guarded inside the APC by Major Dương Hiếu Nghĩa and Captain Nguyễn Văn Nhung, Minh&#x27;s bodyguard. Before the convoy had departed for the church, Minh was reported to have gestured to Nhung with two fingers. This was taken to be an order to kill both brothers. An investigation by General Trần Văn Đôn later determined that Duong Hieu Nghia shot the brothers at point-blank range with a semi-automatic firearm and that Nhung sprayed them with bullets before repeatedly stabbing the bodies with a knife.

Nghia gave his account of what occurred during the journey back to the military headquarters: &quot;As we rode back to the Joint General Staff headquarters, Diệm sat silently, but Nhu and the captain [Nhung] began to insult each other. I don&#x27;t know who started it. The name-calling grew passionate. The captain had hated Nhu before. Now he was charged with emotion.&quot; Nghia said that &quot;[Nhung] lunged at Nhu with a bayonet and stabbed him again and again, maybe fifteen or twenty times. Still in a rage, he turned to Diệm, took out his revolver and shot him in the head. Then he looked back at Nhu, who was lying on the floor, twitching. He put a bullet into his head too. Neither Diệm nor Nhu ever defended themselves. Their hands were tied.&quot; According to historian Howard Jones, the fact &quot;that the killings failed to make the brothers into martyrs constituted a vivid testimonial to the depth of popular hatred they had aroused.&quot; Some months later, Minh reportedly confided to an American source that &quot;We had no alternative. They had to be killed. Diệm could not be allowed to live because he was too much respected among simple, gullible people in the countryside, especially the Catholics and the refugees. We had to kill Nhu because he was so widely feared—and he had created organizations that were the arms of his personal power.&quot;

The two brothers (Nhu and Diệm) were buried by the junta in a location that remains unknown. The speculated burial places include a military prison, a local cemetery, and the grounds of the JGS headquarters at Tan Son Nhut; there are also reports of cremation.

The two brothers are reburied in a cemetery in Lai Thieu, around 20–30 km north of Ho Chi Minh City. Their tombstones are written in Vietnamese simply as &quot;Huynh&quot; meaning Elder Brother, and &quot;Đệ&quot; meaning Younger Brother.

==Children==
* Ngô Đình Lệ Thủy (1945) was killed in April 1967, in an automobile accident in Longjumeau, France.
* Ngô Đình Trác (1949) became an agricultural engineering graduate, and he is married to an Italian woman. They have four children (3 sons, 1 daughter). He died of stroke in 2022.
* Ngô Đình Quỳnh (1952) graduated from ESSEC (École supérieure des sciences économiques et commerciales), a private school training professionals in the economy; he works as a trade representative for a U.S. company in Brussels, Belgium.
* Ngô Đình Lệ Quyên (1959) earned a PhD from the University of Rome. She was a lawyer in the legal IT sector and lectured at presentations by the Law Faculty of the University of Rome. She also served as Commissioner of Immigration for Caritas Europe. On 16 April 2012, she was killed in an automobile accident on the way to work in Rome.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* Đào Thị Diến. Ngô Đình Nhu-Nhà lưu trữ Việt Nam thời kỳ 1938–1946/Ngô Đình Nhu, the Vietnamese archivist during the period of 1938 to 1946, Tạp chí Nghiên cứu và Phát triển, S. 6–7 (2013).
* JFK and the Ngos&#x27; Coup – Provided by the &quot;National Security Archive&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="0" end="12" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="Ngô Đình Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="60" end="65" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="183" end="196" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="221" end="234" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913590" start="360" end="379" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces" label="ARVN Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246182" start="460" end="472" title="private army" label="private army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="482" end="489" title="Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party" label="Cần Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="609" end="622" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="828" end="842" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q856020" start="855" end="866" title="personalism" label="personalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984295" start="881" end="902" title="Person Dignity Theory" label="Person Dignity Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257296" start="1504" end="1536" title="1955 State of Vietnam referendum" label="1955 State of Vietnam referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q384080" start="1775" end="1784" title="mail bomb" label="mail bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="1788" end="1803" title="Prince Sihanouk" label="Prince Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1840" end="1848" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005868" start="2021" end="2034" title="Xá Lợi Pagoda" label="Xá Lợi Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833331" start="2083" end="2098" title="Trần Văn Chương" label="Trần Văn Chương"/>
<link wikidata="Q699241" start="2264" end="2274" title="Madame Nhu" label="Madame Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="2348" end="2363" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132490" start="2396" end="2404" title="Buddhism in Vietnam" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108995" start="2536" end="2571" title="Xá Lợi Pagoda raids" label="raids on prominent Buddhist temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="2968" end="2989" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="3072" end="3085" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Tôn Thất Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="3146" end="3164" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="the coup proceeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003866" start="3207" end="3245" title="Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem" label="detained and assassinated the next day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126165" start="3366" end="3374" title="Mandarin (bureaucrat)" label="mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728202" start="3418" end="3430" title="Ngô Đình Khả" label="Ngô Đình Khả"/>
<link wikidata="Q465059" start="3459" end="3469" title="Thành Thái" label="Thành Thái"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007830" start="3830" end="3843" title="Ngô Đình Khôi" label="Ngô Đình Khôi"/>
<link wikidata="Q738148" start="3845" end="3858" title="Ngô Đình Thục" label="Ngô Đình Thục"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="3863" end="3876" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q273570" start="4305" end="4332" title="École Nationale des Chartes" label="École Nationale des Chartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q856020" start="4460" end="4471" title="personalism" label="personalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q321621" start="4506" end="4519" title="Latin Quarter" label="Latin Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q351359" start="4589" end="4605" title="Emmanuel Mounier" label="Emmanuel Mounier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4770" end="4786" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="4914" end="4919" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q699241" start="5003" end="5013" title="Madame Nhu" label="Madame Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="5202" end="5219" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="5235" end="5241" title="Da Lat" label="Đà Lạt"/>
<link wikidata="Q769960" start="5342" end="5359" title="August Revolution" label="August Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="5374" end="5385" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Hồ Chí Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="5403" end="5412" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10828976" start="6538" end="6574" title="Vietnamese National Military Academy" label="Vietnamese National Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="7183" end="7190" title="Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party" label="Cần Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="7887" end="7893" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="8090" end="8097" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="8120" end="8136" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q848478" start="8165" end="8177" title="French Union" label="French Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022998" start="8650" end="8665" title="Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn" label="Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979793" start="8673" end="8709" title="Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam" label="Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="8765" end="8772" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470364" start="8777" end="8784" title="Cao Đài" label="Cao Đài"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019520" start="8810" end="8820" title="Bình Xuyên" label="Bình Xuyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q604897" start="9767" end="9780" title="Battle of Dien Bien Phu" label="Điện Biên Phủ"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="9804" end="9820" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022417" start="11088" end="11100" title="Ngô Đình Cẩn" label="Ngô Đình Cẩn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913590" start="11185" end="11231" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507551" start="11253" end="11266" title="Lê Quang Tung" label="Lê Quang Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="11289" end="11298" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859501" start="12400" end="12411" title="Stung Treng" label="Stung Treng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799000" start="13639" end="13655" title="Nguyễn Chánh Thi" label="Nguyễn Chánh Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943677" start="13679" end="13693" title="Vương Văn Đông" label="Vương Văn Đông"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935163" start="13730" end="13758" title="1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt" label="failed coup in November 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="13764" end="13793" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190925" start="13811" end="13824" title="Nguyễn Văn Cử" label="Nguyễn Văn Cử"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="13980" end="14004" title="Strategic Hamlet Program" label="Strategic Hamlet Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950482" start="14268" end="14282" title="Phạm Ngọc Thảo" label="Phạm Ngọc Thảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="15035" end="15050" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388358" start="15067" end="15110" title="Huế Phật Đản shootings" label="nine Buddhist protesters were killed in Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130142" start="15141" end="15154" title="Buddhist flag" label="Buddhist flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="15158" end="15163" title="Vesak" label="Vesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="15181" end="15195" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806582" start="15592" end="15608" title="Times of Vietnam" label="Times of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q271847" start="15823" end="15838" title="Thích Quảng Đức" label="Thích Quảng Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q96785422" start="16078" end="16092" title="Leaders of South Vietnam" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q142025" start="16383" end="16395" title="Peter Arnett" label="Peter Arnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q952789" start="16400" end="16414" title="Malcolm Browne" label="Malcolm Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299875" start="16556" end="16580" title="Double Seven Day scuffle" label="Double Seven Day scuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="16678" end="16682" title="photographic film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005868" start="17220" end="17233" title="Xá Lợi Pagoda" label="Xá Lợi Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498476" start="18626" end="18643" title="Frederick Nolting" label="Frederick Nolting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="19465" end="19476" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="20668" end="20718" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850514" start="21132" end="21145" title="Từ Đàm Pagoda" label="Từ Đàm Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="21195" end="21210" title="Thích Trí Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275217" start="21504" end="21518" title="Diệu Đế Pagoda" label="Diệu Đế Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310048" start="21809" end="21823" title="Huế University" label="Huế University"/>
<link wikidata="Q482355" start="22326" end="22334" title="Ấn Quang Pagoda" label="Ấn Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015627" start="23885" end="23894" title="Cable 243" label="Cable 243"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="24364" end="24380" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q864767" start="24849" end="24864" title="Gia Long Palace" label="Gia Long Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24866" end="24881" title="Roger Lalouette" label="Roger Lalouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q20871925" start="24926" end="24946" title="Ramchundur Goburdhun" label="Ramchundur Goburdhun"/>
<link wikidata="Q531138" start="25043" end="25060" title="Mieczysław Maneli" label="Mieczysław Maneli"/>
<link wikidata="Q358051" start="25242" end="25255" title="Phạm Văn Đồng" label="Phạm Văn Đồng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083797" start="25678" end="25690" title="Joseph Alsop" label="Joseph Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="26793" end="26806" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Tôn Thất Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971303" start="26931" end="26940" title="III Corps (South Vietnam)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802475" start="27087" end="27110" title="McNamara Taylor mission" label="McNamara Taylor mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="27835" end="27856" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="28197" end="28212" title="Thich Tri Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="28575" end="28579" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="28620" end="28627" title="Da Nang" label="Đà Nẵng"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="28682" end="28695" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="28805" end="28810" title="land mine" label="mined"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="28905" end="28913" title="hand grenade" label="grenaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003866" start="29679" end="29694" title="Operation Bravo" label="Operation Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="30050" end="30064" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Dương Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="30066" end="30078" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507839" start="30080" end="30090" title="Lê Văn Kim" label="Lê Văn Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q926510" start="30315" end="30330" title="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ" label="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424885" start="30344" end="30357" title="Lucien Conein" label="Lucien Conein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21194" start="30741" end="30749" title="Vũng Tàu" label="Vũng Tàu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644012" start="31109" end="31121" title="7th Division (South Vietnam)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33425" start="31131" end="31137" title="Mỹ Tho" label="Mỹ Tho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951476" start="31216" end="31229" title="Huỳnh Văn Cao" label="Huỳnh Văn Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975531" start="31256" end="31264" title="IV Corps (South Vietnam)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="31272" end="31284" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115006" start="32503" end="32510" title="Tan Son Nhut Air Base" label="airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286113" start="33039" end="33045" title="Đỗ Mậu" label="Đỗ Mậu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193617" start="33303" end="33328" title="Hoa people" label="Chinese merchant district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405555" start="33332" end="33338" title="Chợ Lớn, Ho Chi Minh City" label="Cholon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="33580" end="33592" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="33888" end="33905" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298398" start="34402" end="34414" title="5th Division (South Vietnam)" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="34426" end="34442" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="35019" end="35045" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735139" start="35120" end="35132" title="Mai Hữu Xuân" label="Mai Hữu Xuân"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197972" start="35187" end="35203" title="Dương Hiếu Nghĩa" label="Dương Hiếu Nghĩa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023046" start="35216" end="35232" title="Nguyễn Văn Nhung" label="Nguyễn Văn Nhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197972" start="35482" end="35498" title="Duong Hieu Nghia" label="Duong Hieu Nghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620992" start="35520" end="35537" title="point-blank range" label="point-blank range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752049" start="35545" end="35567" title="semi-automatic firearm" label="semi-automatic firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115006" start="37249" end="37261" title="Tan Son Nhut Air Base" label="Tan Son Nhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10800442" start="37556" end="37572" title="Ngô Đình Lệ Thủy" label="Ngô Đình Lệ Thủy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273642" start="37874" end="37879" title="ESSEC Business School" label="ESSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023191" start="38075" end="38092" title="Ngô Đình Lệ Quyên" label="Ngô Đình Lệ Quyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="38122" end="38140" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="38731" end="38756" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80093" wikidata="Q504362" url="?curid=80093" title="Nguyễn Khánh">
<text>Nguyễn Khánh (; 8 November 192711 January 2013) was a South Vietnamese military dictator and Army of the Republic of Vietnam general who served in various capacities as head of state and prime minister of South Vietnam while at the head of a military junta from January 1964 until February 1965. He was involved in or against many coup attempts, failed and successful, from 1960 until his defeat and exile from South Vietnam in 1965. Khánh lived out his later years with his family in exile in the United States. He died in 2013 in San Jose, California, at age 85.

==Early life and education==
Khánh was born in Trà Vinh in the Mekong Delta region in the far south of Vietnam (then under jurisdiction of the French Cochinchina). His mother was a property manager in the Central Highlands resort town of Đà Lạt, and lived away from the family home in the deep south. Khánh&#x27;s father was a wealthy landlord who lived in the Mekong Delta with a mistress, the popular cải lương performer Phùng Há. Khánh was brought up by his &quot;de facto&quot; stepmother. Trà Vinh is a border town near Cambodia and the family moved between both countries. Khánh began his education in Cambodia and when he grew up, he moved to Saigon to study at an elite French school, boarding with wealthy relatives.

==Việt Minh years==
In late 1945, Khánh finished his secondary studies and along with 20 fellow high school graduates left Saigon to join the communist-dominated Việt Minh, led by Hồ Chí Minh, which sought to gain independence from French colonialism. The August Revolution had just occurred and Hồ had declared independence from France in the aftermath of World War II in September under the newly proclaimed Democratic Republic of Vietnam. In his early military years, Khánh came across many other young recruits who would rise up the ranks alongside him and variously become allies and bitter rivals. One of Khánh&#x27;s Việt Minh instructors was his future enemy Phạm Ngọc Thảo, who later joined the anti-communist forces while remaining a Việt Minh agent. Khánh&#x27;s unit became the 410th Battalion and went on to fight near Cà Mau, the southernmost part of Vietnam. They started with only pieces of bamboo and had to capture or steal their weapons.

However, Khánh soon left Hồ&#x27;s forces after 15 months. He claimed that he had left the Việt Minh because of its communist inclinations, but critics claimed that he was simply switching sides because the French-backed State of Vietnam offered him more opportunities for advancement and better pay. Another account says that Khánh&#x27;s unit was relieved by a larger and stronger unit that was better trained and indoctrinated in communist ideology, and that Khánh&#x27;s band were &quot;too tired&quot; after their tour of duty and did not have the &quot;proper discipline&quot;. Khánh claimed they were removed because they were nationalists rather than communists.

In 1946, he graduated from the French Military Academy Saint-Cyr/Coëtquidan and was promoted to &quot;Indochine&quot;, and the Ecole des Troupes Aéroportées (Airborne forces) in France. In 1947, he graduated from the Vien Dong (Dap Da) Military Academy and Saumur (France) Military Academy, with the rank of lieutenant. His first assignment was as a Platoon Leader of the 1st Battalion, Attaché Officer to the Prime Minister.

==Early years in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam==
Khánh then joined the Vietnamese National Army (VNA) of the French-backed State of Vietnam under the leadership of former Emperor Bảo Đại. The State of Vietnam was an associated state of the French Union and fought in the First Indochina War alongside French forces against the Việt Minh.

Khánh was part of the first batch of Vietnamese officers trained by the French in the country. Of the 17 students who started the course, only 11 passed. The six that failed to finish and eight of the graduates defected and joined the Việt Minh. Khánh was one of only three to join the VNA. Khánh claimed he tried to dissuade his classmates to not join the Việt Minh as they were communist, but he also briefly rejoined Hồ&#x27;s side before being commissioned with the VNA.

From 1949 to 1952, he was a lieutenant and commanded the first airborne unit in the VNA after being sent to France for training. He was then promoted to the rank of captain and commanded the first ever VNA airborne drop, participating in the Hòa Bình Operation in northern Vietnam under the command of General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny. Khánh jumped with his paratroopers into the Hòa Bình after a heavy French defeat and carried out a rearguard action to cover the French retreat. He was wounded and ended as a regimental combat team. In an interview with the journalist Stanley Karnow in 1966, Khánh spoke with much pride of his service under de Lattre de Tassigny, saying &quot;We campaigned together all over the country&quot;, though Karnow noted that Khánh was being somewhat misleading in suggesting that he and de Lattre de Tassigny were friends. In another interview with Karnow in 1981, Khánh stated he became disillusioned when he learned that as an Asian man the French would always look down on him, which led him to favor the idea of a &quot;third force&quot; of anti-Communist Vietnamese nationalists who would be equally opposed to the French. In common with the other newly independent states in Africa and Asia, in the State of Vietnam there was a shortage of officers, especially for high command positions, and Khánh rose rapidly up the ranks. After the partition of Vietnam, Khánh was chosen by President Ngô Đình Diệm as the inaugural commander (titled &quot;Chief of Staff&quot;) of the Republic of Vietnam Air Force. He took a crash course in flying, and took to the air unaccompanied after 11 hours of instruction.

From 1956 to 1957, he was promoted to colonel and commanded the First Infantry Division stationed at the 17th Parallel. In 1957, he was chosen to attend the US Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, US Joint &amp; Combined School in Okinawa, Japan, and he graduated from the US High Command as Chief of Staff in France. In 1957, he was assigned as Region Commander of the Hậu Giang region, consisting of Kiến Hòa, Mỹ Tho and Vĩnh Long. He was appointed Secretary General of the Defense Ministry in 1959. In 1960, Khánh was promoted to major general and made ARVN Chief of Staff.

==Anti-coup loyalist in 1960==

In November 1960, mutinous paratroopers attempted to depose Diệm, and laid siege to Gia Long Palace. Khánh arrived on the scene and climbed over the palace wall to reach Diệm during the siege. Khánh lived close to the palace, and the plotters had tried to put him under house arrest at the start of the coup, but were unaware that he moved houses. Khánh proceeded to coordinate the loyalist defenders, along with Ky Quan Liem, the deputy director of the Civil Guard. During the standoff, Khánh met with rebel officers to keep abreast of their demands that Diệm share power. He then advised Diệm to resign due to the demands of the rebel forces and protestors outside the palace, but the president refused.

Khánh used the remaining communication lines to appeal to other senior officers outside Saigon to help, and two divisions near Saigon complied. He convinced Lê Nguyên Khang, the head of the Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps to contribute. Diệm advised Khánh to continue negotiating, and a ceasefire was organised. Diệm promised reforms, but then reneged and crushed the coup.

Khánh&#x27;s actions gained him a reputation of having helped the president, but he was later criticised for having a foot in both camps. Critics claimed that Khánh had been on good terms with the rebels and decided against rebelling when it was clear that Diệm would win. Khánh was later dispatched to the Central Highlands as the commander of the II Corps. His American advisers were impressed with him and regarded him as an effective force against the Việt Cộng. Khánh also tried to win over the indigenous Montagnard tribesmen, trying to learn their languages.

==1963 and 1964 coups==

Khánh participated in the 1963 South Vietnamese coup led by General Dương Văn Minh that deposed Diệm, playing a minor role. Khánh expected a large reward, but the junta instead sidelined him, excluding him from the twelve-man Military Revolutionary Council (MRC). In mid-December he was moved from the II Corps in the central highlands to the command of the I Corps of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, based around Huế and Đà Nẵng in the far north of the Republic of Vietnam. This, it was speculated, was to keep him as far away from Saigon as possible, as he was regarded by the others as being untrustworthy.

This was contrary to Khánh&#x27;s request for a transfer to the IV Corps in the Mekong Delta close to Saigon, where most of the unconventional fighting was taking place. In an interview with journalist Robert Shaplen, Khánh made no attempt to hide his annoyance at not being given a more important job. With respect to the 1963 coup, he cryptically commented,
&quot;It is too soon yet to tell the whole story, but someday I will tell it to you&quot;. He began to plot against Minh&#x27;s junta. Khánh claimed that &quot;After the November coup, there was much relaxation, wining and dining, and little prosecution of the war effort.&quot; He claimed he had built up intelligence infrastructure to weed out the Việt Cộng under Diệm&#x27;s rule, but that the other generals had disbanded it and released communist prisoners.

At the time, Saigon was plagued by infighting. A civilian government and cabinet led by Prime Minister Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ was appointed, but was hindered by vetoes by the generals. All twelve generals in the MRC had equal power and the power of veto. The press strongly attacked Thơ, accusing his government of being &quot;tools&quot; of the MRC. Minh was criticised for being lethargic and uninterested in running the country, while communist attacks increased and the military situation deteriorated.

At the end of December, Khánh was approached by General Đỗ Mậu, one of the principal tacticians in the removal of Diệm. Mậu had been the head of military security under Diệm and had a deep understanding of most of the senior officers and their strengths and weaknesses. The MRC feared Mậu and sidelined him, causing him to plot. Mậu began to recruit rebels. The most important link in Mậu&#x27;s plan was Colonel Nguyễn Chánh Thi, who led the 1960 coup attempt against Diệm. Mậu persuaded the junta to install Thi as Khánh&#x27;s deputy in the I Corps. He tricked the junta into doing so by reasoning that Khánh had largely been responsible for putting down the 1960 revolt and that Thi would be an ideal mechanism to keep Khánh, whom the MRC distrusted, in check. Mậu&#x27;s real reason was to use Thi would be a bridge between himself and Khánh. He was correct in thinking that the 1960 conflict would be irrelevant in the shifting allegiances over time and that the pair would work together for their current aims.

Mậu recruited a second figure in the form of General Trần Thiện Khiêm, who had worked with Mậu during the November coup. Khiêm had assisted Diệm in putting down the 1960 plot and had since been demoted from being Chief of Staff of the ARVN to the commander of the III Corps that surrounded Saigon. Khiêm readily joined the plot and controlled the troops near the capital. Khiêm, Khánh and Mậu kept in touch surreptitiously on a regular basis, supplementing their forces with an assortment of Marine, Air Force and Special Forces officers. Another notable recruit was the chief of the Civil Guard, Dương Ngọc Lâm. He was under investigation by the junta for swindling military funds and was readily converted. Another was General Dương Văn Đức, who had recently returned from exile in Paris.

At the time, there was innuendo that the MRC would become neutralist and stop fighting the communists, and that they were plotting with French President Charles de Gaulle, who supported such a solution in order to remove the US presence. De Gaulle had just recognized the People&#x27;s Republic of China as the legitimate government of China, a move that angered the US government, which still recognized the Republic of China on Taiwan as the rightful government of China, and was supporting the neutralization of South East Asia. The French recognition of the People&#x27;s Republic of China led American officials to see de Gaulle&#x27;s neutralist plans as pro-communist. Khánh&#x27;s allies concocted documents purporting to show that Generals Minh, Lê Văn Kim and Trần Văn Đôn were making neutralist moves, and the papers were leaked to some senior American officials. Khánh sometimes plotted while in Saigon on military affairs, and told various American officials that Đôn, Kim and General Mai Hữu Xuân, along with Minh, were &quot;pro-French and pro-neutralist&quot; and part of de Gaulle&#x27;s plan. Khánh claimed the fact that Đôn had invited two members of the French National Assembly, both from de Gaulle&#x27;s party, to dine with him, Kim and Minh as proof. The American ambassador in Saigon, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., believed in the rumors that Kim and Đôn favored neutrality for South Vietnam in the Cold War.

On 28 January, Khánh flew from Huế to Saigon in civilian clothes, ostensibly for a dental appointment. A number of American officers and embassy officials were alerted to be in their offices at two o&#x27;clock in the morning of 30 January. The US Ambassador, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., was kept fully informed throughout the night.

Before dawn on 30 January, Khánh surrounded the military headquarters at Tân Sơn Nhứt Air Base. Meanwhile, Khiêm had overslept when he was supposed to seal off the homes of the junta members. Despite this, by daybreak, Khánh had taken over the government without a shot having been fired. In his first radio broadcast on the same morning, Khánh assailed the MRC&#x27;s performance during its three months at the top. He said, &quot;The political, economic, and social situation in the countryside still offers no promising prospect. There has not been one single compensation worthy of the sacrifices accepted daily by the soldiers.&quot;

US officials in Washington were caught off guard by the coup. Although Khánh had already told CIA officer Lucien Conein (who helped to plan the coup against Diệm) in December 1963 that he intended to hold a coup, it was filed away among the many political rumour documents that were received by the American representatives. Following the coup, he was promoted by the Americans as South Vietnam&#x27;s new hope. In a dispatch to Washington, Cabot Lodge wrote: &quot;We have everything we need in Vietnam. The United States has provided military advice, training, equipment, economic and social help, and political advice...Therefore, our side knows how to do it. We have the means to it. We simply need to do it. This requires a tough and ruthless commander. Perhaps Khánh is it&quot;.

==Setting up the junta==
Khánh used de Gaulle&#x27;s policy plans to enact retribution against Generals Đôn and Kim. Khánh had them arrested on grounds of neutralism. Khánh noted that they had served in the French-backed VNA, although he did as well. The generals were flown to My Khe beach, near Đà Nẵng, along with Generals Tôn Thất Đính and Mai Hữu Xuân, the interior minister and police chief, respectively, of the MRC. However, Khánh was unable to produce any proof that Đôn and Kim had been working with the French agents to create a neutralist government in Saigon, and the case collapsed in court, with Khánh instead pressing for charges of &quot;lax morality&quot; to compensate for his failure to find any evidence supporting his claim of a French conspiracy.

Khánh also had Major Nguyễn Văn Nhung, the bodyguard of Minh, shot. Nhung had executed Diệm and his brother Ngô Đình Nhu in the 1963 coup, as well as the loyalist Special Forces head Colonel Lê Quang Tung, and claimed it to be suicide. On 31 January 1964, Nhung was forced to kneel in a garden behind a Saigon villa and was shot once in the head by one of Khánh&#x27;s bodyguards, through the official story was that Nhung had hanged himself out of guilt for executing the Diệm brothers. Karnow wrote that Nhung was a &quot;professional assassin&quot; known for his love of killing, but his symbolic importance outweighed his unsavory and brutal life. Nhung had become a symbol of anti-Diệmism, and his execution lead to fears that Diệm&#x27;s policies and loyalists would return. This resulted in riots in Saigon, notably among Buddhists who were persecuted by Diệm. Of the 14 Buddhist sects in South Vietnam, the heads of 11 of them agreed to form an alliance to oppose the Khánh regime, which was seen as favoring the same Vietnamese Catholics who had been favored under Diệm. Tri Quang, the Buddhist monk who had organized protests against Diệm in 1963, was planning to go on a pilgrimage to &quot;bury my life&quot; in India, Japan and Ceylon when he heard of Nhung&#x27;s execution, and instead decided to stay in South Vietnam to challenge the new government.

Khánh proclaimed himself as the new head of state and chairman of the MRC, replacing Minh. Khánh later managed to persuade Minh to remain as a figurehead head of state due to American pressure. They reasoned that the popular Minh would be a unifying and stabilising factor in the new régime and provide continuity. However, Khánh soon came to dominate the MRC. Khánh turned out to be far more politically astute and vigorous than his predecessors, seeking out veteran Vietnamese politicians and technicians to create a new government. A week after coming to power, Khánh summoned Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn, a Roman Catholic who was one of the former leaders of the southern branch of the Catholic-aligned Đại Việt Quốc Dân Dảng (Greater Vietnam Nationalist Party). Hoàn had been exiled in Paris during the Diệm era, but remained active, publishing a magazine and keeping up to speed with developments in Vietnam. Hoàn had generated little popular following during his campaign for power in the 1940s and 1950s and was unable to form a government as prime minister when he returned. Hoàn was unpopular with the younger members of the Đại Việt who complained that he was too old and had spent too much time in exile to really understand modern Vietnam. Khánh decided to act as both Prime Minister and chairman of the reorganised MRC, which he expanded to include 17 generals and 32 further officers, giving a total of 50 members.

Khánh made Hoàn the first Deputy Prime Minister in charge of rural pacification. Khánh gave Hoàn five ministries, including the Interior, National Defense and Rural Affairs and two special commissions, which were primarily engaged in consolidating the strategic hamlets of Ngô Đình Nhu into the renamed New Rural Life Hamlets. A second Deputy Prime Ministerial post was given to Harvard University trained banker and economist Nguyễn Xuân Oánh, who was associated with the Đại Việt. Oánh was charged with managing the finance and economy of the country. Mậu was the third deputy, overseeing social and cultural affairs.

Khánh selected a cabinet of thirteen ministers and two Secretaries of State at Cabinet level and chose new provincial and district chiefs. He originally tried to include members of a variety of political and religious groups including representatives of the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo, which still had remnants of their private armies intact after their dismantling by Diệm in 1955. Although Khánh insisted that he had no party affiliation, the orientation of his government was toward the Đại Việt, who held many key posts. This provoked bitterness from other anti-communist nationalists and groups that were banned under the Diệm period and were seeking a greater role in the public life of South Vietnam, as well as from younger citizens who felt that the established nationalist parties were responsible for divisions in the country.

In the meantime, the government continued to lose the war against the guerrillas of the National Liberation Front, better known as the Viet Cong, which increased the tempo of their operations in the countryside and began a campaign of assassinations and bombings in Saigon targeting government officials and American advisers. In late February 1964, the government suffered a humiliating debacle when an outnumbered Viet Cong battalion in the Mekong delta were surrounded by 3, 000 of the &quot;best&quot; South Vietnamese troops. Despite being outnumbered and outgunned, the Viet Cong fought off the attacks and were able to escape from the pocket as the South Vietnamese Army were unwilling to fight without air support and artillery support. The fact that the troops engaged in this operation had been graded as among the very &quot;best&quot; soldiers in the entire South Vietnamese Army by the American advisers who had trained them added to the humiliation. In the aftermath, Khánh sacked 3 out of the 4 corps commanders and 5 out of the 9 division commanders, complaining that the army was led by officers unwilling to fight. In Washington, the news that despite the fact that South Vietnam had received American military aid worth hundreds of millions of dollars and had its army trained by American officers that the South Vietnamese Army was still incapable of winning battles provoked much worry about what was going on in South Vietnam. Lyman Kirkpatrick, the inspector-general of the CIA, visited the American embassy in Saigon that same month, and reported to Washington that he was &quot;...shocked by the number of our people and of the military, even those whose job is always to say that we are winning, who feel the tide is against us&quot;.

Starting on 8 March 1964, the US Defense Secretary, Robert McNamara, visited South Vietnam for four days to assess the military situation and to let the South Vietnamese people know that the United States was firmly behind Khánh. Speaking carefully memorized phrases in badly mangled Vietnamese (McNamara kept forgetting Vietnamese is a tonal language) in a series of speeches McNamara praised Khánh as the &quot;best possible leader&quot; that South Vietnam had and urged all South Vietnamese people to back his government. McNamara&#x27;s visit was a disaster for Khánh&#x27;s image as the Americans believed that the South Vietnamese people would back his government more effectively if they knew that the United States was supporting him; to Vietnamese ears, McNamara&#x27;s speeches came across as arrogant and colonialist as it seemed that he was telling the Vietnamese that they should follow Khánh because the United States wanted them to do. As a result, Khánh came to be seen as an American stooge by many of his people. Upon his return to Washington, McNamara told President Johnson that the situation had &quot;unquestionably been growing worse&quot; since his last trip to South Vietnam in December 1963; that 40% of the countryside was under &quot;Vietcong control or predominant influence&quot;; while the Vietcong was &quot;recruiting energetically&quot; desertions in the South Vietnamese Army were &quot;high and increasing&quot;; and finally the South Vietnamese people were overcome by &quot;apathy and indifference&quot; as no one it seemed really wanted to save South Vietnam. Despite his public praise of Khánh, McNamara told Johnson that the &quot;greatest weakness&quot; was the &quot;uncertain viability of Khánh&#x27;s regime, which might crumble at any moment in another coup&quot;. However, McNamara&#x27;s conclusion was that the weakness of Khánh&#x27;s regime meant that the United States should increase its involvement in Vietnam as McNamara recommend that the United States should drastically increase its military and economic aid to South Vietnam, advice that was accepted in an &quot;action memorandum&quot; issued by the National Security Council shortly afterwards.

Khánh promised that the village elections that were abolished under Diệm would be held as soon as feasible and that a new National Assembly would be elected within a year. He started by abolishing the Council of Notables, an advisory body. Many Vietnamese and American observers considered this rash and premature, as promises of elections had been frequently broken and the council had at least been an effective forum for dissent in the absence of parliamentary representation.

However, Khánh received little assistance from Minh, who resented his deposal by a younger officer whom he viewed as an unscrupulous upstart. Minh was also upset with the detention of his colleagues and around 30 of his junior officers. The latter were set free when Minh demanded that Khánh release them as a condition for his cooperation. Khánh attempted to avoid the issue of substantiating the alleged plot as long as he could, and then claimed that French agents were attempting to assassinate him and implement neutralism. Khánh offered no evidence, only claiming that the French had paid a hit man US$1,300 to kill him, before later inflating the supposed reward for his assassination. US intelligence officials in Vietnam found the story spurious.

===Trial of rival generals===
Khánh presided over the trial of the MRC members, which took place in May 1964. Minh was accused of misusing money before being allowed to serve as an advisor on the trial panel. The generals were interrogated for five and a half hours, and the military court deliberated for over nine hours. When it reconvened for the verdict, Khánh stated, &quot;We ask that once you begin to serve again in the army, you do not take revenge on anybody&quot;. The tribunal &quot;congratulated&quot; the generals, but found that they were of &quot;lax morality&quot;, unqualified to command due to a &quot;lack of a clear political concept&quot;. They were chastised for being &quot;inadequately aware of their heavy responsibility&quot; and of letting &quot;their subordinates take advantage of their positions&quot;. They were allowed to remain in Đà Lạt under surveillance with their families.

All four were barred from commanding troops for various periods. Offices were prepared for the quartet so that they could participate in &quot;research and planning&quot;. Khánh made some preliminary arrangements to send the generals to the United States for military study so that they could not stage a coup, but this fell through. Khánh&#x27;s actions left divisions among the officer corps of the ARVN. When Khánh was himself deposed in 1965, he handed over dossiers proving that the generals were innocent. Shaplen said &quot;the case ... continued to be one of Khánh&#x27;s biggest embarrassments&quot;.

==Rule==
As with the Minh junta, Khánh&#x27;s ascension resulted in the replacement of a large number of province and district chiefs, causing disruption to the functioning of the government. Khánh initially appointed some pro-Diệm officials who had been relieved by Minh, but after protests from Buddhists, who decried what they saw as a reversion to Diệmism, Khánh stopped this practice, and removed some of the Diệm supporters that he had reappointed. He then jailed some Diệm supporters. Khánh installed some officers based on loyalty rather than competency as he feared a coup. This compounded the already problematic lack of trained civil servants, a problem that had existed since the French era. Khánh adopted some of Diệm&#x27;s conservative social policies, reinstating the ban on dancing &quot;The Twist&quot;. Karnow wrote that Khánh as leader &quot;...spent most of his time maneuvering against internal rivals, with the result that he neglected his administrative duties, which bored him anyway&quot;.

By 1964, the United States was giving South Vietnam aid worth some $2 million per day, yet owing to rampant corruption in the government most South Vietnamese civil servants were paid late if at all. The ambitious plans for &quot;rural pacification&quot; which called for the United States to provide free medical care, new wells, and ultimately hydroelectricity in the rural areas collapsed in 1964 as the money intended for &quot;rural pacification&quot; was instead stolen by corrupt officials. As it was repeatedly promised that with American assistance South Vietnam would be soon making the transition from a Third World to a First World country, the collapse of the &quot;rural pacification&quot; schemes left many ordinary people disillusioned. Khánh promised McNamara during his visit that he would put South Vietnam on a &quot;war footing&quot; by mobilizing the entire male population of military age to fight against the Vietcong. Khánh passed a national service law which in theory would have conscripted all South Vietnamese men of military age, but he never fully implemented it, blaming &quot;complicated bureaucratic procedures&quot; left over from French rule. In fact, Khánh came under pressure from the many wealthy South Vietnamese families to spare their sons from being drafted, and to keep their support, Khánh provided many exemptions in his national service law to allow the sons of middle and upper-class families from being conscripted. The way in which the burden of conscription fell only upon the sons of poorer families made Khánh unpopular with the poor who complained about the way in which the sons of better off families escaped military service.

The activist Buddhist leader Thích Trí Quang continued to criticise Khánh and accused him of jailing Buddhists. Khánh was in a quandary, as he could be perceived as being too soft on Diệm supporters, or being vindictive towards Roman Catholics. To placate Trí Quang, Khánh agreed to remove all Roman Catholic chaplains from the military. Khánh sentenced Major Đặng Sỹ, the Roman Catholic officer who had overseen the Huế Vesak shootings of Buddhists protesting Diệm&#x27;s ban on the Buddhist flag on 8 May 1963 to a life sentence of hard labour, and sentenced Diệm&#x27;s younger brother, Ngô Đình Cẩn, the &quot;de facto&quot; warlord of central Vietnam, to death. This occurred over the private objections of US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., who thought that it was best for Khánh to take a mild line to dampen religious tensions. Cẩn was executed by firing squad on 9 May. Thích Trí Quang remained critical of what he saw as a lack of vigour on the part of Khánh in removing Diệmists from positions of authority.

Khánh had no prior political experience and turned to Lodge for advice. Lodge advised him to pursue a policy of inclusion of the various groups in Vietnamese society, and Khánh followed this counsel. Upon American advice, Khánh tried to generate a popular rapport by engaging in Western-style political campaigning and community meetings. He frequently flew around the countryside, meeting peasants, shaking hands and making speeches. In August, he became the first leader of South Vietnam to tour the central coast; Diệm had never bothered to visit the public. He made appearances on the streets of Saigon, speaking to the by passers and asking them for their opinions on the state of the nation. However, Khánh remained hesitant on democracy, saying, &quot;we cannot achieve full democracy for some time, perhaps for another generation or two&quot;. Lodge agreed and privately said that the war effort had to come first, and thus a police state, curtailment of civil rights and crackdowns on opposition politicians were reasonable in order to effectively counter the communists. During this time, Khánh&#x27;s régime suffered several military setbacks, such as the Battle of Long Dinh.

In March, Khánh began privately advocating that the US attack jungle areas in Laos and North Vietnam near the border with South Vietnam to stop communist infiltration, saying that it was pointless to keep fighting defensively within the country without taking the initiative to stop incoming forces. Khánh made plans with conservative Laotian General Phoumi Nosovan for anti-communist incursions into eastern Laos, but the Americans stopped him and leaked false reports to the media that he was reluctant to attack. As a result, Khánh concluded that a military victory might not be feasible and one of his officials made contacts with the communists to see if negotiation was possible, but nothing came of this approach.

In July, Khánh called for the expansion of the war into North Vietnam. At a rally on 19 July in Saigon that attracted around 100,000 people, he said that the &quot;Communists are the aggressors, not us ... If we were to go back to the north, it should be termed a counterattack.&quot; He symbolically took soil from two containers representative the divided nation, and mixed them together to promote his reunification plan, under anti-communist rule. He said, &quot;We have often heard that the people have called for the war to be carried to the North ... The government cannot remain indifferent before the firm determination of all the people who are considering the push northward as an appropriate means to fulfil out national history.&quot; He then led the demonstrators in shouting, &quot;To the North&quot; repeatedly. Khánh&#x27;s call for an invasion of North Vietnam, deeply worried President Johnson, who feared an invasion of North Vietnam would cause a war with China in the same way that the approach of U.S. forces upon the Yalu river caused China to intervene in the Korean War in 1950. Johnson told Khánh that he should focus on &quot;pacifying&quot; his own country and the United States was opposed to his plans to invade North Vietnam. In a radio broadcast, the North Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh mocked Khánh for his &quot;sheer stupidity&quot;, sneeringly asking &quot;How can he talk about marching north when he cannot even control areas in the immediate vicinity of Saigon?&quot; At the time, the US had no ambassador in Saigon, as Lodge had returned home to campaign for the Republican Party&#x27;s presidential nomination, and his successor, Maxwell Taylor, was yet to arrive. When Taylor arrived, the US tried to publicly distance itself from Khánh&#x27;s demands to invade North Vietnam and to downplay it, as it wanted to portray the communists as the only aggressors and that they had no intentions of going on the attack in any form, but they were sympathetic to his sentiment. Privately, they did not rule out a policy along Khánh&#x27;s line.

In part, the American reluctance to escalate was due to the impending elections and a desire to not scare the electorate. In a meeting with Ambassador Taylor, Khánh assured the American envoy that his was a political gesture that should be seen as a show. However, it spread to the government-moderated press, and some generals expressed similar sentiments. Khánh then told Taylor that he had to allow Southerners to express their aspirations to unify Vietnam on their own terms and that plans were being explored. He thus refused to publicly renege from his calls for an attack on North Vietnam. In August, the Vietnam War expanded with the Gulf of Tonkin incident, a disputed encounter between North Vietnamese and American naval vessels in which Washington accused the communists of attacking their boats in international waters. Khánh publicly called on the Americans to strike back in order to project a strong image and avoid resembling a &quot;paper tiger&quot;.

US President Lyndon Johnson was given more military powers as a result of the incident. After the second incident (which is believed to have been false), Johnson replied with air strikes, which Khánh praised. Seeing the tense situation as an opportunity to concentrate more power in his hands, Khánh declared a state of emergency on 7 August, empowering the police to ban protests, search properties under any circumstances and arbitrarily jail &quot;elements considered as dangerous to national security&quot;. He imposed censorship to stop &quot;the circulation of all publications, documents, and leaflets considered as harmful to public order&quot;. Taylor reported to President Johnson that Khánh regime was &quot;an ineffective government beset by inexperienced ministers who are also jealous and suspicious of each other&quot;.&quot; However, Taylor despite his doubts, advised Johnson that Khánh was the best leader for South Vietnam at the present and to change the leadership again would be a &quot;disaster&quot;.

===Vũng Tàu Charter===
Khánh drafted a new constitution, known as the &quot;Vũng Tàu Charter&quot;, which would have augmented his personal power and hamstrung Minh of what authority he had left. However, this only served to weaken Khánh as large demonstrations and riots broke out in the cities, with the Buddhists prominent, calling for an end to the state of emergency and the new constitution. Thích Trí Quang thought that, as Khánh would not use his power to remove Diệmists, it was merely an expression of megalomania. Some of the riots were sectarian, resulting in several deaths. Information Ministry buildings and radio stations were set on fire.

During one protest in which thousands of people were chanting &quot;down with military dictatorship&quot;, Khánh confronted the crowd and joined the opposition in their shouting, claiming that he was not what they claimed him to be, rather than cracking down on them. Fearing he could be toppled by the momentum of the protests, Khánh asked Quang, Chau and Minh to hold talks with him at Vũng Tàu on 24 August. They refused and Khánh had to go to Saigon to try to get them to stop protesting against him, demonstrating his weakness. They asked him to repeal the new constitution, reinstate civilian rule, and remove Cần Lao members from power. They asked Khánh to announce these measures publicly, else they would organize a widespread movement of passive resistance. US Ambassador Maxwell Taylor recommended that Khánh ignore the demands, as he regarded the Buddhist activists as a minority group, but Khánh thought to dampen religious tensions by agreeing to the Buddhist proposals. Khiêm claimed &quot;Khánh felt there was no choice but to accept, since the influence of Trí Quang was so great that he could not only turn the majority of the people against the government but could influence the effectiveness of the armed forces&quot;.

Needing support to stay afloat, Khánh released a &quot;communiqué&quot; after the meeting, promising to revise the constitution, liberalise the press, permit protests and start special courts to look into past grievances. This prompted more protests by activists and Khánh responded with wider concessions, which he convinced the Military Revolutionary Council to assent to. Under this plan, the new constitution would be repealed, and the MRC would dissolve itself. He then paid US$300,000 to Buddhist groups in return for their public endorsement, which Khánh publicly used to highlight his support. In return, Khánh promised to create a National Assembly within a year. Many senior officers decried what they viewed as a handing of power to the Buddhist leaders, who alleged that the concessions were playing into the hands of neutralists, easing the pressure on communist activities.

==Junta infighting==
Khánh&#x27;s concessions sparked opposition from Khiêm and Thiệu, both Catholic. They tried to remove him in favour of Minh, and they recruited many officers into their plot. Khiêm and Thiệu sought out Taylor and sought a private endorsement for a coup against Khánh, however the US ambassador did not want any more changes in leadership, fearing a corrosive effect on the government. This deterred Khiêm&#x27;s group from staging a coup.

The division among the generals came to a head at a meeting of the MRC on 26/27 August. Khánh claimed that the government instability was due to troublemaking by Đại Việt members, whom he accused of putting partisan plotting ahead of the national interest and the struggle against the communists. Khiêm blamed Khánh&#x27;s weakness in dealing with Buddhist activists as the reason for the demonstrations in the cities and the rural losses against the communists. Thiệu and General Nguyễn Hữu Có, also a Catholic, called for the replacement of Khánh with Minh, but the latter refused. Minh reportedly claimed that Khánh was the only one who would get funding from Washington, so they support him, prompting Khiêm to angrily declare that &quot;Obviously, Khánh is a puppet of the US government, and we are tired of being told by the Americans how we should run our internal affairs&quot;. Feeling under pressure after the condemnations of his colleagues, Khánh said that he would resign. However no remedy was formulated and another meeting was convened.

After more arguing between the senior officers, they agreed that Khánh, Minh, and Khiêm would rule as a triumvirate for two months, until a new civilian government could be formed. The trio then brought paratroopers into Saigon to end the rioting. However, the triumvirate did little else due to the lack of unity in the ruling triumvirate. Khánh dominated the decision-making and sidelined Khiêm and Minh. He also released many of the rioters who had forced him to back down on his powergrab and liberalised the press after more anti-government protests. US military commander William Westmoreland deplored the concessions Khánh made to political opponents and began to lobby Washington to allow him to attack North Vietnam, saying that Khánh could not survive. He gained some support among Johnson&#x27;s advisors, but the president resisted the pressure.

==Attempted coup by Generals Phát and Đức and further instability==
In September 1964, Khánh dismissed General Lâm Văn Phát as Interior Minister, while General Dương Văn Đức was about to be removed as IV Corps commander. Both were removed as known Diệmists due to pressure from Buddhist activists. Disgruntled, the pair launched a coup attempt before dawn on 13 September, using ten army battalions that they had recruited. They took over the city without any firing, and used the national radio station to proclaim the deposal of Khánh&#x27;s junta. Phat said that he would use the ideology and legacy of Diệm to lay the foundation for his new junta. There was little reaction from most of the military commanders.

However, Phát and Đức could not apprehend Khánh, who had escaped the capital and flew to the central highlands resort town of Đà Lạt. American officials flew after Khánh to encourage him to return to Saigon and reassert his control. He refused to do so unless the Americans publicly announced their support for him to the nation. They then asked Khánh about his plans for the future, but felt that he was directionless. After talking to Phát and Đức, they concluded the same, thus deciding to publicly release a statement through the embassy endorsing Khánh. This helped deter ARVN officers from joining Phát and Đức, who decided to give up. Khánh returned to Saigon and put down the putsch, aided mainly by the Vietnamese Air Force, under the leadership of Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ, whose political star began to rise. Kỳ had Air Force jets flew over the headquarters of the coup leaders while threatening to bomb them if they did not surrender immediately. Khánh imprisoned Lam and Đức for two months. He then removed three of the four corps commanders and six of the nine division commanders for failing to move against Lam and Đức. The Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, sent a message to Taylor to deliver to Khánh stating: &quot;The United States has not provided massive assistance to South Vietnam, in military equipment, economic resources, and personnel in order to subsidize continuing quarrels among South Vietnamese leaders.

On 19/20 September, an armed revolt by Montagnards serving in the armed forces took place. The indigenous paramilitaries took control of four military camps in Darlac Province, killing 70 ARVN troops of Vietnamese ethnicity, and then taking a number of others and their US advisers hostage. However, the Americans eventually convinced the Montagnards to stop, after Khánh made concessions. On 20 September, the Vietnamese Confederation of Labor and their 300,000 members staged a general strike for two days, causing electricity in the cities to be cut for two days. This prompted Khánh to make concessions to laborers. This was followed by other protests and riots in some cities, the largest being in the southern coastal town of Quy Nhơn where the public service stopped functioning for a short period. In some areas of I Corps, the commanders were not disturbed by the unrest so they did nothing to stop them.

Ambassador Maxwell Taylor deplored the repeated concessions, saying that &quot;Khánh contributes further to the atmosphere of weakness that increasingly surrounds him&quot; and that he &quot;has survived only by making virtually unending concessions to every pressure group that has presented itself. There is general recognition that such a process cannot continue indefinitely and still have anything left deserving the name of a government. We are now close to that stage&quot;.

Khánh and his generals created a semblance of civilian rule by creating the High National Council, an appointed advisory body. He put Minh in charge of picking the 17 members of the group, and he filled it with figures sympathetic to him. They then made a resolution to recommend a model with a powerful head of state, which would likely be Minh. Khánh did not want his rival taking power, so he and the Americans convinced the HNC to dilute the powers of the position so as to make it unappealing to Minh, who was then sent on an overseas diplomatic goodwill tour.

The HNC, which covered a wide cross-section of different social groups, selected the aging Phan Khắc Sửu as chief of state, and Sửu selected Trần Văn Hương as Prime Minister, a position with greater power, but the generals and Khánh retained the real power. At the same time, a group of Catholic officers was trying to replace Khánh with Thiệu. Hương took a firm line against the Buddhists, accusing Thích Trí Quang of being a Communist, who in turn charged Hương with being a Diệmist, and responded with mass protests against the new civilian administration, calling for its removal. Huong used the army to break up the demonstrations, resulting in violent confrontations.

By the end of the year, Khánh had sidelined Khiêm and Minh. He despatched Khiêm to Washington as the ambassador with Thảo, his main confidant, as his press attaché. In late December 1964, Khánh summoned Thảo back to Saigon. Thảo suspected Khánh was attempting to have him killed, while Khánh thought Khiêm and Thảo were plotting against him. Fearing he would be arrested upon arrival, Thảo went underground upon returning to Saigon. In mid-January 1965, Khánh called for Thảo to report to his superiors in the ARVN, warning that he would be &quot;considered guilty of abandoning his post with all the consequences of such a situation&quot; if he failed to do so.

Khánh and a group of younger officers called the &quot;Young Turks&quot;, led by Kỳ and Thiệu wanted to forcibly retire officers with more than 25 years of service, as they thought them to be lethargic and ineffective. Most of the older officers had more experience under the French colonial era, and some of the younger men saw them as too detached from the new era.

One of the aims of this was to remove Generals Đôn, Minh, Kim and Xuân, who Khánh had put under arrest after his January coup but had now released and put into meaningless desk jobs with no work to do, although they were still being paid. According to Khánh and the &quot;Young Turks&quot;, the group, led by Minh, who had returned from his overseas tour, had been making plots with the Buddhists to regain power. Sửu&#x27;s signature was required to pass the ruling, but he referred the matter to the HNC.

The HNC turned down the request, which was speculated to be due to the fact that many of them were themselves old, and did not appreciate the negative attitude towards seniors; some South Vietnamese called the HNC the High National Museum. On 19 December, a Sunday, the generals dissolved the High National Council, a civilian advisory body. In any case, the HNC had already ceased to function in a meaningful way, as only 9 of the 17 members were still occasionally attending its meetings.

===Deposal of the High National Council===
Before dawn, there were troop movements in the capital, as the junta deposed the civilians. The operation was commanded by Thi,
who had travelled into Saigon from I Corps, and Kỳ. The national police, which was under the control of the army, moved through the streets, arresting five HNC members and other politicians and student leaders they deemed to be an obstacle. Minh and the other older generals were arrested and flown to Pleiku, a Central Highlands town in a Montagnard area, while other military officers were simply imprisoned. They arrested around 100 members of the National Salvation Council of Lê Khắc Quyến, a new party active in central Vietnam with an anti-war ideology, aligned with Thi and Thích Trí Quang. As Thi was active in the purge, it was believed that the Quyến had fallen out with Thi in I Corps. At this point, Khánh had not spoken up and allowed the impression that the moves have been against his will, and a move on the part of other officers to take power for themselves. Huong had actually privately endorsed the dissolution of the HNC, as both he and the Young Turks thought it would allow them to gain more power and thus influence over Khánh.

===Falling out with the Americans===
The infighting exasperated Maxwell Taylor, the US ambassador to South Vietnam and former Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, who felt that the disputes between the junta&#x27;s senior officers were derailing the war effort. Only a few days later Westmoreland had invited him and the generals to a dinner and asked for an end to the changes in leadership, which Khánh and his men assured would be the case. Westmoreland warned them that persistent instability would turn American political and public opinion against Saigon, fearing it would be useless to support such a regime. Initially Taylor issued a thinly disguised threat to cut aid, releasing a public statement saying that Washington might reconsider its military aid if &quot;the fabric of legal government&quot; was not reinstated.

Taylor summoned the generals to his office, and Khánh sent Thi, Kỳ, Thiệu and Vice Admiral Cang, the commander of the navy. He asked the four to sit down and then asked &quot;Do all of you understand English?&quot;. The ambassador then angrily denounced the generals. According to Stanley Karnow, Taylor &quot;launched into a tirade, scolding them as if he were still superintendent of West Point and they a group of cadets caught cheating&quot;. He said &quot;I told you all clearly at General Westmoreland&#x27;s dinner we Americans were tired of coups. Apparently I wasted my words.&quot; He decried the removal of the HNC as &quot;totally illegal&quot; and said that &quot;... you have made a real mess. We cannot carry you forever if you do things like this.&quot; Taylor believed that the HNC was an essential part of the governance of the country, because as an American, he believed that civilian legitimacy was necessary. He declared that if the military did not transfer some powers or advisory capacity to the HNC or another civilian institution, then aid would be withheld, and some planned military operations against the Hồ Chí Minh trail that was being used to infiltrate communists into the south would be suspended.

The four officers were taken aback by Taylor&#x27;s searing words and felt that they had been humiliated. A decade after the incident, Kỳ wrote that Taylor was &quot;the sort of man who addressed people rather than talked to them&quot;, referencing the confrontation. Karnow said that &quot;For the sake of their own pride, they [the officers] resented being treated in ways that reminded them of their almost total dependence on an alien power. How could they preserve a sense of sovereignty when Taylor, striving to push them into &#x27;getting things done&#x27;, behaved like a viceroy?&quot; Thi was seen by a CIA officer soon after, grinning. When asked why he was happy, Thi said &quot;Because this is one of the happiest days of my life ... Today I told the American ambassador that he could not dictate to us.&quot;

Khánh&#x27;s quartet of delegates responded to Taylor by responding in a circumlocutory way. They remained calm and did not resort to direct confrontation. Kỳ said the change was necessary, as &quot;the political situation is worse than it ever was under Diệm&quot;. Kỳ explained that the situation mandated the dissolution of the council, saying &quot;We know you want stability, but you cannot have stability until you have unity&quot;. He claimed that some HNC members were disseminating coup rumors and creating doubt among the population and that &quot;both military and civilian leaders regard the presence of these people in the High National Council as divisive of the Armed Forces due to their influence&quot;. Kỳ then promised that he would explain the decision at a media conference and that he and his colleagues would return to their military roles in the near future. Thiệu said &quot;I do not see how our action has hurt the Hương government ... Hương now has the full support of the Army and has no worries from the High National Council, which we have eliminated&quot;. When Taylor said that the moves detracted from Hương and Sửu&#x27;s powers, the generals disagreed, and said that they supported the pair in full and that Hương had approved of the deposal of the HNC. Taylor was unimpressed by the reassurances, saying at the meeting&#x27;s end, &quot;I don&#x27;t know whether we will continue to support you after this ... [Y]ou people have broken a lot of dishes and now we have to see how we can straighten out this mess&quot;.

Taylor met Hương and urged the prime minister to reject the dissolution of the HNC. Hương said that he and Suu had not been notified of the moves, but agreed to step in to take over the work of the body. Taylor asked Hương to publicly condemn the deposal of the HNC and to call on the army to release those arrested in the coup. Hương said he would be willing to reorganize his administration to the wishes of the military. Taylor warned that the US did not agree with military rule as a principle, and might reduce aid, but Hương was unmoved and said that the Vietnamese people &quot;take a more sentimental than legalistic approach&quot; and that the existence of civilian procedure and the HNC was much less pressing than the &quot;moral prestige of the leaders&quot;. American military advisers and intelligence officers who liaised with senior junta members found out that they were unconcerned with any possible legal ramifications of their actions.

Later, the quartet called a media conference, where they maintained that the HNC had been dissolved in the nation&#x27;s interest and vowed to stand firm and not renege on their decision, although they proclaimed their ongoing confidence for Sửu and Hương. Two days later, went public in support of the coup against the HNC, condemning the advisory body and asserting the army&#x27;s right to step into government matters if &quot;disputes and differences create a situation favorable to the common enemies: Communism and colonialism.&quot; They announced that they had formed a new body called the Armed Forces Council.

The day after the press conference, Taylor met Khánh in a private meeting at the latter&#x27;s office. He complained about the dissolution of the HNC and said that it did not accord with the values of the alliance and the loyalty that Washington expected of Saigon. Khánh replied that Vietnam was not a satellite of Washington and compared the situation to the US support of a coup against Diệm, saying that loyalty was meant to be reciprocated. Taylor then bemoaned Khánh, saying he had lost confidence in him. Taylor added that military supplies being shipped to Vietnam would be withheld after arriving at Saigon and that American help in planning and advising military operations would be suspended.

Khánh bristled and said that &quot;You should keep to your place as Ambassador ... as Ambassador, it is really not appropriate for you to be dealing in this way with the commander-in-chief of the armed forces on a political matter, nor was it appropriate for you to have summoned some of my generals to the Embassy yesterday.&quot; He threatened to expel Taylor, who said that his forced departure would mean the end of US support for South Vietnam. However, Khánh later said he was open to the possibility of going abroad and asked Taylor if he thought this would be good for the country, to which the ambassador replied in the affirmative. Khánh ended the meeting, saying that he would think about his future.

Later, Khánh phoned Taylor from his office and expressed his desire to resign and go abroad along with several other generals, asking for the Americans to fund the costs of travel. He then Taylor the list of generals for whom arrangements needed to be made, and then asked the ambassador to repeat the names for confirmation. Taylor did so, unaware that Khánh was taping the dialogue. Afterwards, Khánh played back the tape out of context to his colleagues, giving them the impression that Taylor was calling for them to be expelled. Khánh asked his colleagues to participate in a campaign of fomenting anti-American street protests and to give the impression that the country did not need aid from Washington.

On 22 December, Khánh went back on his promise to leave the country and announced on Radio Vietnam that &quot;We make sacrifices for the country&#x27;s independence and the Vietnamese people&#x27;s liberty, but not to carry out the policy of any foreign country&quot;. He said it was &quot;better to live poor but proud as free citizens of an independent country rather than in ease and shame as slaves of the foreigners and Communists&quot;. Khánh explicitly denounced Taylor in an interview published in the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot; on 23 December saying &quot;if Taylor did not act more intelligently, Southeast Asia would be lost&quot;, and that the US could not expect to succeed by modelling South Vietnam on American norms. He added that Taylor&#x27;s &quot;attitude during the last 48 hours-as far as my small head is concerned—has been beyond imagination&quot;. Justifying the removal of the HNC, Khánh said they were &quot;exploited by counter-revolutionary elements who placed partisan considerations above the homeland&#x27;s sacred interest&quot;. Taylor responded by stating that generals had participated in &quot;improper interference&quot; into the purview of civilian government, while embassy staff said that their head had done nothing improper, as did the State Department, effectively again threatening to cut aid.

On 24 December, he issued a declaration of independence from &quot;foreign manipulation&quot;, and condemned &quot;colonialism&quot;. At the time, Khánh was also secretly negotiating with the communists, hoping to put together a peace deal so he could expel the Americans from Vietnam, although this did not lead anywhere in the two months before Khánh was eventually forced from power.

Khánh&#x27;s defiance of Taylor saw his approval rise among the fellow generals, as the ambassador&#x27;s actions were seen as being an insult to the nation. On the night of 23 December, Khánh convinced his colleagues to join him in lobbying Hương to declare Taylor &quot;persona non grata&quot; and expel him from South Vietnam. They were confident that Hương could not reject them and side with a foreign power at the expense of the military that installed him, and made preparations to meet him the next day. However, someone in the junta was a CIA informant and reported the incident, allowing representatives of Washington to individually lobby the officers to change their stance. The next day, the generals changed their mind and when they called on Huong at his office, only called on him to formally denounce Taylor&#x27;s behaviour in his meeting with Khánh and his quartet and to &quot;take appropriate measures to preserve the honor of all the Vietnamese armed forces and to keep national prestige intact&quot;. On the same day, the Việt Cộng bombed the Brinks Hotel, where United States officers were billeted. As a result, there was a suspicion among a minority that Khánh&#x27;s junta had been behind the attack, even though the Viet Cong had claimed responsibility through a radio broadcast. When the Americans started making plans to retaliate against North Vietnam, they did not tell Khánh and his junta.

As a result of these tensions, a standoff started between the Americans and the Vietnamese generals. The US had hoped the generals would relent because they could not survive without aid from Washington, and that they would not be able to repel the communists or rival officers without bending to receive support. On the other hand, Khánh hoped the Americans would become more worried about the communists first and acquiesce to their &quot;fait accompli&quot; against the HNC.

The South Vietnamese eventually had their way. Seeing that the generals and Hương were not willing to reinstate the HNC Taylor sent General John Throckmorton to meet the generals to mend fences. Throckmorton told the Vietnamese generals that they had read too much into Taylor&#x27;s comments and that the US had no intention of pressuring them out of power. Khánh appeared reassured by this and made a public statement on 30 December, saying he was not as hostile to the Americans as reported, and he wanted Thiệu and Cang to meet the Americans to relieve any tension that remained. The generals eventually won out, as the Americans did not move against them in any way for their refusal to reinstate the HNC.

The only concession the AFC made was on 6 January, when they made the ostensible move of officially renouncing all their power to Hương, who was asked to organize elections. They also agreed that a new appointed civilian body would be created in the meantime and that those arrested in December would be released. This resulted in an official announcement by Hương and Khánh three days later, in which the military again reiterated their commitment to civilian rule through an elected legislature and a new constitution, and that &quot;all genuine patriots&quot; would be &quot;earnestly assembled&quot; to collaborate in making a plan to defeat the communists. The Americans were unimpressed with the statement, which was shown to Taylor before it was made public; the State Department dourly announced that &quot;it appears to represent some improvement to the situation&quot;.

The South Vietnamese won in large part because the Americans had spent so much on the country, and could not afford to abandon it and lose to the communists over the matter of military rule, as it would be a big public relations coup for the Soviet bloc. According to Karnow, for Khánh and his officers, &quot;their weakness was their strength&quot;. An anonymous South Vietnamese government official said &quot;Our big advantage over the Americans is that they want to win the war more than we do.&quot;

In late January 1965, Buddhist protests against Prime Minister Hương broke out across South Vietnam, and were at their largest in central Vietnam in I Corps. In Huế, matters degenerated into a riot as 5,000 demonstrators attacked the US Information Service Library and burned 8,000 books. Khánh and Thi turned a blind eye to the rioting and destruction of property. It was believed that they did so to allow the disorder to ruin the Hương government and allow them to inherit power.

Khánh decided to have the armed forces take over the government, and remove Hương. On the morning of 27 January, Khánh staged a bloodless putsch with the support of Thi and Kỳ. He promised to leave politics once the situation was stabilized and hand over power to a civilian body. It was believed some of the officers supported Khánh&#x27;s return to power so that it would give him an opportunity to fail and be removed permanently. Khánh persisted with the facade of civilian government by retaining Sửu and replacing Huong with the economist Nguyễn Xuân Oanh.

==Downfall==

Between January and February 1965, Thảo began plotting against Khánh. Thảo consulted Kỳ, who wanted to seize power for himself before the plot, and exhorted him to join the coup, but Kỳ claimed he would remain neutral. Shortly before noon on 19 February, Thảo used tanks and infantry to seize control of the military headquarters at Tân Sơn Nhứt, the post office and the radio station of Saigon. He surrounded Khánh&#x27;s home, and Sửu&#x27;s residence. When spotted by the press, he emerged from a tank to quip that the &quot;operation is to expel Nguyên Khánh from the government&quot;. Thảo said he was going to bring Khiêm back from his post as Ambassador to the US, catching Khiêm asleep in his Maryland home, off-guard. When informed of what was happening, Khiêm sent a cable pledging &quot;total support&quot; to the plot.

The country was still seeking stability, with Phan Huy Quát having been appointed prime minister just three days earlier. Khánh managed to escape and flee to Vũng Tàu. His plane lifted off from Tân Sơn Nhứt Air Base just as rebel tanks were rolling in, attempting to block the runway. Thảo made a radio announcement stating that the sole objective of his military operation was to get rid of Khánh, whom he described as a &quot;dictator&quot;. Thảo did this in league with General Lâm Văn Phát, who was supposed to seize the Biên Hòa Air Base to prevent Kỳ from mobilising air power against them. Phát and others made pro-Diệm announcements, saying &quot;[Lodge] ... was wrong in encouraging the coup against Diệm rather than correcting mistakes&quot;.

The attempt to seize Biên Hòa failed, and Kỳ circled Tân Sơn Nhứt, threatening to bomb the rebels. Most of the forces of the III and IV Corps surrounding the capital disliked both Khánh and the rebels, and took no action. At 20:00, Phát and Thảo met with Kỳ in a meeting organised by the Americans, and insisted that Khánh be removed from power. The coup collapsed when, around midnight, loyal ARVN forces swept into the city from the south and some loyal to Kỳ from Biên Hòa in the north. Whether the rebels were genuinely defeated or a deal was struck with Kỳ to end the revolt in exchange for Khánh&#x27;s removal is disputed. Before fleeing, Thảo broadcast a message stating that the coup had been effective in removing Khánh. This was not the case, but the chaos led the Armed Forces Council to adopt a vote of no confidence in Khánh the following day. This motion was precipitated by Thi, who gained the support of Kỳ, and the final vote was unanimous. Kỳ assumed control of a junta that continued with Suu and Quat as a civilian front, although General Trần Văn Minh was the nominal head as Commander in Chief of the armed forces. Khánh was then north of Saigon, inspecting a display of captured communist weapons. When he heard what was happening, he refused to accept his fate and used his personal aircraft to fly to different provinces, trying to rally support, promising to promote those which would be natural allies, but received little support. Having ousted Khánh, the generals made a press conference in the afternoon, but claimed that no decision had been definitively made.

By the end of the evening, he was in Đà Lạt when his plane had no fuel left, and no pumps were open at the time, so he was marooned there for the night. Fearing a Khánh comeback, the AFC met again and unanimously resolved to make contingency plans to repel any counter-insurrection by Khánh. Westmoreland sent Colonel Wilson, Khánh&#x27;s former confidant, to go to the military airport at Đà Lạt to convince the Vietnamese general to resign and allow a new military leadership to take the reins. Khánh finally agreed to leave if he was given a dignified send-off, so the other generals arranged a ceremony at Tan Son Nhut, where military bands serenaded him. He theatrically bent down and picked up some loose dirt before putting it in his pocket, saying that he was taking his beloved homeland with him. His enemies, the remaining Vietnamese officers and Taylor, all met him at the airport. He then left as Ambassador-at-Large, and was sent on a world tour, starting with a report at the United Nations in New York City.

==Personal life==
Khánh and his wife Nguyễn Lê Trần (née Phạm) had six children and one stepdaughter; one son died in a drowning accident in South Vietnam.

==References==
=== Citations ===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Official Facebook page of General Nguyễn Khánh
* JFK and the Diem Coup – Provided by the National Security Archive
* Interview with General Nguyen Khanh, April 29, 1981</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="0" end="12" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="80" end="88" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="93" end="124" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="169" end="182" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q96785422" start="187" end="218" title="Prime Minister of South Vietnam" label="prime minister of South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="532" end="552" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q36136" start="613" end="621" title="Trà Vinh" label="Trà Vinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="629" end="641" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19955896" start="709" end="727" title="French Cochinchina" label="French Cochinchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="771" end="788" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="804" end="810" title="Da Lat" label="Đà Lạt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202988" start="969" end="978" title="cải lương" label="cải lương"/>
<link wikidata="" start="989" end="997" title=":vi:Phùng Há" label="Phùng Há"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1091" end="1099" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="1216" end="1222" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="1455" end="1464" title="Việt Minh" label="Việt Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="1473" end="1484" title="Hồ Chí Minh" label="Hồ Chí Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q769960" start="1549" end="1566" title="August Revolution" label="August Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="1703" end="1733" title="Democratic Republic of Vietnam" label="Democratic Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950482" start="1960" end="1974" title="Phạm Ngọc Thảo" label="Phạm Ngọc Thảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25262" start="2125" end="2131" title="Cà Mau" label="Cà Mau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="2472" end="2488" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132066" start="2978" end="2998" title="École spéciale militaire de Saint-Cyr" label="Saint-Cyr/Coëtquidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="3081" end="3096" title="Airborne forces" label="Airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738088" start="3427" end="3451" title="Vietnamese National Army" label="Vietnamese National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="3479" end="3495" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="3535" end="3542" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q848478" start="3596" end="3608" title="French Union" label="French Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="3627" end="3646" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="3683" end="3692" title="Viet Minh" label="Việt Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81114" start="4481" end="4507" title="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny" label="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="4744" end="4758" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="5546" end="5566" title="partition of Vietnam" label="partition of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="5598" end="5611" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="5682" end="5711" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="5978" end="6011" title="Command and General Staff College" label="Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="6013" end="6029" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q143467" start="6042" end="6069" title="U.S. military historical joint commands" label="Joint &amp;amp; Combined School"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="6073" end="6080" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935163" start="6492" end="6516" title="1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt" label="attempted to depose Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q864767" start="6536" end="6551" title="Gia Long Palace" label="Gia Long Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507368" start="7316" end="7331" title="Lê Nguyên Khang" label="Lê Nguyên Khang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503757" start="7349" end="7381" title="Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps" label="Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="7842" end="7859" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971479" start="7884" end="7892" title="II Corps (South Vietnam)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="8046" end="8056" title="Montagnard (Vietnam)" label="Montagnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="8153" end="8179" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup" label="1963 South Vietnamese coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="8195" end="8209" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Dương Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971479" start="8429" end="8437" title="II Corps (South Vietnam)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="8445" end="8462" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="central highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976677" start="8485" end="8492" title="I Corps (South Vietnam)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="8500" end="8531" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="8546" end="8549" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="8554" end="8561" title="Đà Nẵng" label="Đà Nẵng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975531" start="8807" end="8815" title="IV Corps (South Vietnam)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="8823" end="8835" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q926510" start="9670" end="9685" title="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ" label="Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286113" start="10124" end="10130" title="Đỗ Mậu" label="Đỗ Mậu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799000" start="10481" end="10497" title="Nguyễn Chánh Thi" label="Nguyễn Chánh Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937110" start="11140" end="11156" title="Trần Thiện Khiêm" label="Trần Thiện Khiêm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971303" start="11351" end="11360" title="III Corps (South Vietnam)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503757" start="11579" end="11585" title="Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="11587" end="11596" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913590" start="11601" end="11615" title="ARVN Special Forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11684" end="11698" title="Dương Ngọc Lâm" label="Dương Ngọc Lâm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315886" start="11816" end="11829" title="Dương Văn Đức" label="Dương Văn Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="12032" end="12049" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507839" start="12634" end="12644" title="Lê Văn Kim" label="Lê Văn Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="12649" end="12661" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735139" start="12877" end="12889" title="Mai Hữu Xuân" label="Mai Hữu Xuân"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="13053" end="13077" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="13189" end="13210" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="13567" end="13588" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4115006" start="13710" end="13731" title="Tan Son Nhut Air Base" label="Tân Sơn Nhứt Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="14371" end="14374" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424885" start="14383" end="14396" title="Lucien Conein" label="Lucien Conein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="15361" end="15368" title="Đà Nẵng" label="Đà Nẵng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="15390" end="15403" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Tôn Thất Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735139" start="15408" end="15420" title="Mai Hữu Xuân" label="Mai Hữu Xuân"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023046" start="15856" end="15872" title="Nguyễn Văn Nhung" label="Nguyễn Văn Nhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="15943" end="15955" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="Ngô Đình Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507551" start="16026" end="16039" title="Lê Quang Tung" label="Lê Quang Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022998" start="17783" end="17798" title="Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn" label="Nguyễn Tôn Hoàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979793" start="17898" end="17920" title="Đại Việt Quốc dân đảng" label="Đại Việt Quốc Dân Dảng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="18874" end="18891" title="strategic Hamlet Program" label="strategic hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q650194" start="18895" end="18907" title="Ngô Đình Nhu" label="Ngô Đình Nhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="19001" end="19019" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10800072" start="19049" end="19065" title="Nguyễn Xuân Oánh" label="Nguyễn Xuân Oánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q470364" start="19501" end="19508" title="Cao Đài" label="Cao Đài"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="19513" end="19520" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708053" start="21524" end="21541" title="Lyman Kirkpatrick" label="Lyman Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="21889" end="21904" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="29536" end="29551" title="Thích Trí Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215941" start="29867" end="29874" title="Đặng Sỹ" label="Đặng Sỹ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388358" start="29924" end="29943" title="Huế Vesak shootings" label="Huế Vesak shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130142" start="29991" end="30004" title="Buddhist flag" label="Buddhist flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022417" start="30097" end="30109" title="Ngô Đình Cẩn" label="Ngô Đình Cẩn"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="30233" end="30254" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4871592" start="31696" end="31715" title="Battle of Long Dinh" label="Battle of Long Dinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="31796" end="31800" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32069" end="32083" title="Phoumi Nosovan" label="Phoumi Nosovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="33748" end="33759" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="34044" end="34060" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="34112" end="34126" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q482402" start="35163" end="35186" title="Gulf of Tonkin incident" label="Gulf of Tonkin incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146358" start="35472" end="35483" title="paper tiger" label="paper tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="35505" end="35519" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945059" start="36594" end="36610" title="Vũng Tàu Charter" label="Vũng Tàu Charter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37523" end="37527" title="Thich Tam Chau" label="Chau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37532" end="37536" title="Thich Thien Minh" label="Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="37791" end="37798" title="Cần Lao Party" label="Cần Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="37957" end="37971" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022852" start="40247" end="40260" title="Nguyễn Hữu Có" label="Nguyễn Hữu Có"/>
<link wikidata="Q298793" start="41398" end="41418" title="William Westmoreland" label="William Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480719" start="41790" end="41802" title="Lâm Văn Phát" label="Lâm Văn Phát"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315886" start="41839" end="41852" title="Dương Văn Đức" label="Dương Văn Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975531" start="41880" end="41888" title="IV Corps (South Vietnam)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="42522" end="42528" title="Da Lat" label="Đà Lạt"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="43166" end="43179" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="43557" end="43566" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="43871" end="43882" title="Degar" label="Montagnards"/>
<link wikidata="Q36081" start="44564" end="44572" title="Qui Nhơn" label="Quy Nhơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="44758" end="44772" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q707287" start="45888" end="45901" title="Phan Khắc Sửu" label="Phan Khắc Sửu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="45938" end="45952" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="46197" end="46212" title="Thich Tri Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="48978" end="48984" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="48988" end="49005" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261258" start="49016" end="49026" title="Montagnard (Vietnam)" label="Montagnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="49258" end="49273" title="Thích Trí Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="49794" end="49808" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="49872" end="49896" title="US Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="US Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116336" start="50657" end="50661" title="Chung Tan Cang" label="Cang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="50847" end="50861" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="50952" end="50962" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q695916" start="51701" end="51718" title="Ho Chi Minh trail" label="Hồ Chí Minh trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="56015" end="56021" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="58403" end="58426" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="59896" end="59913" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q712907" start="60669" end="60702" title="1964 Brinks Hotel bombing" label="Việt Cộng bombed the Brinks Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243716" start="61667" end="61684" title="John L. Throckmorton" label="John Throckmorton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64655" end="64671" title="Nguyễn Xuân Oanh" label="Nguyễn Xuân Oanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="65389" end="65397" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705534" start="65566" end="65579" title="Phan Huy Quát" label="Phan Huy Quát"/>
<link wikidata="Q21194" start="65678" end="65686" title="Vũng Tàu" label="Vũng Tàu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480719" start="66001" end="66013" title="Lâm Văn Phát" label="Lâm Văn Phát"/>
<link wikidata="Q619905" start="66045" end="66062" title="Biên Hòa Air Base" label="Biên Hòa Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971303" start="66399" end="66402" title="III Corps (South Vietnam)" label="III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975531" start="66407" end="66415" title="IV Corps (South Vietnam)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="67090" end="67103" title="no confidence" label="no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833340" start="67334" end="67347" title="Trần Văn Minh (diplomat)" label="Trần Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="67905" end="67911" title="Da Lat" label="Đà Lạt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="68858" end="68872" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726307" start="68929" end="68943" title="Madame Khánh" label="Nguyễn Lê Trần"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="69232" end="69257" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80095" wikidata="Q106240" url="?curid=80095" title="Deimos (deity)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Deimos ( ) is the personification of fear. He is the son of Ares and Aphrodite, and the brother of Phobos. Deimos served to represent the feelings of dread and terror that befell those before a battle, while Phobos personified feelings of fear and panic in the midst of battle.

== Genealogy ==
In Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot;, Deimos is the son of Ares and Cytherea (Aphrodite), and the sibling of Phobos and Harmonia. According to the Greek antiquarian Semus of Delos, Deimos is the father of the monster Scylla.

== Mythology ==
Deimos mainly appears in an assistant role to his father, who causes disorder in armies. In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, he accompanied his father, Ares, into battle with the Goddess of Discord, Eris, and his brother Phobos (fear). In the &quot;Shield of Herakles&quot;, Phobos and Deimos accompany Ares into battle and remove him from the field once Herakles injures him. The poet Antimachus, in a misrepresentation of Homer&#x27;s account, portrays Deimos and Phobos as the horses of Ares. In Nonnus&#x27; &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;, Zeus arms Phobos with lightning and Deimos with thunder to frighten Typhon. Later in the work, Phobos and Deimos act as Ares&#x27; charioteers to battle Dionysus during his war against the Indians.

==Namesake==
In 1877, the American astronomer Asaph Hall discovered the two satellites of the planet Mars. Hall named the two moons Phobos and Deimos. Deimos is the smaller of the two satellites.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Beekes, Robert S. P., &quot;Etymological Dictionary of Greek&quot;, 2 vols, Leiden, Brill, 2009. .
* &quot;Brill’s New Pauly: Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World. Antiquity, Volume 4&quot;, Cyr-Epy, editors: Hubert Cancik, Helmuth Schneider, Brill, 2004. . Online version at Brill.
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Hesiod, &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Matthews, V. J., &quot;Antimachus of Colophon&quot;, Brill, 1995. . Online version at Brill.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240" start="20" end="26" title="Deimos (deity)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="80" end="84" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="89" end="98" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="119" end="125" title="Phobos (mythology)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="318" end="324" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="338" end="346" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="375" end="379" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="394" end="403" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="425" end="431" title="Phobos (deity)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q978079" start="436" end="444" title="Harmonia" label="Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="490" end="495" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="533" end="539" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="660" end="665" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="747" end="751" title="Eris (mythology)" label="Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="769" end="775" title="Phobos (deity)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="797" end="815" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="903" end="923" title="Heracles" label="Herakles injures him"/>
<link wikidata="Q577769" start="934" end="944" title="Antimachus of Colophon" label="Antimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="1047" end="1053" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1084" end="1088" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="1152" end="1158" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1237" end="1245" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="1318" end="1328" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106559" start="1329" end="1339" title="Asaph Hall" label="Asaph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1384" end="1388" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="1415" end="1421" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="1426" end="1432" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="1511" end="1531" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="Beekes, Robert S. P."/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="1595" end="1600" title="Brill Publishing" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q132460627" start="1618" end="1635" title="Brill’s New Pauly" label="Brill’s New Pauly"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="1752" end="1757" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807209" start="1794" end="1808" title="Timothy Gantz" label="Gantz, Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1955" end="1961" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912247" start="2073" end="2093" title="Hugh Evelyn-White" label="Hugh G. Evelyn-White"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2266" end="2272" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2567" end="2572" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2574" end="2595" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="2846" end="2851" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80096" wikidata="Q313707" url="?curid=80096" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu">
<text>Nguyễn Văn Thiệu (; 5 April 1923 – 29 September 2001) was a South Vietnamese military officer and politician who was the president of South Vietnam from 1967 to 1975. He was a general in the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF), became head of a military junta in 1965, and then president after winning a rigged election in 1967. He established rule over South Vietnam until he resigned and left the nation and relocated to Taipei a few days before the fall of Saigon and the ultimate North Vietnamese victory.

Born in Phan Rang in the south central coast of Vietnam, Thieu joined the communist-dominated Việt Minh of Hồ Chí Minh in 1945 but quit after a year and joined the Vietnamese National Army (VNA) of the French-backed State of Vietnam. He gradually rose up the ranks and, in 1954, led a battalion in expelling the communists from his native village. Following the withdrawal of France, the VNA became the ARVN and Thiệu was the head of the Vietnamese National Military Academy for four years before becoming a division commander and colonel. In November 1960, he helped put down a coup attempt against President Ngô Đình Diệm. During this time, he also converted to Catholicism and joined the regime&#x27;s secret Cần Lao Party; Diệm was thought to give preferential treatment to his co-religionists and Thiệu was accused of being one of many who converted for political advancement.

Despite this, Thiệu agreed to join the coup against Ngô Đình Diệm in November 1963 in the midst of the Buddhist crisis, leading the siege on Gia Long Palace. Diệm was captured and executed and Thiệu made a general. Following Diệm&#x27;s death, there were several short-lived juntas as coups occurred frequently. Thiệu gradually moved up the ranks of the junta by adopting a cautious approach while other officers around him defeated and sidelined one another. In 1965, stability came to South Vietnam when he became the figurehead head of state, while Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ became prime minister, although the men were rivals.

In 1967, a transition to elected government was scheduled; and, after a power struggle within the military, Thiệu ran for the presidency with Kỳ as his running mate—both men had wanted the top job. To allow the two to work together, their fellow officers had agreed to have a military body controlled by Kỳ shape policy behind the scenes. Leadership tensions became evident, and Thiệu prevailed, sidelining Kỳ supporters from key military and cabinet posts. Thiệu then passed legislation to restrict candidacy eligibility for the 1971 election, banning almost all would-be opponents, while the rest withdrew as it was obvious that the poll would be a sham; Thiệu won 100% of the vote and the election was uncontested, while Kỳ retired from politics.

During his rule, Thiệu was accused of turning a blind eye to and indulging in corruption, and appointing loyalists rather than competent officers to lead ARVN units. During the 1971 Operation Lam Sơn 719 and the communists&#x27; Easter Offensive, the I Corps in the north of the country was under the command of his confidant, Hoàng Xuân Lãm, whose incompetence led to heavy defeats until Thiệu finally replaced him with Ngô Quang Trưởng. After the signing of the Paris Peace Accords—which Thiệu opposed—and the US withdrawal, South Vietnam resisted the communists for another two years until the communists&#x27; final push for victory, which saw the South openly invaded by the entire North Vietnamese army. Thiệu gave contradictory orders to Trưởng to stand and fight or withdraw and consolidate, leading to mass panic and collapse in the south of the country. This allowed the communists to generate much momentum and within a month they were close to Saigon, prompting Thiệu to resign and leave the country. He eventually settled near Boston, Massachusetts, preferring not to talk to the media. He died in 2001.

Thiệu has been described as dictatorial, similar to Ngô Đình Diệm.

==Early years==
Born in Phan Rang on the south central coast of Vietnam, Thiệu was a son of a small, well-off landowner who earned his living by farming and fishing. Thiệu was the youngest of five children. According to some reports, Thiệu was born in November 1924, but adopted 5 April 1923, as his birthday on grounds that it was a more auspicious day. His elder brothers raised money so that he could attend the elite schools run by France, who were Vietnam&#x27;s colonial rulers. Although not yet a Catholic (he converted later in life after getting married), Thiệu attended Pellerin, a French-run Catholic school in Huế, the imperial seat of the Nguyễn dynasty. He returned to his hometown after graduating.

During World War II, Imperial Japan invaded French Indochina and seized control. Ninh Thuận was taken over by the Japanese in 1942, but the reaction from the locals was muted, and Thiệu continued to work the ricelands alongside his father for another three years.

==Việt Minh and Vietnamese National Army==

When World War II ended, Thiệu joined the Việt Minh, led by Hồ Chí Minh, whose goal was to gain independence for Vietnam from France. With no rifles, Thiệu&#x27;s class of Việt Minh recruits trained in jungle clearings with bamboo. He rose to be district chief, but left the movement after just one year, following the return of the French to southern Vietnam in 1946 to contest Việt Minh control. Thiệu said, &quot;By August of 1946, I knew that Việt Minh were Communists … They shot people. They overthrew the village committee. They seized the land.&quot; He defected and moved to Saigon and joined the forces of the French-backed State of Vietnam.

With the help of his brother, Nguyễn Văn Hiếu, a Paris-trained lawyer who served in the upper echelons of the State of Vietnam government, Thiệu initially was enrolled in the Merchant Marine Academy. After a year, he was given his officer&#x27;s commission, but he rejected a position on a ship when he discovered that the French owners were going to pay him less than his French colleagues. This incident was said to have made him suspicious of foreigners. Thiệu later became known for his paranoia and distrust of his American allies when he rose to the top of politics.

Thiệu transferred to the National Military Academy in Đà Lạt. In 1949, upon graduation, he was commissioned a 2nd Lieutenant from the first officer candidates&#x27; course of the Vietnam National Army, which had been created by former Emperor Bảo Đại who had agreed to be the Chief of State of the State of Vietnam to fight against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam of the Việt Minh. Thiệu started as the commander of an infantry platoon fighting against the Việt Minh. He quickly rose up the ranks, and was known as a good strategist, albeit cautious, with an aversion to attacking unless victory appeared almost assured. He was sent to France to train at the Infantry School at Coëtquidan, before returning home to attend the Staff College in Hanoi. Nevertheless, Thiệu was regarded as &quot;very much a country boy, lacking the manners of more sophisticated urban dwellers who aspired to become officers&quot;. By 1954, he was a major and led a battalion that attacked a Việt Minh unit, forcing the communists to withdraw from Phan Rang. At first the Việt Minh retreated into Thiệu&#x27;s old family home, confident that he would not attack his own house, but they were mistaken.

==Army of the Republic of Vietnam==
Thiệu was a lieutenant colonel when the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam) was founded and officially gained full sovereignty after the withdrawal of French forces in 1955, following the 1954 Geneva Agreement. In 1956, he was appointed as head of the National Military Academy in Đà Lạt, and held the post for four years. There he formed ties with many of the younger officers and trainees and who went on to become his generals, colonels and majors when he ascended to the presidency a decade later. In 1957, and again in 1960, Thiệu was sent to the United States for military training. He studied at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and in weapons training at Fort Bliss, Texas, as well as at the Joint and Combined Planning School of the Pacific Command in Okinawa.

==Role in stopping 1960 anti-Diệm coup==

On 11 November 1960, Colonels Vương Văn Đông and Nguyễn Chánh Thi launched a coup attempt against President Ngô Đình Diệm, but after surrounding the palace, they stopped attacking and decided to negotiate a power-sharing agreement. Diệm falsely promised reform, allowing time for loyalists to come to the rescue. The rebels had also failed to seal the highways into the capital to block loyalist reinforcements.

Thiệu sent infantry from his 7th Division from Biên Hòa, a town just north of Saigon, to help rescue Diệm. As the false promises of reform were being aired, Trần Thiện Khiêm&#x27;s men approached the palace grounds. Some of the rebels switched sides as the power balance changed. After a brief but violent battle that killed around 400 people, the coup attempt was crushed. On 21 October 1961, Thiệu was transferred to command the 1st Division, based in Huế, the former imperial capital in central Vietnam. He remained in the post until 8 December 1962, when General Đỗ Cao Trí took over. Twelve days later, Thiệu was appointed commander of the 5th Division, which was based in Biên Hòa, the 7th having been moved to Mỹ Tho. Diệm did not trust Thiệu&#x27;s predecessor, Nguyễn Đức Thắng, but Thiệu&#x27;s appointment proved to be a mistake.

==Coup against Diệm==
Thiệu turned against Diệm late, and led his 5th Division in the revolt. Late on the night of 1 November, as light drizzle fell, Thiệu&#x27;s tanks, artillery, and troops advanced towards the grounds of Gia Long Palace. A little before 22:00, infantry started the assault, covered by tank and artillery fire, which flattened the Presidential Guard barracks. Demolition units set charges to the palace, and rebel flamethrowers sprayed buildings, as the two sides exchanged gunfire. After a lull, shortly after 3:00, the shelling resumed, and just after 5:00, Thiệu ordered the start of the final stage of the siege. By 6:37, the palace fell. He was then made a general by the junta after they took power. Diệm had been promised exile by the generals, but, after escaping from the palace, was executed on the journey back to military headquarters after having been captured. Dương Văn Minh, the junta and coup leader, was generally blamed for having ordered Diệm&#x27;s assassination, but there has been debate about the culpability.

When Thiệu rose to become president, Minh blamed him for the assassinations. In 1971, Minh claimed that Thiệu had caused the deaths by hesitating and delaying the attack on Gia Long Palace, implying that if Diệm was captured there, junior officers could not have killed him while in a small group. General Trần Văn Đôn, another plotter, was reported to have pressured Thiệu during the night of the siege, asking him on the phone, &quot;Why are you so slow in doing it? Do you need more troops? If you do, ask Đính to send more troops—and do it quickly because after taking the palace you will be made a general.&quot; Thiệu stridently denied responsibility and issued a statement that Minh did not dispute: &quot;Dương Văn Minh has to assume entire responsibility for the death of Ngô Đình Diệm.&quot;

Diệm remained a taboo subject until Thiệu became president. His regime first approved of public memorial services for Diệm upon the eighth anniversary of his death in 1971, and this was the third year that such services were permitted. Madame Thiệu, the First Lady, was seen weeping at a requiem mass for Diệm at the Saigon Notre-Dame Basilica.

==Junta member==
Thiệu was rewarded with membership in the 12-man Military Revolutionary Council led by General Minh, and served as the secretary general; the leading figures in the MRC were Generals Minh, Trần Văn Đôn, Lê Văn Kim and Tôn Thất Đính.
In August 1964, the current junta head, General Nguyễn Khánh, who had in fact deposed Minh and his colleagues in January or at least heavily weakened him – as he had to formally retain Minh in recognition of the United States&#x27; will – decided to increase his authority by declaring a state of emergency, increasing police powers, banning protests, tightening censorship and allowing the police arbitrary search and imprisonment powers. He drafted a new constitution, which would have augmented his personal power. However, these moves served only to weaken Khánh as large demonstrations and riots broke out in the cities, with majority Buddhists prominent, calling for an end to the state of emergency and the abandonment of the new constitution, as well as a progression back to civilian rule.

Fearing that he could be toppled by the intensifying protests, Khánh made concessions, repealing the new constitution and police measures, and promising to reinstate civilian rule and remove the Cần Lao, a Catholic political apparatus covertly used to maintain the Diệm regime in power by seeking out dissenters, etc. Many senior officers, in particular the Catholics, such as Khiêm and Thiệu, decried what they viewed as a handing of power to the Buddhist leaders, They then tried to remove Khánh in favour of Minh again, and recruited many officers into their plot. Khiêm and Thiệu sought out US Ambassador Maxwell Taylor and sought a private endorsement for a coup, but, as this would have been the third coup in a few months, Taylor did not want any more changes in leadership, fearing a corrosive effect on the already unstable government. This deterred Khiêm&#x27;s group from following through on their plans.

The division among the generals came to a head at a meeting of the MRC on 26/27 August. Khánh claimed the instability was due to troublemaking by members and supporters of the Catholic-aligned Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam. Prominent officers associated with the Đại Việt included Thiệu and Khiêm. Khiêm blamed Khánh&#x27;s concessions to Buddhist activists as the reason for the trouble. Thiệu and another Catholic General, Nguyễn Hữu Có, called for the replacement of Khánh with the original junta leader Minh, but the latter refused. Feeling pressured by the strong condemnations of his colleagues, Khánh said that he would resign. However, after further deadlock, Khánh, Minh, and Khiêm were put together in a triumvirate to resolve the problem, but tensions remained as Khánh dominated the decision-making.

On 15 September 1964, Thiệu became the commander of IV Corps, which oversaw the Mekong Delta region of the country, and three divisions. This came after the Buddhists had lobbied Khánh to remove General Dương Văn Đức from command of IV Corps; Đức had responded with a failed coup attempt, along with Lâm Văn Phát, on 13 September. During the coup attempt, Khiêm and Thiệu&#x27;s torpor, combined with their criticism of Khánh was seen as tacit support of the rebels. US Embassy logs during the coup claimed that Thiệu and Khiêm &quot;seem so passive that they appear to have been either tacitly supporting or associated with his move by Đức and Phát&quot;. However, after the coup faltered, the pair &quot;issued expressions of firm support for Khánh somewhat belatedly&quot;.
Thiệu was part of a group of younger officers called the Young Turks—the most prominent apart from himself included commander of the Republic of Vietnam Air Force, Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ, commander of I Corps General Nguyễn Chánh Thi and Admiral Chung Tấn Cang, the head of the Republic of Vietnam Navy. They and Khánh wanted to forcibly retire officers with more than 25 years of service, as they thought them to be lethargic, out of touch, and ineffective, but most importantly, as rivals for power. Specific targets of this proposed policy were Generals Minh, Trần Văn Đôn, Lê Văn Kim and Mai Hữu Xuân.

The signature of Chief of State Phan Khắc Sửu was required to pass the ruling, but he referred the matter to the High National Council (HNC), an appointed civilian advisory body, to get their opinion. The HNC turned down the request. This was speculated to be due to the fact that many of the HNC members were old, and did not appreciate the generals&#x27; negativity towards seniors. On 19 December, the generals dissolved the HNC and arrested some of the members as well as other civilian politicians. This prompted US Ambassador Maxwell D. Taylor to angrily berate Thiệu, Thi, Kỳ and Cang in a private meeting and threaten to cut off aid if they did not reverse their decision. However, this galvanized the officers around Khánh for a time and they ignored Taylor&#x27;s threats without repercussions as the Americans were too intent on defeating the communists to cut funding.
Thiệu was again plotting the following month when the junta-appointed Prime Minister, Trần Văn Hương, introduced a series of war expansion measures, notably by widening the terms of conscription. This provoked widespread anti-Hương demonstrations and riots across the country, mainly from conscription-aged students and pro-negotiations Buddhists. Reliant on Buddhist support, Khánh did little to try to contain the protests, and then decided to have the armed forces take over the government, and he removed Hương on 27 January.

Khánh&#x27;s action nullified a counter-plot involving Hương that had developed during the civil disorders that forced him from office. In an attempt to pre-empt his deposal, Hương had backed a plot led by some Đại Việt-oriented Catholic officers, including Thiệu and Có, who planned to remove Khánh and bring Khiêm back from Washington. The US Embassy in Saigon was privately supportive of the aim as Taylor and Khánh had become implacable enemies, but they did not fully back the move as they regarded it as poorly thought out and potentially a political embarrassment due to the need to use an American plane to transport some plotters between Saigon and Washington, and as a result, they promised asylum only for Hương if necessary. The plot continued over the next month with US encouragement, especially when evidence emerged that Khánh wanted to make a deal with the communists. Taylor told the generals that the US was &quot;in no way propping up General Khanh or backing him in any fashion&quot;. At this stage, Taylor and his staff in Saigon thought highly of Thiệu, Có and Cang as possible replacements for Khánh. Thiệu was quoted in a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) report as being described by an unnamed American official as &quot;intelligent, highly ambitious, and likely to remain a coup plotter with the aim of personal advancement&quot;.

Thiệu took a cautious approach, as did Có and Cang, and they were pre-empted by Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo, an undetected communist double agent, who launched a coup with Phát on a hardline Catholic platform without US backing. With US support against both Khánh and the plotters, Kỳ and Thi put down the coup attempt and then ousted Khánh. This left Kỳ, Thi and Thiệu as the three most prominent members in the new junta. There were claims that Thiệu ordered the military to capture and extrajudicially kill Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo, who died in 1965 after a series of coup attempts between various ARVN officers. Other sources blame Kỳ. During this period, Thiệu became more prominent as other generals fought and defeated one another in coups, which forced several into exile.

==Figurehead chief of state==

In mid-1965, Thiệu became the figurehead chief of state of a military junta, with Kỳ as the prime minister. After a series of short-lived juntas, their pairing put an end to a series of leadership changes that had occurred since the assassination of Diệm.

Kỳ and Thiệu&#x27;s military junta decided to inaugurate their rule by holding a &quot;no breathing week&quot;. They imposed censorship, closed many newspapers that published material deemed unacceptable, and suspended civil liberties. They then sidelined the civilian politicians to a &quot;village of old trees&quot; to &quot;conduct seminars and draw up plans and programs in support of government policy&quot;. They decided to ignore religious and other opposition groups &quot;with the stipulation that troublemakers will be shot&quot;.

Kỳ and Thiệu were more concerned with attacking the communists than their predecessors. The generals began to mobilize the populace into paramilitary organizations. After one month, Thích Trí Quang began to call for the removal of Thiệu because he was a member of Diệm&#x27;s Catholic Cần Lao apparatus, decrying his &quot;fascistic tendencies&quot;, and claiming that Cần Lao members were undermining Kỳ. For Quang, Thiệu was a symbol of the Diệm era of Catholic domination, when advancement was based on religion. He had desired that General Thi, known for his pro-Buddhist position, would lead the country, and denounced Thiệu for alleged past crimes against Buddhists.

In 1966, with Kỳ leading the way, Thi was sacked in a power struggle, provoking widespread civil unrest in his base in I Corps; Quang led Buddhist protests against Kỳ and Thiệu and many units in I Corps began disobeying orders, siding with Thi and the Buddhist movement. Eventually, Kỳ&#x27;s military forces forced the dissidents to back down and defeated those who did not. Thi was exiled and Quang put under house arrest, ending Buddhist opposition and any effective threat to Kỳ and Thiệu&#x27;s regime.

==1967 South Vietnamese Presidential election==

Under US insistence on constitutional rule, elections for the presidency and legislature were scheduled.

On 3 September 1967, Thiệu ran successfully for the presidency with Kỳ as his running mate. Thiệu took 34% of the vote and held the position until 21 April 1975. He promised democracy, social reform and vowed to &quot;open wide the door of peace and leave it open&quot;. However, the poll was the start of a power struggle with Kỳ, who had been the main leader of South Vietnam in the preceding two years. The military had decided that they would support one candidate, and after both men wanted the job, Kỳ only backed down after being promised real influence behind the scenes through a military committee that would control proceedings. Thiệu was intent on concentrating power in his own hands.

==Tet Offensive==
During the Lunar New Year of 1968, the communists launched a massive attack on the cities of Vietnam in an attempt to topple Thiệu and reunify the country under their rule. At the time of the attack on Saigon, Thiệu was out of town, having travelled to celebrate the new year at his wife&#x27;s family&#x27;s home at Mỹ Tho in the Mekong Delta. Kỳ, who was still in the capital, stepped into the spotlight and took command, organising the military forces in Saigon in the battle. The ARVN and the Americans repelled the communist onslaught. Kỳ&#x27;s overshadowing of his superior during South Vietnam&#x27;s deepest crisis further strained relations between the two men.

Although the communists were repelled and suffered heavy losses, South Vietnam suffered heavily as the conflict reached the cities for the first time in a substantial way. As ARVN troops were pulled back to defend the towns, the Việt Cộng gained in the countryside. The violence and destruction witnessed damaged public confidence in Thiệu, who apparently couldn&#x27;t protect the citizens.

Thiệu&#x27;s regime estimated the civilian dead at 14,300 with 24,000 wounded. 630,000 new refugees had been generated, joining the nearly 800,000 others already displaced by the war. By the end of 1968, 8% of the populace was living in a refugee camp. More than 70,000 homes had been destroyed and the nation&#x27;s infrastructure was severely damaged. 1968 became the deadliest year of the war to date for South Vietnam, with 27,915 men killed.

In the wake of the offensive, however, Thiệu&#x27;s regime became more energetic. On 1 February, Thiệu declared martial law, and in June, the National Assembly approved his request for a general mobilization of the population and the induction of 200,000 draftees into the armed forces by the end of the year; the bill had been blocked before the Tết Offensive. This increased South Vietnam&#x27;s military to more than 900,000 men.

Mobilization and token anti-corruption campaigns were carried out. Three of the four ARVN corps commanders were replaced for poor performance during the offensive. Thiệu also established a National Recovery Committee to oversee food distribution, resettlement, and housing construction for the new refugees. The government perceived a new determination among the ordinary citizens, especially among previously apathetic urbanites who were angered by the communist attacks.

Thiệu used the period to consolidate his personal power. His only real political rival was Vice President Kỳ. In the aftermath of Tết, Kỳ supporters in the military and the administration were quickly removed from power, arrested, or exiled. A crack-down on the South Vietnamese press followed and there was a return of some of Diệm&#x27;s Cần Lao members to positions of power. Within six months, the populace began to call him &quot;the little dictator&quot;. Over the next few years, Kỳ became increasingly sidelined to the point of irrelevance.

==Re-elected unopposed and stagnation==

In 1971, Thiệu ran for re-election, but his reputation for corruption made his political opponents believe the poll would be rigged, and they declined to run. As the only candidate, Thiệu was thus easily re-elected on 2 October, receiving 94% of the vote on an 87% turn-out, a figure widely held to be fraudulent. The signing of the Paris Peace Accords in January 1973 failed to end the fighting in South Vietnam, as North Vietnam immediately violated the cease-fire and attempted to make territorial gains, resulting in large battles.

In late 1973, the communists issued &quot;Resolution 21&quot;, which called for &quot;strategic raids&quot; against South Vietnam to gain territory and to gauge the reaction of Thiệu and the American government. This started between March and November 1974, when the communists attacked Quang Duc Province and Biên Hòa. The US failed to respond to the communist violations and the ARVN lost a lot of supplies in the fighting.

Thiệu expressed his stance on the ceasefire by publicly proclaiming the &quot;Four Nos&quot;: no negotiations with the communists; no communist political activities south of the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ); no coalition government; and no surrender of territory to the North Vietnamese or Provisional Revolutionary Government (PRG), which went against the deal. Thiệu believed the American promise to reintroduce air power against the communists if they made any serious violations of the agreement, and he and his government also assumed that US aid would continue to be forthcoming at previous levels.

On 1 July 1973, however, the US Congress passed legislation that all but prohibited any US combat activities over or in Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. On 7 November, the legislative branch overrode Nixon&#x27;s veto of the War Powers Act. In 1973–74, US funding was slashed to $965 million, a reduction of more than 50%. Despite Nixon&#x27;s growing political difficulties and an increasingly hostile working relationship with the legislature over Vietnam, Thiệu, and most of the Saigon leadership, remained optimistic about ongoing aid. According to Vietnamese Air Force General Đổng Văn Khuyên, &quot;Our leaders continued to believe in U.S. air intervention even after the U.S. Congress had expressly forbidden it ... [T]hey deluded themselves.&quot;

As North Vietnam needed to replenish its armed forces in 1974, Thiệu decided to go on the attack. He stretched his own forces thinly by launching offensives that regained most of the territory captured by PAVN forces during the 1973 campaign, and retook 15% of the total land area controlled by the communists at the time of the cease-fire. In April, Thiệu launched the Svay Rieng Campaign against communist strongholds in eastern Cambodia near Tây Ninh, in what was the last major ARVN offensive. While these operations were successful, the cost in terms of manpower and resources was high. By the end of the year the military was experiencing equipment shortages as a result of decreased American aid, while communist forces continued to gain strength.

By the end of October, the North Vietnamese had formulated their strategy for 1975 and 1976. In what became known as &quot;Resolution of 1975&quot;, the party leadership reported that the war had reached its &quot;final stage&quot;. The army was to consolidate its gains, eliminate South Vietnamese border outposts and secure its logistical corridor, and continue its force build-up in the south. During 1976, the final general offensive would begin. The communists decided to start by attacking Phước Long Province, around 140 km north of Saigon.

In the meantime, morale in and supplies for the ARVN continued to fade away. Desertion increased, and only 65% of registered personnel were present. Morale fell due to Thiệu&#x27;s continued policy of promoting officers on the grounds of religion, loyalty and cronyism. Corruption and incompetence were endemic, with some officers &quot;raising it almost to an art form&quot;. Under heavy criticism, Thiệu reluctantly sacked General Nguyễn Văn Toàn, a loyalist notorious for corruption. 

The aid cuts meant that an artillery piece could only fire four rounds a day, and each soldier had only 85 bullets per month. Due to lack of fuel and spare parts, air force transport operations shrank by up to 70%. Due to Thiệu&#x27;s insistence on not surrendering any territory, the army was spread very thinly, defending useless terrain along a 600 mile (966 km) frontier, while the strategic reserve was occupied in static defensive roles. The situation was exacerbated by the collapse of the economy and a massive influx of refugees into the cities. Worldwide rises in fuel price due to the 1972 Arab oil embargo, and poor rice harvests throughout Asia, hit hard.

==Collapse==

By the end of 1974, around 370,000 communist troops were in South Vietnam, augmented by ever increasing influxes of military hardware. In mid-December, the communists attacked Phước Long, and quickly gained the upper hand, besieging the city.

On 2 January 1975, Thiệu held an emergency meeting with General Dư Quốc Đống, who was in charge of the Phước Long situation, and other senior military figures. Đống presented a plan for the relief of Phước Long, but it was rejected because a lack of reserve forces of sufficient size available, a lack of airlift capability, and the belief that the besieged defenders could not hold out long enough for reinforcements. Thiệu decided to cede the entire province to the North Vietnamese, since it was considered to be less important than Tây Ninh, Pleiku, or Huế — economically, politically, and demographically.

On 6 January 1975, Phước Long City became the first provincial capital permanently seized by the communists. Less than a sixth of the ARVN forces survived. Lê Duẩn declared that &quot;Never have we had military and political conditions so perfect or a strategic advantage so great as we have now.&quot; The communists thus decided to initiate a full-scale offensive against the central highlands, which had been named &quot;Campaign 275&quot;. General Văn Tiến Dũng planned to take Buôn Ma Thuột, using 75,000–80,000 men to surround the city before capturing it.

Major General Phạm Văn Phú, the II Corps commander, was given adequate warnings of the impending attacks, but was not worried. He thought the true objective was Pleiku or Kon Tum and that Buôn Ma Thuột was a diversion. The town was therefore lightly defended and communists outnumbered defenders by more than 8:1. The battle for Buôn Ma Thuột began on 10 March and ended only eight days later. Reinforcements were flown in, but were dismantled and fled in chaos.

On 18 March the communists took complete control of Đắk Lắk Province. ARVN forces began to rapidly shift positions in an attempt to keep the North Vietnamese from quickly pushing eastward to the coastal lowlands along Route 21. In the face of rapid communist advances, Thiệu had sent a delegation to Washington in early March to request an increase in aid. The US Ambassador Graham Martin also traveled to Washington to present the case to President Gerald Ford. However, the US Congress, increasingly reluctant to invest in what was seen as a lost cause, slashed a proposed $1.45 billion military aid package for 1975 to $700 million. The Ford administration, however, continued to encourage Thiệu to believe that money would eventually come.

During this time, Thiệu was feeling the increased pressure and became increasingly paranoid. According to one of his closest advisors Nguyễn Tiến Hưng, he became &quot;suspicious ... secretive ... and ever watchful for a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; against him.&quot; His increasing isolation had begun to deny him &quot;the services of competent people, adequate staff work, consultation, and coordination&quot;. Thieu&#x27;s military decisions were followed faithfully by his officers who generally agreed that he &quot;made all the decisions as to how the war should be conducted.&quot;

===Abandonment of the Central Highlands===

By 11 March, Thiệu concluded that there was no hope of receiving the $300 million supplemental aid package from the US. On that basis he called a meeting attended by Generals Quang and Viên. After reviewing the situation, Thiệu pulled out a small-scale map of South Vietnam and discussed the possible redeployment of the armed forces to &quot;hold and defend only those populous and flourishing areas which were really most important&quot;.

Thiệu sketched on the map those areas which he considered most important, all of the III and IV Corps Tactical Zones. He also pointed out those areas that were currently under communist control which would have to be retaken. The key to the location of these operations were concentrations of natural resources such as rice, rubber and industries. The necessary territory included coastal areas where oil had been discovered on the continental shelf. These areas were to become, in Thiệu&#x27;s words: &quot;Our untouchable heartland, the irreducible national stronghold.&quot; With respect to the I and II Corps Zones, he drew a series of phase lines on the map indicating that South Vietnamese forces should hold what they could, but that they could redeploy southward if needed. Thiệu declared this new strategy as &quot;Light at the top, heavy on the bottom.&quot;

The critical decision was made on 14 March when Thiệu met with Phú. Thiệu had decided to abandon Pleiku and Kon Tum so that the II Corps forces could concentrate on retaking Buôn Ma Thuột, which he considered more important. Phú then decided that the only possible means of doing this was to retreat to the coast along Interprovincial Route 7B, a dilapidated, rough track with several downed bridges, before recuperating and counterattacking back into the highlands.

The large-scale retreat of hundreds of thousands of military personnel and civilians would be dangerous. However, it was poorly planned, many senior officers were not kept informed, and some units were left behind or retreated incoherently. This was exacerbated by a three-day delay when the convoy encountered a broken bridge and had to rebuild it. The communist forces caught up, surrounded the convoy, and attacked it.

Heavy losses were incurred against the numerically dominant communists, who shelled and rocketed the soldiers and peasants alike. More bridge delays played into communist hands, and by the time the convoy reached Tuy Hòa on 27 March, it was estimated by the ARVN that only 20,000 of the 60,000 troops had survived, while only 25% of the estimated 180,000 civilians had escaped. Thiệu&#x27;s order to evacuate, which was too late, had resulted in chaos and a bloodbath that left more than 150,000 dead. The planned operation to retake Buôn Ma Thuột never materialized because II Corps had been reduced to only 25% strength. Buoyed by their easy triumph the North Vietnamese overran the whole region.

===Thiệu&#x27;s collapse===

However, a worse collapse occurred in the northernmost I Corps, after a series of U-turns by Thiệu. It added to the fall of the highlands, which had already earned Thiệu much criticism. I Corps fielded three infantry divisions, the elite Airborne and Marine Divisions, four Ranger Groups and an armored brigade, under the command of Ngô Quang Trưởng, regarded as the nation&#x27;s finest general. Until mid-March, the North Vietnamese had only tried to cut the highways, despite having five divisions and 27 further regiments. At a meeting on 13 March, Trưởng and the new III Corps commander, Lieutenant General Nguyễn Văn Toàn briefed Thiệu. Thiệu laid out his plan to consolidate a smaller proportion. As Trưởng understood it, he was free to redeploy his forces south to hold Đà Nẵng, South Vietnam&#x27;s second largest city, thereby abandoning Huế. Offshore oil deposits were thought to be nearby. Thiệu also decided to remove the Airborne and Marines, leaving I Corps exposed.

Thiệu called Trưởng to Saigon on 19 March to detail his withdrawal plan. The president then stunned Trưởng by announcing that he had misinterpreted his previous orders: The old imperial capital of Huế was not to be abandoned, despite losing two divisions.
In the meantime, the withdrawal preparations and the increasing North Vietnamese pressure caused civilians to flee, clogging the highway and hampering the withdrawal. Trưởng requested permission for a withdrawal of his forces into the three enclaves as planned; Thiệu ordered him to &quot;hold onto any territory he could with whatever forces he now had, including the Marine Division&quot;, implying that he could retreat if and when needed.

Trưởng returned to Đà Nẵng to the start of a North Vietnamese offensive. Thiệu made a nationwide radio broadcast that afternoon proclaiming that Huế would be held &quot;at all costs&quot;, contradicting the previous order. That evening Trưởng ordered a retreat to a new defense line at the Mỹ Chánh River to defend Huế, thereby ceding all of Quảng Trị Province. He was confident that his forces could hold Huế, but was then astounded by a late afternoon message from Thiệu that ordered &quot;that because of inability to simultaneously defend all three enclaves, the I Corps commander was free ... to redeploy his forces for the defense of Đà Nẵng only.&quot; The people of Quảng Trị and Huế began to leave their homes by the hundreds of thousands, joining an ever-growing exodus toward Đà Nẵng.

Meanwhile, the North Vietnamese closed in on Đà Nẵng amid the chaos caused by Thiệu&#x27;s confused leadership. Within a few days I Corps was beyond control. The South Vietnamese tried to evacuate from the other urban enclaves into Đà Nẵng, but the 1st Division collapsed after its commander, Brigadier General Nguyễn Văn Diệm, angered by Thiệu&#x27;s abandonment, told his men that &quot;&quot;We&#x27;ve been betrayed ... [i]t is now &quot;sauve qui peu&quot; [&quot;every man for himself&quot;] ... See you in Đà Nẵng.&quot;&quot; The overland march, pummelled by communist artillery the entire way, degenerated into chaos as it moved toward Đà Nẵng. The remainder of the force deserted or began looting. Only a minority survived and some disillusioned officers committed suicide.

As anarchy and looting enveloped Đà Nẵng, with a defense of the city becoming impossible, Trưởng requested permission to evacuate by sea, but Thiệu, baffled, refused to make a decision. When his communications with Saigon were sundered by communist shelling, Trưởng ordered a naval withdrawal, as Thiệu was not making a decision either way.

With no support or leadership from Đà Nẵng, the evacuation turned into a costly debacle, as the communists pounded the city with artillery, killing tens of thousands. Many drowned while jostling for room on the boats; with no logistical support, those vessels sent were far too few for the millions of would-be evacuees. Only around 16,000 soldiers were pulled out, and of the almost two million civilians that packed Đà Nẵng, little more than 50,000 were evacuated. As a result, 70,000 troops were taken prisoner, along with around 100 fighter jets. During the fall of Đà Nẵng, no pitched battles had been fought. In quick succession, the few remaining cities along the coastline &quot;fell like a row of porcelain vases sliding off a shelf&quot; and half the country had fallen in two weeks. When his hometown of Phan Rang fell, retreating ARVN troops showed their disgust at Thiệu by demolishing his family&#x27;s ancestral shrines and graves.

===Communists close in and Thiệu resigns===
By this time, the North Vietnamese Politburo no longer felt it necessary to wait until 1976 for the final offensive, and they sought to secure victory within two months, before the monsoon season began. On 7 April 1975, Lê Đức Thọ arrived at General Văn Tiến Dũng&#x27;s headquarters near Loc Ninh to oversee the final battles. General Dũng prepared a three-pronged attack, which would seize the vital highway intersection at Xuân Lộc, the capital of Long Khánh Province and &quot;the gateway to Saigon&quot;, before heading for Biên Hòa.

The week-long fighting that erupted on 8 April in and around Xuân Lộc was the most significant engagement of the entire offensive. The South Vietnamese eventually committed 25,000 troops to the battle, almost one-third of their remaining forces. After conducting a valiant defense, the 18th Division was overwhelmed by a 6:1 numerical ratio, and the communists encircled Saigon.

On 10 April, US President Gerald Ford went to Congress to request a US $722 million supplemental military aid package for South Vietnam plus $250 million in economic and refugee aid but Congress was not impressed. On 17 April the discussion ended—there would be no further military funding for Thiệu.

On 21 April 1975, Thiệu, under intense political pressure, resigned as president after losing the confidence of his closest domestic allies. In his televised farewell speech during which he was close to tears, he admitted, for the first time, having ordered the evacuation of the Central Highlands and the north that had led to debacle. He then stated that it had been the inevitable course of action considering the situation, but still blamed the generals.

In a rambling and incoherent speech, Thiệu went on to excoriate the US, attacking &quot;our great ally, [the] leader of the free world&quot;. &quot;The United States has not respected its promises&quot; he declared. &quot;It is inhumane. It is not trustworthy. It is irresponsible.&quot; He added, &quot;The United States did not keep its word. Is an American&#x27;s word reliable these days?&quot;, and &quot;The United States did not keep its promise to help us fight for freedom and it was in the same fight that the United States lost 50,000 of its young men.&quot;

Thiệu bemoaned the American funding cuts, which he equated to desertion, saying, &quot;You don&#x27;t fight by miracles, you need high morale and bravery. But even if you are brave, you can&#x27;t just stand there and bite the enemy. And we are fighting against Russia and China. We&#x27;re having to bargain for aid from the United States like haggling for fish in the market and I am not going to continue this bargaining for a few million dollars when your [South Vietnamese soldiers and civilians] lives are at stake.&quot;

He criticised the American policy, saying, &quot;You Americans with your 500,000 soldiers in Vietnam! You were not defeated...you ran away!&quot; He lambasted US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger for signing the Paris Peace Accords, which the communists violated, and which he regarded as an American abandonment, stating &quot;I never thought that such a good Secretary of State would produce a treaty that would bring us to our death&quot;. Thiệu also blamed the local media and foreign broadcasting organisations for lowering the morale of the military and the population by reporting on the corruption and setbacks of his government.
Immediately following the speech, Vice President Trần Văn Hương took the presidency. However, the Communist tide could not be stopped. They overran what was left of the ARVN within nine days and took Saigon on 30 April 1975, ending the war.

==Life in exile==

In his farewell speech, Thiệu said, &quot;I resign, but I do not desert,&quot; but he fled to Taiwan on a C-118 transport plane five days later. According to Morley Safer, the CIA was involved in the flight of Thiệu, his aides, and a &quot;planeload of suitcases containing heavy metal,&quot; though it was revealed in 2015 by Tuổi Trẻ, a Vietnamese news source, that the &quot;heavy metal&quot;, which was 16 tons of gold, was left behind and given to the Soviet Union from 1979 onwards as debt payment. Thiệu also brought 15 tons of luggage with him.

Thiệu initially lived in Taiwan at the house of his brother Nguyen Van Kieu, the Ambassador of South Vietnam to Taiwan before moving to a rented property in Tianmu, downtown Taipei. According to a &quot;New York Times&quot; report, Thiệu suffered from depression at this time as a result of going into exile. After a brief spell in Taiwan, he then settled in London, having obtained a visa there because his son was studying at Eton College and lived in a house in Kingston upon Thames. Thiệu kept a low profile, and in 1990 even the British Foreign Office claimed to have no information on his personal life or whereabouts. In the early 1990s, Thiệu took up residence in Foxborough, Massachusetts, where he lived reclusively. He never produced an autobiography, rarely assented to interviews and shunned visitors. Neighbours had little contact with him or knowledge of him, aside from seeing him walking his dog. He did, however, give an interview to the West German magazine &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; in 1979 and appeared in the 1980 documentary television mini-series &quot;&quot;, discussing his time as president of South Vietnam.

Thiệu&#x27;s aversion to public appearances was attributed to a fear of hostility from South Vietnamese who believed that he had failed them. He acknowledged his compatriots&#x27; low esteem of his administration in a 1992 interview, but said, &quot;You say that you blame me for the fall of South Vietnam, you criticize me, everything. I let you do that. I like to see you do better than I.&quot; Thiệu continually predicted the demise of the Vietnamese Communist Party&#x27;s grip on power and warned the United States government not to establish diplomatic relations with the communist regime. Relations between the US and the communist regime in Hanoi were formally established in 1995. Thiệu said that when the communists are deposed and &quot;democracy is recovered,&quot; he would return to his homeland, but their hold on Vietnam remained unchallenged during his lifetime. He futilely offered to represent the refugee community in reconciliation talks with Hanoi so exiles could be allowed to return home.

Thiệu was criticized by many opponents and historians, but he was appreciated by others. The US ambassador to South Vietnam, Ellsworth Bunker, told former Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird about Thiệu: &quot;He is an individual of very considerable intellectual capacity. He made the decision in the beginning to follow the constitutional road, not to rule with a clique of generals, which many of them expected he would do. He has been acting more and more like a politician, getting out into the country, following up on pacification, talking to people, seeing what they want.&quot; The military historian Lewis Sorley suggests that Thiệu &quot;was arguably a more honest and decent man than Lyndon Johnson, and – given the differences in their respective circumstances – quite likely a more effective president of his country.&quot;

==Death==
Thiệu and his wife Mai Anh celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary in Hawaii when the September 11 attacks happened. The fact that both planes (American Airlines Flight 11 and United Airlines Flight 175) that crashed into the World Trade Center had departed from Logan International Airport in Boston, had certain psychological effects on Thiệu and also affected his health. Because much of the air travel was affected by the attacks, the couple was stuck in Hawaii for more than a week. When they got home, Thiệu&#x27;s condition had worsened.

He died on 29 September 2001, aged 78, at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, after he collapsed and was put on a respirator due to a stroke which he suffered at his Foxborough home. His funeral was held on 6 October 2001, in Newton, Massachusetts. He was cremated and the location of his ashes is unknown. According to Mai Anh, before his death, Thiệu expressed his wish to be buried in his hometown of Phan Rang, otherwise his ashes will be scattered half into the sea and half on the mountain.

==Personal life==

In 1951, Thiệu married Nguyễn Thị Mai Anh, the daughter of a wealthy herbal medicine practitioner from the Mekong Delta. She was a Roman Catholic, and Thiệu converted to Catholicism in 1958. Critics claimed that he did so in order to improve his prospects of rising up the military ranks, because Diệm was known to favor Catholics. The couple had two sons and one daughter.

He spoke Vietnamese, English and French fluently.

==Awards and decorations==
** National Order of Vietnam (Grand Cross)
** National Order of Vietnam (Commander)
** Army Distinguished Service Order (1st class)
** Air Force Distinguished Service Order (1st class)
** Navy Distinguished Service Order (1st class)
** Military Merit Medal
** Good Conduct Medal (2nd class)
** Military Service Medal (2nd class)
** Armed Forces Honor Medal (1st class)
** Vietnamese Gallantry Cross with 3 palms
** Army Meritorious Service Medal
** Vietnam Campaign Medal
** &quot;Croix de guerre des théâtres d&#x27;opérations extérieures&quot;
** Grand Officer of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite (1953)
** Honorary Recipient of the Grand Order of Mugunghwa (1969)
** Grand Cordon of the Order of Brilliant Jade (1969)
** Commander of the Legion of Merit

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 

== External links ==
* &quot;Nguyen Van Thieu, 78; S. Vietnam&#x27;s President&quot;, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, 1 October 2001
* &quot;Nguyen Van Thieu Is Dead at 76; Last President of South Vietnam&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot;, 1 October 2001
* &quot;Nguyen Van Thieu&quot;, &quot;The Independent&quot; (UK), 2 October 2001
* &quot;1975: Vietnam&#x27;s President Thieu resigns&quot; BBC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="0" end="16" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="60" end="76" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q96785422" start="121" end="147" title="Leaders of South Vietnam" label="president of South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314525" start="191" end="223" title="Republic of Vietnam Military Forces" label="Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="250" end="264" title="military junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="428" end="434" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="457" end="471" title="fall of Saigon" label="fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="489" end="502" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19013" start="524" end="533" title="Phan Rang–Tháp Chàm" label="Phan Rang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202888" start="541" end="560" title="South Central Coast" label="south central coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="610" end="619" title="Việt Minh" label="Việt Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="623" end="634" title="Hồ Chí Minh" label="Hồ Chí Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738088" start="680" end="704" title="Vietnamese National Army" label="Vietnamese National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="732" end="748" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10828976" start="954" end="990" title="Vietnamese National Military Academy" label="Vietnamese National Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935163" start="1084" end="1107" title="1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt" label="put down a coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="1126" end="1139" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1180" end="1191" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="1228" end="1241" title="Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party" label="Cần Lao Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078181" start="1438" end="1481" title="1963 South Vietnamese coup" label="coup against Ngô Đình Diệm in November 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q635624" start="1502" end="1517" title="Buddhist crisis" label="Buddhist crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q864767" start="1540" end="1555" title="Gia Long Palace" label="Gia Long Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003866" start="1566" end="1587" title="arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem" label="captured and executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1684" end="1689" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="1919" end="1929" title="figurehead" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="1963" end="1976" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568749" start="2557" end="2574" title="1971 South Vietnamese presidential election" label="the 1971 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095768" start="2964" end="2985" title="Operation Lam Son 719" label="Operation Lam Sơn 719"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395085" start="3011" end="3027" title="Easter Offensive" label="Easter Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976677" start="3033" end="3040" title="I Corps (South Vietnam)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874460" start="3109" end="3123" title="Hoàng Xuân Lãm" label="Hoàng Xuân Lãm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353072" start="3203" end="3219" title="Ngô Quang Trưởng" label="Ngô Quang Trưởng"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="3246" end="3265" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="3396" end="3418" title="Ho Chi Minh Campaign" label="final push for victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="3738" end="3744" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3822" end="3828" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19013" start="3992" end="4001" title="Phan Rang–Tháp Chàm" label="Phan Rang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="4620" end="4634" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="4704" end="4718" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="4727" end="4743" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="5034" end="5043" title="Việt Minh" label="Việt Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="5052" end="5063" title="Hồ Chí Minh" label="Hồ Chí Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="5576" end="5582" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="5626" end="5642" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25281" start="6273" end="6279" title="Đà Lạt" label="Đà Lạt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738088" start="6398" end="6419" title="Vietnam National Army" label="Vietnam National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="6462" end="6469" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="6517" end="6533" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="6555" end="6585" title="Democratic Republic of Vietnam" label="Democratic Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132066" start="6881" end="6896" title="École spéciale militaire de Saint-Cyr" label="Infantry School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029873" start="6900" end="6910" title="Coëtquidan" label="Coëtquidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="7452" end="7470" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="7501" end="7514" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="7628" end="7649" title="Geneva Conference (1954)" label="1954 Geneva Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="8047" end="8080" title="Command and General Staff College" label="Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="8084" end="8100" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="8102" end="8108" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="8137" end="8147" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="8149" end="8154" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="8235" end="8242" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943677" start="8317" end="8331" title="Vương Văn Đông" label="Vương Văn Đông"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799000" start="8336" end="8352" title="Nguyễn Chánh Thi" label="Nguyễn Chánh Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="8395" end="8408" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644012" start="8729" end="8741" title="7th Division (South Vietnam)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="8747" end="8755" title="Biên Hòa" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937110" start="8857" end="8873" title="Trần Thiện Khiêm" label="Trần Thiện Khiêm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596310" start="9131" end="9143" title="1st Division (South Vietnam)" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="9154" end="9157" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285977" start="9267" end="9277" title="Đỗ Cao Trí" label="Đỗ Cao Trí"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298398" start="9345" end="9357" title="5th Division (South Vietnam)" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33425" start="9417" end="9423" title="Mỹ Tho" label="Mỹ Tho"/>
<link wikidata="Q864767" start="9766" end="9781" title="Gia Long Palace" label="Gia Long Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q334419" start="10436" end="10450" title="Dương Văn Minh" label="Dương Văn Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="10902" end="10914" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="11105" end="11109" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q428129" start="11716" end="11742" title="Saigon Notre-Dame Basilica" label="Saigon Notre-Dame Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="11951" end="11963" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507839" start="11965" end="11975" title="Lê Văn Kim" label="Lê Văn Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820697" start="11980" end="11993" title="Tôn Thất Đính" label="Tôn Thất Đính"/>
<link wikidata="Q504362" start="12043" end="12055" title="Nguyễn Khánh" label="Nguyễn Khánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="12990" end="12997" title="Cần Lao Party" label="Cần Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="13404" end="13418" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979793" start="13906" end="13942" title="Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam" label="Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022852" start="14145" end="14158" title="Nguyễn Hữu Có" label="Nguyễn Hữu Có"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975531" start="14585" end="14593" title="IV Corps (South Vietnam)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="14613" end="14625" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315886" start="14736" end="14749" title="Dương Văn Đức" label="Dương Văn Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480719" start="14833" end="14845" title="Lâm Văn Phát" label="Lâm Văn Phát"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="15443" end="15472" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976677" start="15514" end="15521" title="I Corps (South Vietnam)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799000" start="15530" end="15546" title="Nguyễn Chánh Thi" label="Nguyễn Chánh Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116336" start="15559" end="15573" title="Chung Tấn Cang" label="Chung Tấn Cang"/>
<link wikidata="Q649920" start="15591" end="15615" title="Republic of Vietnam Navy" label="Republic of Vietnam Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833334" start="15876" end="15888" title="Trần Văn Đôn" label="Trần Văn Đôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507839" start="15890" end="15900" title="Lê Văn Kim" label="Lê Văn Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735139" start="15905" end="15917" title="Mai Hữu Xuân" label="Mai Hữu Xuân"/>
<link wikidata="Q707287" start="15952" end="15965" title="Phan Khắc Sửu" label="Phan Khắc Sửu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="16452" end="16469" title="Maxwell D. Taylor" label="Maxwell D. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="16887" end="16901" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="18479" end="18506" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950482" start="18780" end="18794" title="Phạm Ngọc Thảo" label="Phạm Ngọc Thảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950482" start="19205" end="19219" title="Phạm Ngọc Thảo" label="Phạm Ngọc Thảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="19580" end="19582" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006267" start="20480" end="20495" title="Thích Trí Quang" label="Thích Trí Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="20583" end="20600" title="Can Lao Party" label="Cần Lao apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568748" start="21592" end="21602" title="1967 South Vietnamese presidential election" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568745" start="21607" end="21618" title="1967 South Vietnamese parliamentary election" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="22364" end="22378" title="Tết" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q33425" start="22670" end="22676" title="Mỹ Tho" label="Mỹ Tho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="22684" end="22696" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="23255" end="23264" title="Việt Cộng" label="Việt Cộng"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="23979" end="23990" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="24214" end="24227" title="Tết Offensive" label="Tết Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568749" start="25563" end="25580" title="1971 South Vietnamese presidential election" label="easily re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="25699" end="25718" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="26213" end="26221" title="Biên Hòa" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072362" start="26616" end="26652" title="Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam" label="Provisional Revolutionary Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="27052" end="27056" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419202" start="27153" end="27167" title="War Powers Resolution" label="War Powers Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27510" end="27525" title="Dong Van Khuyen" label="Đổng Văn Khuyên"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872471" start="28055" end="28074" title="Battle of Svay Rieng" label="Svay Rieng Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q130391" start="28130" end="28138" title="Tây Ninh" label="Tây Ninh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188369" start="28937" end="28956" title="Phước Long Province" label="Phước Long Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934397" start="29423" end="29438" title="Nguyễn Văn Toàn (general, born 1932)" label="Nguyễn Văn Toàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="30080" end="30096" title="1973 oil crisis" label="Arab oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806425" start="30339" end="30349" title="Phước Long, Bình Phước" label="Phước Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q10757540" start="30471" end="30483" title="Dư Quốc Đống" label="Dư Quốc Đống"/>
<link wikidata="Q130391" start="30943" end="30951" title="Tây Ninh" label="Tây Ninh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="30953" end="30959" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="30964" end="30967" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q466001" start="31175" end="31182" title="Lê Duẩn" label="Lê Duẩn"/>
<link wikidata="Q700516" start="31471" end="31484" title="Văn Tiến Dũng" label="Văn Tiến Dũng"/>
<link wikidata="Q33469" start="31501" end="31514" title="Buôn Ma Thuột" label="Buôn Ma Thuột"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="31744" end="31750" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q36493" start="31754" end="31761" title="Kon Tum" label="Kon Tum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36690" start="32099" end="32115" title="Đắk Lắk Province" label="Đắk Lắk Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q724360" start="32422" end="32435" title="Graham Martin" label="Graham Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="32497" end="32508" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799745" start="32926" end="32942" title="Nguyễn Tiến Hưng" label="Nguyễn Tiến Hưng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33603" end="33608" title="Đăng Văn Quang" label="Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33469" start="34914" end="34927" title="Buôn Ma Thuột" label="Buôn Ma Thuột"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353072" start="36693" end="36709" title="Ngô Quang Trưởng" label="Ngô Quang Trưởng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934397" start="36972" end="36987" title="Nguyễn Văn Toàn (general)" label="Nguyễn Văn Toàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q233969" start="41179" end="41189" title="Lê Đức Thọ" label="Lê Đức Thọ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258599" start="41385" end="41393" title="Xuân Lộc" label="Xuân Lộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="41488" end="41496" title="Biên Hòa" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q487076" start="41546" end="41568" title="Battle of Xuân Lộc" label="in and around Xuân Lộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="41905" end="41916" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="44429" end="44443" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="44735" end="44741" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="44747" end="44752" title="C-118" label="C-118"/>
<link wikidata="Q920637" start="44799" end="44811" title="Morley Safer" label="Morley Safer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305823" start="45352" end="45358" title="Tianmu, Shilin District" label="Tianmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="45369" end="45375" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="45398" end="45412" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="45554" end="45560" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="45623" end="45635" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="45660" end="45680" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q830669" start="45867" end="45892" title="Foxborough, Massachusetts" label="Foxborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="46178" end="46189" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582526" start="46837" end="46899" title="Vietnam-United States relations" label="United States government not to establish diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q63708" start="47470" end="47486" title="Ellsworth Bunker" label="Ellsworth Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="47500" end="47520" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q499056" start="47521" end="47533" title="Melvin Laird" label="Melvin Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537062" start="47953" end="47965" title="Lewis Sorley" label="Lewis Sorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="48264" end="48270" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="48280" end="48300" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="48338" end="48365" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705" start="48370" end="48396" title="United Airlines Flight 175" label="United Airlines Flight 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="48420" end="48438" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="48457" end="48484" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897536" start="48782" end="48818" title="Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center" label="Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="48822" end="48828" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="48886" end="48892" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q830669" start="48918" end="48928" title="Foxborough, Massachusetts" label="Foxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="48978" end="48999" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10799655" start="49292" end="49310" title="Madame Nguyen Van Thieu" label="Nguyễn Thị Mai Anh"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="49338" end="49353" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="49400" end="49414" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="49653" end="49663" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="49665" end="49672" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="49677" end="49683" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q93630" start="49725" end="49750" title="National Order of Vietnam" label="National Order of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932227" start="49809" end="49841" title="Distinguished Service Order (Vietnam)" label="Army Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932227" start="49857" end="49894" title="Distinguished Service Order (Vietnam)" label="Air Force Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932227" start="49910" end="49942" title="Distinguished Service Order (Vietnam)" label="Navy Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852083" start="49958" end="49978" title="Military Merit Medal (Vietnam)" label="Military Merit Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785550" start="49982" end="50000" title="Good Conduct Medal (Vietnam)" label="Good Conduct Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787244" start="50016" end="50038" title="Military Service Medal (South Vietnam)" label="Military Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675098" start="50054" end="50078" title="Armed Forces Honor Medal" label="Armed Forces Honor Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468132" start="50094" end="50120" title="Gallantry Cross (South Vietnam)" label="Vietnamese Gallantry Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819565" start="50137" end="50167" title="Meritorious Service Medal (Vietnam)" label="Army Meritorious Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287215" start="50171" end="50193" title="Vietnam Campaign Medal" label="Vietnam Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141876" start="50203" end="50261" title="Croix de guerre des théâtres d&amp;#x27;opérations extérieures" label="Croix de guerre des théâtres d&amp;#x27;opérations extérieures"/>
<link wikidata="Q369412" start="50292" end="50317" title="Order of Ouissam Alaouite" label="Order of Ouissam Alaouite"/>
<link wikidata="Q624463" start="50354" end="50378" title="Grand Order of Mugunghwa" label="Grand Order of Mugunghwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442688" start="50409" end="50432" title="Order of Brilliant Jade" label="Order of Brilliant Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="50460" end="50475" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="50629" end="50646" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="50754" end="50768" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="50829" end="50844" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80097" wikidata="Q105019" url="?curid=80097" title="Phobos (mythology)">
<text>Phobos (, , Latin: &quot;Phobus&quot;) is the god and personification of fear and panic in Greek mythology. Phobos was the son of Ares and Aphrodite, and the brother of Deimos. He does not have a major role in mythology outside of being his father&#x27;s attendant.

In Classical Greek mythology, Phobos exists as both the god of and personification of the fear brought by war.

His name is transliterated in Latin as Phobus, but his counterpart in Roman mythology is Pavor or Terror.

==Mythology==
In Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot;, Phobos is the son of Ares and Aphrodite, and the sibling of Deimos and Harmonia. He mainly appears in an assistant role to his father and causes disorder in battle. In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, he accompanied his father into battle along with the goddess Eris (discord) and his brother Deimos (Dread). In Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Shield of Herakles&quot;, Phobos and Deimos accompany Ares into battle and remove him from the field once he is injured by Herakles. In Nonnus&#x27; &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;, Zeus arms Phobos with lightning and Deimos with thunder to frighten Typhon. Later in the work, Phobos and Deimos act as Ares&#x27;s charioteers to battle the god Dionysus during his war against the Indians.

In the &quot;Seven Against Thebes&quot; by Aeschylus, the seven warriors slaughter a bull over a black shield and then &quot;...touching the bull&#x27;s gore with their hands they swore an oath by Ares, by Enyo, and by Rout [Phobos]&quot;. According to Stesichorus, Ares&#x27;s son, Kyknos, &quot;...beheaded strangers who came along in order to build a temple to Phobos (fear) from the skulls.&quot;

==Depictions==

Hesiod depicts Phobos on the shield of Heracles as &quot;…staring backwards with eyes that glowed with fire. His mouth was full of teeth in a white row, fearful and daunting…&quot;

Phobos often is depicted as having a lion&#x27;s or lion-like head. This may be seen in &quot;Description of Greece&quot; by Pausanias, &quot;On the shield of Agamemnon is Phobos (Fear), who[se] head is a lion&#x27;s…&quot;.

==Worship==
Plutarch makes reference to a shrine to Phobos at Sparta, in addition to shrines dedicated to Death (Thanatos) and Laughter (Gelos), and he claimed that the Spartans honoured fear as a positive force that held the state together. Pausanias, writing during Imperial Rome, noted that the temple dedicated to Phobos was located outside of the city.

== The &quot;Iliad&quot; ==
There are many places within the &quot;Iliad&quot;, where Homer mentions the presence of Phobos and Deimos. Some references are:

Homer, &quot;Iliad&quot; 11. 36 ff:&quot;[The shield of Agamemnon:] And he took up the man-enclosing elaborate stark shield, a thing of splendour. There were ten circles of bronze upon it, and set about it were twenty knobs of tin, pale-shining, and in the very centre another knob of dark cobalt. And circled in the midst of all was the blank-eyed face of the Gorgo (Gorgon) with her stare of horror, and Deimos (Dread) was inscribed upon it, and Phobos (Fear).

Homer, &quot;Iliad&quot; 15. 119 ff:&quot;So he [Ares] spoke, and ordered Deimos (Dread) and Phobos (Fear) to harness his horses, and himself got into his shining armour.&quot;

==Historical reference==

According to Plutarch, Alexander the Great offered sacrifices to Phobos on the eve of the Battle of Gaugamela (in all probability asking for Darius to be filled with fear). This was believed by Mary Renault to be part of Alexander&#x27;s psychological warfare campaign against Darius III. Darius fled from the field of Gaugamela, making Alexander&#x27;s praying to Phobos seem successful as a tactic.

Phobos was depicted on the chest of Cypselus on the shield of Agamemnon.

==Astronomy==

In 1877, the American astronomer Asaph Hall discovered the two satellites of the planet Mars. Hall named the two moons Phobos and Deimos. Phobos is the larger of the two satellites.

==Psychology==

The word &quot;phobia&quot; derives from &quot;&quot;, (), meaning irrational .

==Notes==
== References ==
* Aeschylus, translated in two volumes. 1. &quot;Seven Against Thebes&quot; by Herbert Weir Smyth, Ph. D. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. 1926. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
*Hesiod, &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot; translated by William Henry Denham Rouse (1863-1950), from the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca. 3 Vols.&quot; W.H.D. Rouse. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1940-1942. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="0" end="6" title="Phobos (mythology)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12" end="17" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="46" end="49" title="Deity" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="54" end="69" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="73" end="77" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q208450" start="82" end="87" title="panic" label="panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="91" end="106" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="130" end="134" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="139" end="148" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240" start="169" end="175" title="Deimos (deity)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="409" end="414" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="418" end="424" title="Phobos (mythology)" label="Phobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="449" end="464" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="468" end="473" title="Phobos (mythology)" label="Pavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105019" start="477" end="483" title="Phobos (mythology)" label="Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="503" end="509" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="523" end="531" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="560" end="564" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="569" end="578" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240" start="599" end="605" title="Deimos (deity)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q978079" start="610" end="618" title="Harmonia" label="Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="717" end="722" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="791" end="795" title="Eris (mythology)" label="Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240" start="822" end="828" title="Deimos (deity)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="861" end="879" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="984" end="992" title="Heracles" label="Herakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="997" end="1003" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="1016" end="1026" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1034" end="1038" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="1102" end="1108" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1196" end="1204" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1232" end="1237" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q506546" start="1255" end="1275" title="Seven Against Thebes" label="Seven Against Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="1285" end="1294" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q747657" start="1448" end="1452" title="Enyo" label="Enyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="1495" end="1506" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1967" end="1976" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="2080" end="2088" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="2130" end="2136" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="2181" end="2189" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530498" start="2205" end="2210" title="Gelos (mythology)" label="Gelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2310" end="2319" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2336" end="2349" title="Roman Empire" label="Imperial Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2494" end="2499" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2513" end="2518" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3266" end="3274" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="3276" end="3295" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q179670" start="3343" end="3362" title="Battle of Gaugamela" label="Battle of Gaugamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q235354" start="3447" end="3459" title="Mary Renault" label="Mary Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="3530" end="3540" title="Darius III of Persia" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="3717" end="3726" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="3766" end="3776" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106559" start="3777" end="3787" title="Asaph Hall" label="Asaph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3832" end="3836" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="3863" end="3869" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="3874" end="3880" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q175854" start="3958" end="3964" title="phobia" label="phobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="4053" end="4062" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807209" start="4297" end="4311" title="Timothy Gantz" label="Gantz, Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="4457" end="4463" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="4767" end="4773" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="5067" end="5086" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5494" end="5503" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80100" wikidata="Q214758" url="?curid=80100" title="Dean Acheson">
<text>Dean Gooderham Acheson ( ; April 11, 1893October 12, 1971) was an American politician and lawyer. As the 51st U.S. Secretary of State, he set the foreign policy of the Harry S. Truman administration from 1949 to 1953. He was also Truman&#x27;s main foreign policy advisor from 1945 to 1947 during early years of the Cold War. Acheson helped design the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, as well as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. He was in private law practice from July 1947 to December 1948. After 1949, Acheson came under political attack from Republicans led by Senator Joseph McCarthy over Truman&#x27;s policy toward the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

As a private citizen in 1968, he counseled President Lyndon B. Johnson to negotiate for peace with North Vietnam. During the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, President John F. Kennedy called upon Acheson for advice, bringing him into the executive committee (ExComm), a strategic advisory group.

==Early life and education==
Dean Gooderham Acheson was born in Middletown, Connecticut, on April 11, 1893. His father, Edward Campion Acheson, was an English-born Canadian (immigrated to Canada in 1881) who became a Church of England priest after graduating from Wycliffe College and later became a bishop of the Episcopal Church. He moved to the U.S., eventually becoming Bishop of Connecticut. His mother, Eleanor Gertrude (Gooderham), was a Canadian-born descendant of William Gooderham, Sr. (1790–1881), a founder of the Gooderham and Worts Distillery of Toronto. Like his father, Acheson was a staunch Democrat and opponent of prohibition.

Acheson attended Groton School and Yale College (1912–1915), where he joined Scroll and Key Society, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and was a brother of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity (Phi chapter). At Groton and Yale he had the reputation of a partier and prankster; he was somewhat aloof but still popular with his classmates. Acheson&#x27;s well-known, reputed arrogance—he disdained the curriculum at Yale because it focused on memorizing subjects already known—was apparent early. At Harvard Law School from 1915 to 1918, however, he was swept away by the intellect of professor Felix Frankfurter and finished fifth in his class.

==Personal life==
On May 15, 1917, while serving in the National Guard, Acheson married Alice Caroline Stanley (August 12, 1895 – January 20, 1996). She loved painting and politics and served as a stabilizing influence throughout their enduring marriage; they had three children: David Campion Acheson, Jane Acheson Brown and Mary Eleanor Acheson Bundy.

==Career==
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis had begun a new tradition of bright law students clerking for the U.S. Supreme Court justices. Acheson clerked for him for two terms from 1919 to 1921. Frankfurter and Brandeis were close associates, and future Supreme Court Justice Frankfurter suggested that Brandeis take on Acheson.

Throughout his long career, Acheson displayed:
:exceptional intellectual power and purpose, and tough inner fiber. He projected the long lines and aristocratic bearing of the thoroughbred horse, a self-assured grace, an acerbic elegance of mind, and a charm whose chief attraction was perhaps its penetrating candor...[He] was swift-flowing and direct... Acheson was perceived as an 18th century rationalist ready to apply an irreverent wit to matters public and private.

===Economic diplomacy===
A lifelong Democrat, Acheson worked at a law firm in Washington, Covington &amp; Burling, often dealing with international legal issues before Franklin Delano Roosevelt appointed him Undersecretary of the Treasury in March 1933. When Secretary William H. Woodin fell ill, Acheson suddenly found himself acting secretary despite his ignorance of finance. Because of his opposition to FDR&#x27;s plan to deflate the dollar by controlling gold prices (thus creating inflation), he was forced to resign in November 1933. He resumed his law practice.

===World War II===
Brought back as assistant secretary of state on February 1, 1941, Acheson implemented much of Roosevelt&#x27;s economic policy of aiding Great Britain and harming the Axis Powers. Acheson implemented the Lend-Lease policy that helped re-arm Great Britain and the American/British/Dutch oil embargo that cut off 95 percent of Japanese oil supplies and escalated the crisis with Japan in 1941. Roosevelt froze all Japanese assets merely to disconcert them. He did not intend the flow of oil to Japan to cease. The president then departed Washington for Newfoundland to meet with Churchill. While he was gone Acheson used those frozen assets to deny Japan oil. Upon the president&#x27;s return, he decided it would appear weak and appeasing to reverse the &quot;de facto&quot; oil embargo.

In 1944, Acheson attended the Bretton Woods Conference as the head delegate from the State Department. At this conference the post-war international economic structure was designed. It was the birthplace of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the last of which would evolve into the World Trade Organization.

===Cold War diplomacy===
Later, in 1945, Harry S. Truman selected Acheson as the Undersecretary of the United States Department of State; he retained this position working under Secretaries of State Edward Stettinius, Jr., James F. Byrnes, and George Marshall. As late as 1946 Acheson sought détente with the Soviet Union. In 1946, as chairman of a special committee to prepare a plan for the international control of atomic energy, he wrote the Acheson–Lilienthal report. At first Acheson was conciliatory towards Joseph Stalin.

The Soviet Union&#x27;s attempts at regional hegemony in Eastern Europe and in Turkey and Iran changed Acheson&#x27;s thinking. From this point forward, one historian writes, &quot;Acheson was more than &#x27;present at the creation&#x27; of the Cold War; he was a primary architect.&quot; Acheson often was acting secretary during the secretary&#x27;s frequent overseas trips, and during this period he cemented a close relationship with President Truman. Acheson devised the policy and wrote Truman&#x27;s 1947 request to Congress for aid to Greece and Turkey, a speech which stressed the dangers of totalitarianism (but did not name the Soviet Union) and marked the fundamental change in American foreign policy that became known as the Truman Doctrine.

On June 30, 1947, Acheson received the Medal for Merit from President Truman.

===The &quot;White Paper&quot; Defense===
During the summer of 1949, after the unexpected Democratic victory in the 1948 elections did not quiet the question &quot;Who Lost China?&quot;, Acheson had the State Department produce a study of recent Sino-American relations. The document known officially as &quot;United States Relations with China with Special Reference to the Period 1944–1949&quot;, which later was simply called the China &quot;White Paper&quot;, attempted to dismiss any misinterpretations of Chinese and American diplomacy toward each other. Published during the height of Mao Zedong&#x27;s takeover, the 1,054-page document argued that American intervention in China was doomed to failure. Although Acheson and Truman had hoped that the study would dispel rumors and conjecture, the documents helped to convince many critics that the administration had indeed failed to check the spread of communism in China.

===Korean War===
Acheson&#x27;s speech on January 12, 1950, before the National Press Club did not mention the Korea Peninsula and Formosa (Taiwan) as part of the all-important &quot;defense perimeter&quot; of the United States, known as the Acheson Line. Since the war in Korea broke out on June 25, just a few months later, critics, especially in South Korea, took Acheson&#x27;s statements to mean that the United States support for the new Syngman Rhee government in South Korea would be limited and that the speech provided Stalin and Kim Il Sung with a &quot;green light&quot; to believe the U.S. would not intervene if they invaded the South. When Soviet archives opened in the 1980s, however, research found that the speech had little if any impact on Communist decision for war in Korea.

=== Menon Cabal and the &#x27;end of easy and automatic relations&#x27; ===
Acheson&#x27;s advocacy of foreign policy discomfited many traditional American allies, who banded together with India&#x27;s de facto foreign minister Krishna Menon, in what Acheson named at the time and again in his memoirs as the &#x27;Menon cabal&#x27;. Members of the cabal included Anthony Eden and Selwyn Lloyd from Britain; R.G. Casey of Australia; and Lester B. Pearson of Canada, who famously observed in 1951 that &quot;the days of easy and automatic relations with the United States are over&#x27;. The Menon cabal would frustrate Acheson&#x27;s Korean War diplomatic policy, and remained a force beyond Acheson&#x27;s tenure as Secretary of State, while Acheson&#x27;s vituperative description of the cabal&#x27;s diplomatic efforts as &#x27;sophistries&#x27; by Menon and Pearson personally wounded Pearson, who would go on to become Prime Minister of Canada.

===The &quot;loss of China&quot; attacks===
With the Communist victory in the Chinese Civil war, China switched from a close friend of the U.S. to a bitter enemy—the two powers were at war in Korea by 1950. Critics blamed Acheson for what they called the &quot;loss of China&quot; and launched several years of organized opposition to Acheson&#x27;s tenure; Acheson ridiculed his opponents and called this period in his outspoken memoirs &quot;The Attack of the Primitives&quot;. Although he maintained his role as a firm anti-communist, he was attacked by various anti-communists for not taking a more active role in attacking communism abroad and domestically, rather than hew to his policy of containment of communist expansion. Both he and Secretary of Defense George Marshall came under attack from men such as Joseph McCarthy; Acheson became a byword to some Americans, who tried to equate containment with appeasement. Congressman Richard Nixon, who later as president would call on Acheson for advice, ridiculed &quot;Acheson&#x27;s College of Cowardly Communist Containment&quot;. This criticism grew very loud after Acheson refused to &quot;turn his back on Alger Hiss&quot; when the latter was accused of being a Communist spy, and convicted of perjury for denying he was a spy.

==Later life and death==

He retired on January 20, 1953, the last day of the Truman administration, and served on the Yale board of trustees along with Senator Robert A. Taft, one of his sharpest critics. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1955.

Acheson returned to his private law practice. Although his official governmental career was over, his influence was not. He was ignored by the Eisenhower administration but headed up Democratic policy groups in the late 1950s. Much of President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s flexible response policies came from the position papers drawn up by this group.

Acheson&#x27;s law offices were strategically located a few blocks from the White House and he accomplished much out of office. He became an unofficial advisor to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. During the Cuban Missile Crisis, for example, he was dispatched by Kennedy to France to brief French President Charles de Gaulle and gain his support for the United States blockade. Acheson so strongly opposed the final decision merely to blockade that he resigned from the executive committee.

During the 1960s, he was a leading member of a bipartisan group of establishment elders known as the Wise Men, who initially supported the Vietnam War. As secretary of state, Acheson had supported the French efforts to control Indochina as the necessary price for French support of NATO, and to contain communism. By 1968, however, his viewpoint had changed. President Johnson asked Acheson to reassess American military policy, and he concluded that military victory was impossible. He advised Johnson to pull out as quickly as possible, to avoid a deepening division inside the Democratic Party. Johnson took Acheson&#x27;s advice, in terms of de-escalating the war, and deciding not to run for reelection. Acheson distrusted Hubert Humphrey, and supported Richard Nixon for president in 1968. He provided advice to the Nixon administration through Henry Kissinger, focusing on NATO and on African affairs. He broke with Nixon in 1970 with the incursion into Cambodia.

In 1964, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, with Distinction. In 1970, he won the Pulitzer Prize for History for his memoirs of his tenure in the State Department, &quot;Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department&quot;. The Modern Library placed the book at No. 47 on its top 100 non-fiction books of the 20th century.

At 6:00 p.m. on October 12, 1971, Acheson died of a massive stroke, at his farm home in Sandy Spring, Maryland, at the age of 78. His body was found slumped over his desk in his study. Acheson was interred in Oak Hill Cemetery in Georgetown, Washington, D.C.

He had a son, David C. Acheson (father of Eleanor D. Acheson), and two daughters, Jane Acheson Brown and Mary Acheson Bundy, wife of William Bundy.

==In media==
Acheson was portrayed by John Dehner in the 1974 television docudrama, &quot;The Missiles of October.

In the 2000 film &quot;Thirteen Days&quot;, Acheson was played by Len Cariou.

==Publications==
===Articles===
* “Summary of Attorney General’s Committee Report”. &quot;American Bar Association Journal&quot;, Vol. 27, No. 3 (March 1941), pp. 143–146.
* “Mr. Justice Brandeis”. &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot;, Vol. 55, No. 2 (December 1941), pp. 191–192.
* “Text of the United States Note to the Soviet Union concerning the Question of the Turkish Straits, August 19, 1946”. &quot;Middle East Journal&quot;, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1947), pp. 88–89.
* “Statement on India by Dean Acheson, Acting U. S. Secretary of State, December 3, 1946”. &quot;Middle East Journal&quot;, Vol. 1, No. 2 (April 1947), p. 209.
* “The Need and the Lack”. &quot;The American Scholar&quot;, Vol. 17, No. 4 (Autumn 1948), pp. 476–477.
* “Abwehr von Aggressionen”. &quot;Ost-Probleme&quot;, Vol. 2, No. 39 (September 28, 1950), p. 1240.
* “Proklamation des Nationalen Notstands in USA”. &quot;Ost-Probleme&quot;, Vol. 3, No. 1 (January 6, 1951), p. 31. Co-authored with Harry S. Truman.
* “The Development of the International Community.” &quot;Proceedings of the American Society of International Law at Its Annual Meeting (1921–1969)&quot;, Vol. 46 (April 24–26, 1952), pp. 18–25.
* “The Illusion of Disengagement”. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, Vol. 36, No. 3 (April 1958), pp. 371–382.
* “Felix Frankfurter”. &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot;, Vol. 76, No. 1 (November 1962), pp. 14–16.
* “The Practice of Partnership”. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, Vol. 41, No. 2 (January 1963), pp. 247–260.
* “The Cuban Quarantine”. &quot;Proceedings of the American Society of International Law at Its Annual Meeting (1921–1969)&quot;, Vol. 57, Law and Conflict: Changing Patterns and Contemporary Challenges (April 25–27, 1963), pp. 9–18. Co-authored by Quincy Wright &amp; Abram Chayes.
* “Europe: Decision or Drift”. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, Vol. 44, No. 2 (January 1966), pp. 198–205.
* “The Lawyer’s Path to Peace”. &quot;The Virginia Quarterly Review&quot;, Vol. 42, No. 3 (Summer 1966), pp. 337–348.
* “The Arrogance of International Lawyers”. &quot;The International Lawyer&quot;, Vol. 2, No. 4 (July 1968), pp. 591–600.
* “Removing the Shadow Cast on the Courts”. &quot;American Bar Association Journal&quot;, Vol. 55, No. 10 (October 1969), pp. 919–922.
* “The Eclipse of the State Department”. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, Vol. 49, No. 4 (July 1971), pp. 593–606.
* “How Containment Worked”. &quot;Foreign Policy&quot;, No. 7 (Summer 1972), pp. 41–53. Co-authored with Chalmers M. Roberts, W. Averell Harriman &amp; Arthur Krock.

===Book reviews===
* “Review of &quot;The Labor Law of Maryland&quot;, by Malcolm H. Lauchheimer”. &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot;, Vol. 33, No. 2 (December 1919), pp. 329–332. Full text available on JSTOR.
* “Review of &quot;Shaping the Future: Foreign Policy in an Age of Transition&quot;, by Robert R. Bowie”. &quot;Political Science Quarterly&quot;, Vol. 79, No. 3 (September 1964), pp. 435–436.

==References==
==Further reading==

* &quot;Dean Gooderham Acheson.&quot; &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot; (1994) online
* Beisner, Robert L. &quot;Dean Acheson: A Life in the Cold War&quot;. (New York: OUP USA, 2006), 800 pages; a standard scholarly biography. online
* Beisner, Robert L. &quot;Patterns of Peril: Dean Acheson Joins the Cold Warriors, 1945–46&quot;. &quot;Diplomatic History&quot;, 20#3 (1996), pp. 321–355. .
* Beisner, Robert L. “SHAFR Presidential Address: The Secretary, the Spy, and the Sage Dean Acheson, Alger Hiss, and George Kennan”. &quot;Diplomatic History&quot;, Vol. 27, No. 1 (January 2003), pp. 1–14.
* Brinkley, Douglas. &quot;Dean Acheson: The Cold War Years, 1953–71&quot;. (1992) 429 pages. online
* Brinkley, Douglas, ed. &quot;Dean Acheson and the Making of U.S. Foreign Policy&quot;. (1993) 271 pages. online
* Brinkley, Douglas. “Dean Acheson and the &#x27;Special Relationship&#x27;: The West Point Speech of December 1962”. &quot;The Historical Journal&quot;, 33#3 (September 1990), pp. 599–608.
* Chace, James. &quot;Acheson: The Secretary of State Who Created the American World&quot;. (Harvard University Press, 1998), . online
* Fletcher, Luke. &quot;The Collapse of the Western World: Acheson, Nitze, and the NSC 68/Rearmament Decision.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot;, 40#4 (2016), pp. 750–777.
* Frazier, Robert. &quot;Acheson and the Formulation of the Truman Doctrine&quot;. &quot;Journal of Modern Greek Studies&quot;, Vol. 17, No. 2 (1999), pp. 229–251. in Project Muse
* Garson, Robert. &quot;The United States and China since 1949: A Troubled Affair&quot;. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Madison (1994), pp. 27–33 
* Goulden, Joseph C. &quot;The Superlawyers: The Small and Powerful World of the Great Washington Law Firms&quot;. (New York: Weybright and Talley, 1971)
* Harper, John Lamberton. &quot;American Visions of Europe: Franklin D. Roosevelt, George F. Kennan, and Dean G. Acheson&quot;. Cambridge University Press (1994), 378 pages.
* Hopkins, Michael F. &quot;President Harry Truman&#x27;s Secretaries of State: Stettinius, Byrnes, Marshall and Acheson.&quot; &quot;Journal of Transatlantic Studies&quot;, 6#3 (2008), pp. 290–304.
* Hopkins, Michael F. &quot;Dean Acheson and the Obligations of Power&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2017). 289 pages. excerpt
* Hopkins, Michael F. &quot;Dean Acheson, Bretton Woods and the American Role in the International Economy.&quot; in &quot;Global Perspectives on the Bretton Woods Conference and the Post-War World Order&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2017).
* Isaacson, Walter, and Evan Thomas. &quot;The Wise Men: Six Friends and the World They Made&quot;. (1997), 864 pages. – Covers Acheson and colleagues Charles E. Bohlen, W. Averell Harriman, George Kennan, Robert Lovett, and John J. McCloy. online
* Leffler, Melvyn P. &quot;Strategy, Diplomacy, and the Cold War: the United States, Turkey, and NATO, 1945–1952&quot;. &quot;Journal of American History&quot;, 71#4 (1985), pp. 807–825.
* McGlothlen, Ronald L. &quot;Controlling the Waves: Dean Acheson and US Foreign Policy in Asia&quot; (1993) online
* McLellan, David S. &quot;Dean Acheson: The State Department Years&quot;. (New York: Dodd Mead &amp; Co, 1976), 466 pages. online
* McMahon, Robert J. &quot;Dean Acheson and the Creation of an American World Order&quot; (Washington: Potomac, 2009), 257 pages. online
* McNay, John T. &quot;Acheson and Empire: The British Accent in American Foreign Policy&quot; (2001) online
* Merrill, Dennis. &quot;The Truman Doctrine: Containing Communism and Modernity&quot;. &quot;Presidential Studies Quarterly&quot;, 36#1 (2006), pp. 27–37.online
* Offner, Arnold A. &quot;&#x27;Another Such Victory&#x27;: President Truman, American Foreign Policy, and the Cold War&quot;. &quot;Diplomatic History&quot;, 23#2 (1999), pp. 127–155.
* Offner, Arnold A. &quot;Another Such Victory: President Truman and the Cold War&quot;. (2002) 640 pages. – Highly negative. excerpts and text search
* Perlmutter, Oscar William. &quot;The &#x27;Neo-Realism&#x27; of Dean Acheson&quot;. &quot;The Review of Politics&quot;, 26#1 (January 1964), pp. 100–123.
* Perlmutter, Oscar William. &quot;Acheson and the Diplomacy of World War II&quot;. &quot;The Western Political Quarterly&quot;, 14#4 (December 1961), pp. 896–911.
* Purifoy, Lewis McCarroll. &quot;Harry Truman&#x27;s China Policy&quot;. (New York: Franklin Watts, 1976), pp. 125–150. .
* Smith, Gaddis. &quot;Dean Acheson&quot; (1972), major scholarly biography online
* Spalding, Elizabeth Edwards. &quot;The First Cold Warrior: Harry Truman, Containment, and the Remaking of Liberal Internationalism&quot;. (2006) excerpt
* Steil, Benn. &quot;The Marshall Plan: Dawn of the Cold War&quot; (2018) 608pp. excerpt
* Stupak, Ronald J. &quot;The shaping of foreign policy; the role of the Secretary of State as seen by Dean Acheson&quot; (1969) online
* Wells, Samuel F. &quot;Dean Acheson Leads The Defense Of Europe.&quot; in &quot;Fearing the Worst&quot; (Columbia UP, 2019). 269-303.

===Primary sources===
* Acheson, Dean. &quot;A Democrat Looks at His Party&quot; (1955)
* Acheson, Dean. &quot;A Citizen Looks at Congress&quot; (1957)
* Acheson, Dean. &quot;Sketches from Life of Men I Have Known&quot; (1961)
* online
* Acheson, Dean. &quot;Present at the Creation&quot; (1969) online
* Acheson, Dean. &quot;The Korean War&quot; (1971)
* 222 pages.
* McLellan, David S., and David C. Acheson, eds. &quot;Among Friends: Personal Letters of Dean Acheson&quot; (1980)
* Truman, Harry S. and Dean Acheson. &quot;Affection and trust: the personal correspondence of Harry S. Truman and Dean Acheson, 1953-1971&quot; (2010) online

==External links==
* Dean Gooderham Acheson Papers (MS 1087) at Yale special collections.
* Work on Acheson&#x27;s Role in Designing the Foreign Policy Stance of the Democratic Party after the 1952 election.
* Annotated bibliography for Dean Acheson from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues 
* FOIA FBI file at Internet Archive




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="0" end="22" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Gooderham Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="110" end="133" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122568" start="146" end="198" title="foreign policy of the Harry S. Truman administration" label="foreign policy of the Harry S. Truman administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="316" end="324" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171375" start="352" end="367" title="Truman Doctrine" label="Truman Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="376" end="389" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="406" end="440" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="586" end="601" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="639" end="670" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="726" end="743" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="772" end="785" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="798" end="818" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="838" end="853" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383589" start="929" end="935" title="ExComm" label="ExComm"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="1031" end="1054" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661092" start="1087" end="1109" title="Edward Campion Acheson" label="Edward Campion Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1184" end="1201" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570196" start="1231" end="1247" title="Wycliffe College" label="Wycliffe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="1281" end="1297" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063304" start="1440" end="1462" title="William Gooderham, Sr." label="William Gooderham, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3110713" start="1493" end="1523" title="Gooderham and Worts Distillery" label="Gooderham and Worts Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q872541" start="1631" end="1644" title="Groton School" label="Groton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="1649" end="1661" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560506" start="1691" end="1705" title="Scroll and Key" label="Scroll and Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="1730" end="1744" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975232" start="1771" end="1790" title="Delta Kappa Epsilon" label="Delta Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="2107" end="2125" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403472" start="2202" end="2219" title="Felix Frankfurter" label="Felix Frankfurter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21666041" start="2342" end="2364" title="Alice Acheson" label="Alice Caroline Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958317" start="2534" end="2555" title="David Campion Acheson" label="David Campion Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2620" end="2633" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q520840" start="2642" end="2656" title="Louis Brandeis" label="Louis Brandeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="3453" end="3461" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q564223" start="3507" end="3530" title="Covington &amp;amp; Burling" label="Covington &amp;amp; Burling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3585" end="3610" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285124" start="3625" end="3655" title="United States Deputy Secretary of the Treasury" label="Undersecretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031553" start="3686" end="3703" title="William H. Woodin" label="William H. Woodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="4175" end="4186" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="4212" end="4222" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194052" start="4826" end="4850" title="Bretton Woods Conference" label="Bretton Woods Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="5007" end="5034" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5036" end="5050" title="the World Bank" label="the World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="5060" end="5098" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="5140" end="5164" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145033" start="5248" end="5262" title="Under Secretary of State" label="Undersecretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="5270" end="5303" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q362118" start="5366" end="5388" title="Edward Stettinius, Jr." label="Edward Stettinius, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q432726" start="5390" end="5405" title="James F. Byrnes" label="James F. Byrnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="5411" end="5426" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673632" start="5613" end="5638" title="Acheson–Lilienthal report" label="Acheson–Lilienthal report"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="5682" end="5695" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5755" end="5769" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5944" end="5952" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171375" start="6438" end="6453" title="Truman Doctrine" label="Truman Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307005" start="6495" end="6510" title="Medal for Merit" label="Medal for Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="6625" end="6665" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="Democratic victory in the 1948 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328177" start="6699" end="6720" title="Loss of China" label="Who Lost China?&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="6781" end="6804" title="Sino-American relations" label="Sino-American relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068114" start="6980" end="6991" title="White Paper (China)" label="White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="7127" end="7137" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="7910" end="7922" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="8006" end="8017" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595860" start="8492" end="8505" title="V. K. Krishna Menon" label="Krishna Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125186479" start="8579" end="8590" title="Menon cabal" label="Menon cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="8628" end="8640" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="8645" end="8657" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="Selwyn Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q335310" start="8672" end="8682" title="Richard Casey, Baron Casey" label="R.G. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="8701" end="8718" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="8898" end="8908" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="9268" end="9310" title="Chinese Revolution (1949)" label="Communist victory in the Chinese Civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328177" start="9476" end="9489" title="loss of China" label="loss of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="9980" end="9995" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="10031" end="10046" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="10153" end="10166" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="10383" end="10393" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q519730" start="10667" end="10681" title="Robert A. Taft" label="Robert A. Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="10743" end="10780" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="11036" end="11051" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q605189" start="11059" end="11076" title="flexible response" label="flexible response"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="11356" end="11376" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="11456" end="11473" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775243" start="11738" end="11750" title="The Wise Men (book)" label="the Wise Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="12369" end="12384" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="12492" end="12507" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="12587" end="12610" title="Cambodian campaign" label="incursion into Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="12638" end="12667" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q599254" start="12707" end="12733" title="Pulitzer Prize for History" label="Pulitzer Prize for History"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12795" end="12852" title="Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department" label="Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="12864" end="12878" title="Modern Library" label="Modern Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q432632" start="13048" end="13070" title="Sandy Spring, Maryland" label="Sandy Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369971" start="13169" end="13186" title="Oak Hill Cemetery (Washington, D.C.)" label="Oak Hill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958317" start="13234" end="13250" title="David Campion Acheson" label="David C. Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354256" start="13262" end="13280" title="Eleanor D. Acheson" label="Eleanor D. Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006135" start="13353" end="13366" title="William Bundy" label="William Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017853" start="13407" end="13418" title="John Dehner" label="John Dehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="13442" end="13451" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751721" start="13459" end="13482" title="The Missiles of October" label="The Missiles of October"/>
<link wikidata="Q128730" start="13508" end="13521" title="Thirteen Days (film)" label="Thirteen Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720470" start="13551" end="13561" title="Len Cariou" label="Len Cariou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650020" start="13654" end="13686" title="American Bar Association Journal" label="American Bar Association Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="13768" end="13786" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931859" start="13965" end="13984" title="Middle East Journal" label="Middle East Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931859" start="14130" end="14149" title="Middle East Journal" label="Middle East Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788611" start="14226" end="14246" title="The American Scholar" label="The American Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="14531" end="14546" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q468581" start="14625" end="14662" title="American Society of International Law" label="American Society of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="14785" end="14800" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="14879" end="14897" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="14987" end="15002" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q468581" start="15105" end="15142" title="American Society of International Law" label="American Society of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349539" start="15303" end="15316" title="Quincy Wright" label="Quincy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669341" start="15323" end="15335" title="Abram Chayes" label="Abram Chayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="15374" end="15389" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934467" start="15479" end="15508" title="The Virginia Quarterly Review" label="The Virginia Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742315" start="15609" end="15633" title="The International Lawyer" label="The International Lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650020" start="15731" end="15763" title="American Bar Association Journal" label="American Bar Association Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="15863" end="15878" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="15961" end="15975" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="16053" end="16072" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="W. Averell Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799395" start="16079" end="16091" title="Arthur Krock" label="Arthur Krock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="16199" end="16217" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420342" start="16293" end="16298" title="JSTOR" label="JSTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210236" start="16412" end="16439" title="Political Science Quarterly" label="Political Science Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177756" start="16880" end="16898" title="Diplomatic History" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177756" start="17073" end="17091" title="Diplomatic History" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301276" start="17142" end="17159" title="Douglas Brinkley" label="Brinkley, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301276" start="17243" end="17260" title="Douglas Brinkley" label="Brinkley, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301276" start="17357" end="17374" title="Douglas Brinkley" label="Brinkley, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739760" start="17479" end="17501" title="The Historical Journal" label="The Historical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131184" start="17547" end="17559" title="James Chace" label="Chace, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="17638" end="17662" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177756" start="17803" end="17821" title="Diplomatic History" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846673" start="17944" end="17975" title="Journal of Modern Greek Studies" label="Journal of Modern Greek Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430528" start="18124" end="18160" title="Fairleigh Dickinson University Press" label="Fairleigh Dickinson University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="18471" end="18497" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708889" start="18651" end="18683" title="Journal of Transatlantic Studies" label="Journal of Transatlantic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q681012" start="19091" end="19107" title="Walter Isaacson" label="Isaacson, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415555" start="19113" end="19124" title="Evan Thomas" label="Evan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19132" end="19181" title="The Wise Men: Six Friends and the World They Made" label="The Wise Men: Six Friends and the World They Made"/>
<link wikidata="Q776165" start="19240" end="19257" title="Charles E. Bohlen" label="Charles E. Bohlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="19259" end="19278" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="W. Averell Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q156058" start="19280" end="19293" title="George Kennan" label="George Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063424" start="19295" end="19308" title="Robert A. Lovett" label="Robert Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q563577" start="19314" end="19328" title="John J. McCloy" label="John J. McCloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707062" start="19463" end="19490" title="Journal of American History" label="Journal of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q15754501" start="20111" end="20141" title="Presidential Studies Quarterly" label="Presidential Studies Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177756" start="20312" end="20330" title="Diplomatic History" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q15759717" start="20607" end="20629" title="The Review of Politics" label="The Review of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210227" start="20761" end="20792" title="The Western Political Quarterly" label="The Western Political Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240939" start="21817" end="21840" title="Present at the Creation" label="Present at the Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="22504" end="22508" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="22521" end="22537" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80101" wikidata="Q161088" url="?curid=80101" title="Eragrostis">
<text>Eragrostis is a large and widespread genus of plants in the grass family, found in many countries on all inhabited continents and many islands.

&quot;Eragrostis&quot; is commonly known as lovegrass or canegrass. The name of the genus is derived from the Greek words ἔρως (&quot;érōs&quot;), meaning &quot;love&quot;, and ἄγρωστις (&quot;ágrōstis&quot;), meaning &quot;grass&quot;.

Lovegrass is commonly used as livestock fodder. The seeds appear to be of high nutritional value for some animals, but they are also very tiny and collecting them for human food is cumbersome and hence uncommon. A notable exception is teff (&quot;E. tef&quot;), which is used to make traditional breads on the Horn of Africa, such as Ethiopian &quot;injera&quot; and Somalian &quot;laxoox&quot;. It is a crop of commercial importance. &quot;E. clelandii&quot; and &quot;E. tremula&quot; are recorded as famine foods in Australia and Chad, respectively.

Other species, such as &quot;E. amabilis&quot;, are used as ornamental plants. &quot;E. cynosuroides&quot; is used in the &quot;pūjā&quot; rites in the Hindu temple at Karighatta. Bahia lovegrass (&quot;E. bahiensis&quot;) is known as a hyperaccumulator of caesium-137 and can be grown to remove the highly toxic radioactive atoms from the environment. Weeping lovegrass (&quot;E. curvula&quot;) has been planted extensively to prevent soil erosion.

Seed dispersal is often done by passing animals; the grains&#x27; hooks latch on to fur or hair, or to clothes. Others are wind or gravity dispersed. Several herbivores feed on lovegrass, including invertebrates such as the caterpillars of the Zabulon skipper (&quot;Lon zabulon&quot;) and vertebrates. The extinct bluebuck (&quot;Hippotragus leucophaeus&quot;) was known to graze these grasses. The dense bunches also provide cover for small animals such as the rare Botteri&#x27;s sparrow (&quot;Aimophila botterii&quot;). Lovegrasses may be important groundcover on oceanic islands like Laysan, where other plants are rare.

==Taxonomy==

&quot;Eragrostis&quot; is the type genus of the tribe Eragrostideae.

;Formerly included
Many species now considered better suited to other genera, including &quot;Cladoraphis Coelachyrum Desmazeria Diplachne Ectrosia Festuca Harpachne Poa&quot; etc.

==References==
==External links==
*
* Interactive Key to &quot;Eragrostis&quot; of North America</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="37" end="42" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="60" end="72" title="Poaceae" label="grass family"/>
<link wikidata="Q161088" start="189" end="198" title="Eragrostis" label="lovegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q161088" start="202" end="211" title="Eragrostis" label="canegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="255" end="260" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="413" end="422" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="423" end="429" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="618" end="622" title="Eragrostis tef" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="630" end="636" title="Eragrostis tef" label="E. tef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="679" end="684" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="693" end="707" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="717" end="725" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q935807" start="733" end="739" title="injera" label="injera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="750" end="757" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809371" start="765" end="771" title="laxoox" label="laxoox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="836" title="Eragrostis clelandii" label="E. clelandii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515631" start="853" end="863" title="Eragrostis tremula" label="E. tremula"/>
<link wikidata="Q610642" start="886" end="897" title="famine food" label="famine food"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="902" end="911" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="916" end="920" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q87622848" start="966" end="977" title="Eragrostis amabilis" label="E. amabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="997" end="1013" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1022" end="1037" title="Eragrostis cynosuroides" label="E. cynosuroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937578" start="1065" end="1069" title="Puja (Hinduism)" label="pūjā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370498" start="1089" end="1115" title="Karighatta temple" label="Hindu temple at Karighatta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1140" end="1152" title="Eragrostis bahiensis" label="E. bahiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624381" start="1174" end="1190" title="hyperaccumulator" label="hyperaccumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154826" start="1194" end="1205" title="caesium-137" label="caesium-137"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="1244" end="1249" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1250" end="1261" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384814" start="1290" end="1307" title="Weeping lovegrass" label="Weeping lovegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384814" start="1315" end="1325" title="Eragrostis curvula" label="E. curvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="1373" end="1385" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="1388" end="1402" title="Seed dispersal" label="Seed dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1546" end="1555" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="1586" end="1598" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="1612" end="1623" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97369546" start="1632" end="1647" title="Zabulon skipper" label="Zabulon skipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="1678" end="1688" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="1695" end="1702" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q746580" start="1703" end="1711" title="bluebuck" label="bluebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926374" start="1856" end="1878" title="Botteri&amp;#x27;s sparrow" label="Botteri&amp;#x27;s sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34720" start="1978" end="1984" title="Laysan" label="Laysan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="2078" end="2083" title="tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429994" start="2084" end="2097" title="Eragrostideae" label="Eragrostideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808760" start="2194" end="2205" title="Cladoraphis" label="Cladoraphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820861" start="2206" end="2217" title="Coelachyrum" label="Coelachyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499717" start="2218" end="2228" title="Desmazeria" label="Desmazeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560136" start="2229" end="2238" title="Diplachne" label="Diplachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153220" start="2239" end="2247" title="Ectrosia" label="Ectrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="2248" end="2255" title="Festuca" label="Festuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479460" start="2256" end="2265" title="Harpachne" label="Harpachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157656" start="2266" end="2269" title="Poa" label="Poa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80103" wikidata="Q45188" url="?curid=80103" title="Coldplay">
<text>Coldplay are a British rock band formed in London in 1997. They consist of vocalist and pianist Chris Martin, guitarist Jonny Buckland, bassist Guy Berryman, drummer and percussionist Will Champion, and manager Phil Harvey. They are best known for their live performances, and their impact on popular culture through their music, advocacy and achievements.

The members of the band initially met at University College London, calling themselves Big Fat Noises and changing to Starfish, before settling on the current name. After releasing &quot;Safety&quot; (1998) independently, Coldplay signed with Parlophone in 1999 and issued their debut album, &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000), featuring the breakthrough single &quot;Yellow&quot;. It earned a Brit Award for British Album of the Year and a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album. The group&#x27;s follow-up, &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; (2002), won the same accolades. &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005) completed what they regarded as a trilogy and was shortlisted for Best Rock Album at the Grammy Awards. Its successor, &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; (2008), prevailed in the category. Both releases were the best-sellers of their respective years, topping the charts in over 30 countries. &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; title track was the first song from a British act to lead the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and UK Singles Chart simultaneously in the 21st century.

Coldplay further expanded their repertoire in subsequent albums, with &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; (2011), &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; (2014), &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; (2015), &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019), &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (2021) and &quot;Moon Music&quot; (2024) drawing from genres like electronica, R&amp;B, ambient, disco, funk, gospel, blues and progressive rock. The group&#x27;s additional endeavours include philanthropy, politics and activism, supporting numerous humanitarian projects and donating 10% of their profits to charity. In 2018, directed by Mat Whitecross was released for their 20th anniversary.

With over 100 million albums sold worldwide, Coldplay are one of the best-selling music acts of all time. They are also the first group in Spotify history to reach 90 million monthly listeners. Fuse listed them among the most awarded artists, which includes holding the record for most Brit Awards won by a band. In the United Kingdom, they own three of the 50 best-selling albums, the most UK Albums Chart leaders without missing the top (10), and were ranked as the country&#x27;s most played group of the 21st century. In 2021, &quot;My Universe&quot; was the first song by a British outfit to enter the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 at number one. Coldplay have two of the highest-grossing tours of all time and the most attended. The British Phonographic Industry called them one of the most &quot;influential and pioneering acts&quot; in the world, while the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame added &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; to the 200 Definitive Albums list and &quot;Yellow&quot; to the &quot;Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll&quot; exhibition. In 2023, &quot;Time&quot; cited the group among the most impactful climate action figures. Despite their renown, they are considered polarising cultural icons.

== History ==
=== 1997–1999: Formation and first years ===

Chris Martin and Jonny Buckland met during their first week at University College London, in September 1996. They began to write their first songs together in early 1997 and practised every night. Guy Berryman was the third to join the band in the following months and the trio recorded numerous demos without a drummer, calling themselves Big Fat Noises by November. In January 1998, Will Champion completed the line-up. He declared that Martin, Buckland and Berryman came to his house because a roommate had a drum kit and was a good drummer, but the roommate did not turn up for the session, &quot;so I just said [I would] give it a go&quot;.

Champion scheduled the band&#x27;s first performance only a few days after becoming part of it. They had not chosen a proper name yet and called themselves Starfish for the show, which was held on 16 January 1998 at The Laurel Tree, in Camden. Weeks later, the band settled on the name Coldplay. In May, they released &quot;Safety&quot;, an independent EP financed by Martin&#x27;s lifelong friend, Phil Harvey. 150 out of 500 copies went to open market. Harvey sold the first one to his roommate for £3 and the rest was given away to record labels.

As Martin complained about the &quot;vice-like grip&quot; one of the Camden promoters had on the band, Harvey suggested the group should book their own concert at Dingwalls, where they managed to sell 50 copies of &quot;Safety&quot;. The event is generally considered when Harvey officially became Coldplay&#x27;s manager. He eventually dropped out of his course at Trinity College, Oxford to dedicate himself to the role. More concerts were scheduled throughout the summer. Martin tried to invite Tim Rice-Oxley to play keyboard for the band, but when &quot;[they] discussed it again a couple of weeks later, he said that the rest of the band weren&#x27;t keen on adding a member&quot;. In September 1998, they performed at Manchester&#x27;s In the City showcase and got discovered by A&amp;R scout Debs Wild. &quot;Safety&quot; was followed by a cassette demo with &quot;Ode to Deodorant&quot; and &quot;Brothers &amp; Sisters&quot;.

Wild informed BMG Publishing&#x27;s Caroline Elleray and music lawyer Gavin Maude about the group. Elleray then talked to Dan Keeling at Parlophone, but he had already passed on them. Conversely, Maude talked to Simon Williams from Fierce Panda Records, who in turn contacted Steve Lamacq. On 3 January 1999, Coldplay became the first unsigned act in history to guest on Lamacq&#x27;s &quot;Evening Session&quot;. A month later, they signed a short-term contract with Fierce Panda and re-recorded &quot;Brothers &amp; Sisters&quot;. Six labels offered a contract as the band&#x27;s popularity grew; but they wanted Parlophone, which led Elleray to meet Keeling again. He changed his mind and the deal was signed at Trafalgar Square in April 1999, the same month in which &quot;Brothers &amp; Sisters&quot; was released. The next days saw them study for UCL&#x27;s final examinations.

On 27 June 1999, Coldplay made their first appearance at the Glastonbury Festival in the New Bands Tent. They later recorded &quot;The Blue Room&quot;, which had 5,000 copies pressed and sold to the public. Its sessions were originally meant for &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000), but became tumultuous due to Martin having heated discussions regarding Champion&#x27;s abilities as a drummer. The singer commented that &quot;Three days later, the rest of us were feeling miserable, [...] we asked him to come back. They made me have lots of vodka and cranberry juice in remembrance of what a nasty piece of work I was being&quot;. After working out their differences, the band chose to operate as a democracy, established a new set of rules and proclaimed that anyone using hard drugs would be kicked out of the group immediately, a decision inspired by R.E.M. and U2.

=== 2000–2001: &quot;Parachutes&quot; ===
The band first planned to record their debut album, &quot;Parachutes&quot;, over the span of two weeks. However, due to tours and other live performances, the recording took place between September 1999 and April–May 2000. The album was recorded at Rockfield Studios, Matrix Studios, and Wessex Sound Studios with producer Ken Nelson, although the majority of &quot;Parachutes&quot;″ tracks were recorded at Liverpool&#x27;s Parr Street Studios (where they used three studio rooms). American engineer Michael Brauer in New York mixed all of the songs for the album. During that time they played on the Carling Tour, which showcased up-and-coming acts.
After releasing two EPs without a hit song, Coldplay had their first Top 40 hit with the lead single from &quot;Parachutes&quot;, &quot;Shiver&quot;, which was released in March 2000, the same week Coldplay played The Forum in Tunbridge Wells supporting the band Terris as part of the NME Premier Tour. &quot;Shiver&quot; peaked at the number 35 position on the UK Singles Chart. June 2000 was a pivotal moment in Coldplay&#x27;s history: the band embarked on their first headlining tour, including a performance at the Glastonbury Festival. The band also released the single &quot;Yellow&quot;; it was Coldplay&#x27;s first release to reach the top five and rose to number four on the UK Singles Chart. The minimalistic music video for &quot;Yellow&quot; was filmed at Studland Bay in Dorset, and featured Martin singing the song in one continuous shot as he walked along the beach. &quot;Yellow&quot; and &quot;Shiver&quot; were initially released as EPs in the spring of 2000. &quot;Yellow&quot; was released as a single in the United Kingdom on 26 June 2000. In the United States, it was released as the lead single from the then-untitled debut album. In October 2000, the track was sent to US college and alternative radio outlets.

Coldplay released &quot;Parachutes&quot; on 10 July 2000 in the United Kingdom via their record label, Parlophone. The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart. It was released on 7 November 2000 by record label Nettwerk in North America. The album has been made available in various formats since its initial release; both Parlophone and Nettwerk released it as a CD in 2000, and it was also released as a Cassette by US label Capitol in 2001. In the following year, Parlophone issued the album as an LP. Four singles were released from &quot;Parachutes&quot;, including &quot;Shiver&quot; and &quot;Yellow&quot;, and enjoyed popularity in the UK and US. The third single was &quot;Trouble&quot;, which reached number 10 in the UK charts. It was released more than a year later in the US, and reached number 28 in the Alternative Songs chart. In December 2001, the band released a limited-edition CD, &quot;Mince Spies&quot;, featuring a remix of &quot;Yellow&quot; and the Christmas song &quot;Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas&quot;. It was pressed to 1,000 copies, and was issued only to fans and journalists.

&quot;Parachutes&quot; was nominated for the Mercury Music Prize in September 2000. Having found success in Europe, the band set their sights on North America, by releasing the album there in November 2000, and started the &quot;US Club Tour&quot; in February 2001. At the 2001 Brit Awards in February, Coldplay earned awards for Best British Group and Best British Album. Although &quot;Parachutes&quot; was a slow-burning success in the United States, it eventually reached double-platinum status. The album was critically well received and earned a Best Alternative Music Album honours at the 2003 Grammy Awards. Chris Martin said after &quot;Parachutes&quot; was released that the album&#x27;s success was meant to elevate the band&#x27;s status to the &quot;biggest, best band in the world&quot;. After single-handedly managing the band until early 2001, Harvey resigned due to the stress of having to perform duties that typically require a team of people. He became the group&#x27;s creative director and is often referenced as their fifth member; Dave Holmes replaced him as manager.

=== 2002–2004: &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; ===

After the success of &quot;Parachutes&quot;, Coldplay returned to the studio in September 2001 to begin work on their second album, &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot;, once again with Ken Nelson producing. They had trouble focusing in London and decided to relocate to Liverpool, where they recorded some of the songs on &quot;Parachutes&quot;. Once there, vocalist Chris Martin said that they became obsessed with recording. &quot;In My Place&quot; was the first song recorded for the album. The band released it as the album&#x27;s lead single because it was the track that made them want to record a second album, following a &quot;strange period of not really knowing what we were doing&quot; three months after the success of &quot;Parachutes&quot;. According to Martin &quot;one thing kept us going: recording &#x27;In My Place&#x27;. Then other songs started coming&quot;.

The band wrote more than 20 songs for the album. Some of their new material, including &quot;In My Place&quot; and &quot;Animals&quot;, was played live while the band were still touring &quot;Parachutes&quot;. The album&#x27;s title was revealed through a post on the band&#x27;s official website. The album was released in August 2002 and spawned several successful singles, including &quot;In My Place&quot;, &quot;Clocks&quot;, and the ballad &quot;The Scientist&quot;, which was inspired by George Harrison&#x27;s 1970 song &quot;All Things Must Pass&quot;.
Coldplay toured from 19 June 2002 to 8 September 2003 for the A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour.
They visited five continents, including co-headlining festival dates at Glastonbury Festival, V2003 and Rock Werchter. Many concerts showcased elaborate lighting and individualised screens reminiscent of U2&#x27;s Elevation Tour and Nine Inch Nails&#x27; Fragility Tour. During the extended tour, Coldplay recorded a live DVD and CD, &quot;Live 2003&quot;, at Sydney&#x27;s Hordern Pavilion. At the 2003 Brit Awards held at Earls Court, London, Coldplay received awards for Best British Group and Best British Album. On 28 August 2003, Coldplay performed &quot;The Scientist&quot; at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards at the Radio City Music Hall in New York City and won three awards.

In December 2003, readers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine chose Coldplay as the best artist and the best band of the year. At that time the band covered the Pretenders&#x27; 1983 song &quot;2000 Miles&quot; (which was made available for download on their official website). &quot;2000 Miles&quot; was the top selling UK download that year, with proceeds from the sales donated to Future Forests and Stop Handgun Violence campaigns. &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album at the 2003 Grammy Awards. At the 2004 Grammy Awards, Coldplay earned Record of the Year for &quot;Clocks&quot;.

=== 2005–2007: &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; ===
Coldplay spent most of 2004 out of the spotlight, taking a break from touring and releasing a satire music video of a song from a fictional band titled The Nappies while recording their third album. &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; was released in June 2005 in UK and Europe. This new, delayed release date had put the album back into the next fiscal year, and the late release was blamed for a drop in EMI&#x27;s stock. It became the best-selling album of 2005 with worldwide sales of 8.3 million. The lead single, &quot;Speed of Sound&quot;, made its radio and online music store debut on 18 April and was released as a CD on 23 May 2005. &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; entered the album charts of 32 countries at the number one position and was the third-fastest-selling album in UK chart history upon release.
Two other singles were released that year: &quot;Fix You&quot; in September and &quot;Talk&quot; in December. Critical reaction to &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; was mostly positive, though slightly less enthusiastic than that of its predecessor. &quot;The New York Times&quot; critic Jon Pareles infamously described Coldplay as &quot;the most insufferable band of the decade&quot;, whereas &quot;NME&quot; awarded the album 9/10 calling it &quot;Confident, bold, ambitious, bunged with singles and impossible to contain, &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; doesn&#x27;t reinvent the wheel but it does reinforce Coldplay as the band of their time&quot;. Comparisons between Coldplay and U2 became commonplace. Martin said the critical review of the album by the &quot;New York Times&quot; made him feel liberated as he &quot;agreed with a lot of the points&quot;, adding that &quot;in a way, it was liberating to see that someone else realised that also&quot;.

From June 2005 to March 2007, Coldplay went on their Twisted Logic Tour, which included festival dates like Coachella, Isle of Wight Festival, Glastonbury and the Austin City Limits Music Festival. In July 2005, the band appeared at Live 8 in Hyde Park, where they played a rendition of the Verve&#x27;s &quot;Bitter Sweet Symphony&quot; with Richard Ashcroft on vocals. On 28 August, Coldplay performed &quot;Speed of Sound&quot; at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards in Miami. In September, Coldplay recorded a new version of &quot;How You See the World&quot; with reworked lyrics for War Child&#x27;s &quot;Help!: A Day in the Life&quot; charity album. In February 2006, Coldplay earned Best Album and Best Single honours at the Brit Awards. Three more singles were released during 2006 and 2007, &quot;The Hardest Part&quot;, &quot;What If&quot; and &quot;White Shadows&quot;.

=== 2008–2010: &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; ===

In October 2006, Coldplay began work on their fourth studio album, &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot;, with producer Brian Eno. Taking a break from recording, the band toured Latin America in early 2007, finishing the Twisted Logic Tour while performing in Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. After recording in churches and other venues in Latin America and Spain during their tour, the band said the album would likely reflect Hispanic influence. The group spent the rest of the year recording most of the album with Eno.

Martin described &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; as a new direction for Coldplay; a change from their past three albums, which the band felt was a &quot;trilogy&quot; that they had finished. He said the album featured less of his falsetto as he allowed his voice&#x27;s lower register to take precedence. Some songs, such as &quot;Violet Hill&quot; contain distorted guitar riffs and bluesy undertones.
&quot;Violet Hill&quot; was confirmed as the first single, with a radio release date of 29 April 2008. After the first play, it was freely obtainable from Coldplay&#x27;s website from 12:15 pm (GMT +0) for one week until it became commercially available on 6 May. &quot;Violet Hill&quot; entered the UK Top 10, US Top 40 and charted well in the rest of the world. The title track, &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;, was also released exclusively on iTunes, it became the band&#x27;s first number-one single on both the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, and the UK Official Charts. Coldplay performed the song live for the first time at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards on 1 June. &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; became iTunes&#x27; best-selling song of 2008.

Upon release, &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; topped the album charts worldwide and was the world&#x27;s best-selling album of 2008. It hit number one on the UK album chart despite having come on the market only three days previously. In that time, it sold 302,000 copies, being &quot;one of the fastest-selling albums in the country&#x27;s history&quot;. By the end of June, it had set a new record for most-downloaded album ever. In October 2008, Coldplay won two &quot;Q&quot; Awards for Best Album for &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; and Best Act in the World Today. On 9 November, Coldplay were named the World&#x27;s Best-selling Act of 2008 at the World Music Awards in Monte Carlo. They also picked up two other awards: World&#x27;s Best-selling Rock Act and Great Britain&#x27;s Best-selling Act. The band followed up &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; with the &quot;Prospekt&#x27;s March&quot; EP, which was released on 21 November 2008. The extended play features songs from the album sessions and was originally made available on its own, while the album got re-issued with all EP tracks included on a bonus disc. &quot;Life in Technicolor II&quot; was the only single released.
Coldplay began their Viva la Vida Tour in June with a free concert at Brixton Academy in London. This was followed two days later by a 45-minute performance that was broadcast live from outside BBC Television Centre. Released in late 2008, &quot;Lost!&quot; became the third single from the album, featuring a new version with Jay-Z called &quot;Lost+&quot;. After performing the opening set on 14 March 2009 for Sound Relief at the Sydney Cricket Ground, Coldplay headlined a sold-out concert later that same night. Sound Relief is a benefit concert for victims of the Victorian Bushfire Crisis and the Queensland Floods. On 4 December 2008, Joe Satriani filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Coldplay in the California Central District Court. Satriani claimed that &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; incorporates &quot;substantial, original portions&quot; of his song &quot;If I Could Fly&quot; from the album &quot;Is There Love in Space?&quot; (2004). Coldplay denied the allegation. In 2009, &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; won a Grammy Award for Song of the Year and Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals. The lawsuit was eventually dismissed. with the judge declaring that both the parties should bear their own trial costs.

Coldplay were nominated for four awards at the 2009 Brit Awards: British Group, British Live Act, British Single (&quot;Viva la Vida&quot;) and British Album (&quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot;). At the 51st Grammy Awards in the same year, Coldplay won three Grammy Awards in the categories for Song of Year for &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;, Best Rock Album for &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot;, and Best Vocal Pop Performance by a Duo or Group for &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;. A live album titled &quot;LeftRightLeftRightLeft&quot; was recorded at various shows during the tour. &quot;LeftRightLeftRightLeft&quot;, released on 15 May 2009, was to be given away at the remaining concerts of their Viva la Vida Tour. It was released as a free download from their website. Following the Viva la Vida Tour, Coldplay announced another &quot;Latin America tour&quot; to take place in February and March 2010, in which they were to visit Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Colombia. In October 2009, Coldplay won Song of the Year for &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; at The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) Awards in London. In December 2009, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; readers voted the group the fourth best artist of the 2000s, they were also included in &quot;Q&quot; list of artists of the century. In December 2010 the band released &quot;Christmas Lights&quot;. The song received very positive reviews, and the music video features a cameo from actor Simon Pegg, a close friend of Chris Martin, who plays a violin-playing Elvis impersonator in the background.

=== 2011–2012: &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; ===
The band finished recording the new album in mid-2011. When Martin and Champion were interviewed by BBC Radio and asked about the album&#x27;s lyrical themes, Martin replied &quot;It&#x27;s about love, addiction, OCD, escape and working for someone you don&#x27;t like&quot;. When asked whether or not their fifth album would be out by the summer, Martin and Champion said that there was plenty of work to be done before releasing it. They confirmed several festival appearances before its release date, including a headlining spot at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival, T in the Park, Austin City Limits Music Festival, Rock in Rio, and Lollapalooza festival.

In an interview on 13 January 2011, Coldplay mentioned two new songs would be included on their upcoming fifth album, &quot;Princess of China&quot; and &quot;Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall&quot;. In a February interview Parlophone president Miles Leonard told HitQuarters that the band were still in the studio working on the album and that he expected the final version would appear &quot;towards the autumn of this year&quot;. On 31 May 2011, Coldplay announced that &quot;Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall&quot; was the first single for the fifth album. It was released on 3 June 2011. The band presented five new songs at festivals during the summer of 2011, &quot;Charlie Brown&quot;, &quot;Hurts Like Heaven&quot;, &quot;Us Against the World&quot;, &quot;Princess of China&quot; and &quot;Major Minus&quot;.

On 12 August 2011, Coldplay announced via their official website that &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; was the new album title, and that it would be released on 24 October 2011. On 12 September the band released &quot;Paradise&quot;, the second single from their upcoming album &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot;. On 23 September 2011, tickets for Coldplay&#x27;s European tour went on sale. The high demand led venues be sold out in seconds. &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; was released on 24 October 2011, it received positive reviews and topped the charts in over 34 countries.
On 19 October 2011, Coldplay performed songs at Apple Inc.&#x27;s private memorial for Steve Jobs, including &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;, &quot;Fix You&quot;, &quot;Yellow&quot; and &quot;Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall&quot;. On 26 October their &quot;Amex Unstaged&quot; concert at the Plaza de Toros de Las Ventas in Madrid, Spain, was streamed by YouTube as a live webcast directed by Anton Corbijn. On 30 November 2011, Coldplay received three Grammy Award nominations for the 54th Annual Grammy Awards which took place on 12 February 2012 in Los Angeles, and the band performed with Rihanna at the ceremony. On 12 January 2012, Coldplay were nominated for two Brit Awards. On 21 February 2012, they were awarded the Brit Award for Best British Group for the third time. The album was the best-selling rock album in the United Kingdom, selling 908,000 copies. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Paradise&quot;, was also the best-selling rock single in the UK, selling 410,000 copies. At the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards, &quot;Paradise&quot; won Best Rock Video. &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; has sold over 8 million copies globally.

Coldplay headlined the closing ceremony of the London 2012 Paralympic Games on 9 September 2012, where they performed alongside other artists including Rihanna and Jay-Z. To tie in with their performance at the closing ceremony, the group gave permission for bands who were participating in the Bandstand Marathon the opportunity to perform their 2008 single &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; to celebrate the end of the games.

In October 2012, the music video for Coldplay&#x27;s song &quot;Hurts Like Heaven&quot; was released. The video was based on the story of Mylo Xyloto, a boy who grew up in tyranny ran by Major Minus. The fictional comics titled &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; continued on the story portrayed in the music video when the series was released in early 2013. A concert documentary film and live album &quot;Live 2012&quot; chronicles their tour in support of the &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; album. The film premiered theatrically for one night only, 13 November 2012, and was released on CD and home video on 19 November 2012.

On 21 November, after a concert in Brisbane, Australia as part on the group&#x27;s Mylo Xyloto Tour, Coldplay hinted they were set to take a three-year break from touring. Coldplay performed two shows with Jay-Z in the Barclays Center, Brooklyn, New York, on 30 December and New Year&#x27;s Eve which ended the Mylo Xyloto Tour. The Mylo Xyloto Tour was named the fourth-highest-grossing tour of 2012 worldwide with more than $171.3 million earned from ticket sales.

=== 2013–2014: &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; ===
In an interview from late 2012 with Australian radio station 2Day FM, Chris Martin revealed that the title for the band&#x27;s next album would be &quot;much easier to pronounce&quot;. Martin debunked speculation that they were taking a break from touring by saying, &quot;This three-year break idea only came about because I said at a gig in Australia that we might not be back there for three years. That&#x27;s probably true, but that&#x27;s just how a world tour works. No chance are we taking a three-year break&quot;.

On 9 August 2013, Coldplay announced the release of their song &quot;Atlas&quot;, which featured on the soundtrack for the film &quot;The Hunger Games: Catching Fire&quot;. Its release got pushed back to 6 September 2013 (everywhere but the UK) and 8 September (UK). In December 2013, it was announced that future Coldplay releases would be distributed by Atlantic Records in the US due to restructuring within Warner Music Group following the purchase of Parlophone Records from EMI.

On 25 February 2014, the band unveiled &quot;Midnight&quot;, a track from their yet-to-be released album. In early March 2014, it was announced that the band&#x27;s sixth album, &quot;Ghost Stories&quot;, would be released 19 May 2014. &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; is a spiritually driven album that revolves around two major themes mentioned by Chris Martin. The album explores the idea of past actions, and the effects they can have on your future and one&#x27;s capacity for unconditional love. The band took a different approach for their sixth studio album in contrast to their previous studio albums, with Martin inviting the band to contribute original songwriting material for the album, as opposed to building songs off his ideas as they had done during previous recording sessions.

From April to July, Coldplay embarked on a six-date Ghost Stories Tour in support of the album, playing &#x27;intimate&#x27; shows in six cities: the Beacon Theatre in New York City on 5 May, Royce Hall in Los Angeles on 19 May, Casino de Paris in Paris on 28 May, Tokyo Dome City Hall in Tokyo on 12 June, Enmore Theatre in Sydney on 19 June, and closed the tour at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 2 July 2014. The album was made available for pre-order on iTunes, alongside new single &quot;Magic&quot;. Two more singles from the album, &quot;A Sky Full of Stars&quot; and &quot;True Love&quot;, have since been released. &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; received mixed to positive reviews. The album topped the charts in the United Kingdom, the United States and most major markets. It received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album, and &quot;A Sky Full of Stars&quot; was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. In December 2014, Spotify named Coldplay the most-streamed band in the world for 2014, and third most-streamed artist behind Ed Sheeran and Eminem.

=== 2015–2018: &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; ===

On 4 December 2014, Chris Martin announced in an interview with Zane Lowe on BBC Radio 1 that Coldplay were in the middle of working on their seventh studio album, &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot;. Martin remarked it might be the band&#x27;s final album and compared it to Harry Potter: &quot;It&#x27;s our seventh thing, and the way we look at it, it&#x27;s like the last Harry Potter book or something like that&quot;. He added that unlike their promotion efforts for &quot;Ghost Stories&quot;, the band will tour for the seventh record. In an interview with Jo Whiley on BBC Radio 2, Martin hinted at the style of the album by saying that the band were trying to make something colourful and uplifting, yet not bombastic. He also stated that it will be something to &quot;shuffle your feet&quot; to.

On 11 December 2014, the band unveiled a new song, &quot;Miracles&quot;, which was written and recorded for the World War II drama film &quot;Unbroken&quot; directed by Angelina Jolie. At the 2015 Billboard Music Awards on 17 May, &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; was named Top Rock Album. On 26 September, Coldplay performed at the 2015 Global Citizen Festival in Central Park&#x27;s Great Lawn in New York, an event organised by Chris Martin advocating for an end to extreme global poverty. Coldplay, along with Beyoncé, Ed Sheeran, and Pearl Jam, headlined the festival which was broadcast on NBC in the US on 27 September and the BBC in the UK on 28 September.

Speaking on Nick Grimshaw&#x27;s &quot;Radio 1 Breakfast Show&quot; on the BBC on 6 November, Coldplay confirmed 4 December as the release date of &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot;, and a new song from the album, &quot;Adventure of a Lifetime&quot;, premiered on the show. The album has guest appearances from Beyoncé, Gwyneth Paltrow, Noel Gallagher, Tove Lo and Barack Obama. The album reached number one in the UK, and number two in the US, Australia and Canada among others where it was kept in second place by Adele&#x27;s &quot;25&quot;. The music video for &quot;Adventure of a Lifetime&quot; featured the band performing as chimpanzees. They were provided consultation with renowned performance capture actor Andy Serkis.
On 27 November 2015, the first dates to their 2016 A Head Full of Dreams Tour were announced. Latin American and European stops were listed, which included three dates at Wembley Stadium, London in June. The North America Tour, an extra Wembley concert, and an Oceania tour were later added. On 5 December, the band headlined the opening day of the 2015 Jingle Bell Ball at London&#x27;s O2 Arena. On 7 February 2016 they headlined the Super Bowl 50 halftime show, being joined by Beyoncé and Bruno Mars. In April 2016, the band were named the sixth best-selling artist worldwide in 2015.

On 26 June 2016, Coldplay closed the final day of the Glastonbury Festival in England. Their performance included a duet with Barry Gibb, the last surviving member of the Bee Gees. During the band&#x27;s second night at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey on 18 July, Coldplay were joined onstage by Michael J. Fox to recreate a &quot;Back to the Future&quot; scene. Martin sang &quot;Earth Angel&quot; before introducing Fox onstage to join the band in performing the Chuck Berry classic &quot;Johnny B. Goode&quot;.

The band performed a full set in India for the first time as part of the Global Citizen Festival in Mumbai on 19 November 2016. This performance was attended by 80,000 people and also featured many Bollywood stars during the concert. The same month, Coldplay announced in interviews with Absolute Radio and Magic Radio in London that they would be releasing new songs in a new EP called the &quot;Kaleidoscope EP&quot;. Described as being made from a leftover &quot;bag of ideas&quot; from the recording of &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot;, Martin stated that it would be released in &quot;a couple of months&quot;. The band officially announced that the EP was released on 14 July 2017.
On 22 February 2017, the band released a long-awaited and teased collaboration track with EDM duo The Chainsmokers called &quot;Something Just Like This&quot;. Reaching number 2 in the UK Singles Chart and number 3 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, it was the lead single from Coldplay&#x27;s thirteenth extended play &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;, released on 14 July 2017. Together, they debuted the song live at the 2017 Brit Awards with Chris Martin also performing a tribute song to the late George Michael. On 2 March, Martin&#x27;s birthday, the band released a track from the EP, &quot;Hypnotised&quot;. Two further releases from the EP, &quot;All I Can Think About Is You&quot; and &quot;Aliens&quot;, came out on 15 June and 6 July 2017 respectively. On 15 August 2017, Coldplay announced that a live album covering the A Head Full of Dreams Tour would be released.

On 8 October 2017, Coldplay debuted live their new song called &quot;Life Is Beautiful&quot; at SDCCU Stadium in San Diego. It was written in support after the Puebla earthquake. A part of the show was broadcast at the end of Estamos Unidos Mexicanos, a benefit concert at Mexico City&#x27;s Zócalo. Proceeds from the song and concert were donated to relief efforts for Mexico and other countries.

On 15 November 2017, the Head Full of Dreams Tour was finished with a total gross of $523 million from 5.38 million tickets sold, ranking as the third-highest-grossing concert tour of all time. On 30 November 2018, Coldplay released &quot;Global Citizen – EP 1&quot; under the name Los Unidades, with proceeds being donated towards efforts to end global poverty. Coldplay&#x27;s fifth live album, &quot;Live in Buenos Aires&quot;, arrived on 7 December 2018. Its footage covers the final concert of the tour in La Plata, while a second release, &quot;Love in Tokyo&quot;, was made available exclusively for the Japanese market.

=== 2019–2020: &quot;Everyday Life&quot; ===
On 18 October 2019, mysterious black-and-white posters began appearing in numerous countries around the world, with Coldplay wearing vintage-style clothing and a date showing 22 November 1919. The band also changed their profile pictures on social media to a sun and moon, making fans speculate an imminent release of new material. On 19 October 2019, a cryptic five-second teaser was released on social media with orchestral music in the background. On 21 October 2019, in a letter sent to fans, the band announced that their eighth studio album would be titled &quot;Everyday Life&quot; and that it would be a double album, with the first half titled &quot;Sunrise&quot; and the second half titled &quot;Sunset&quot;.
On 23 October 2019, the album&#x27;s track list was revealed on the advertisements from local newspapers in the United Kingdom; those included the &quot;Daily Post&quot; in North Wales (with whom Buckland once had a holiday job) and &quot;Express &amp; Echo&quot; in Exeter (Martin&#x27;s hometown). Double lead singles &quot;Orphans&quot; and &quot;Arabesque&quot; were released on 24 October 2019 during the Annie Mac show on BBC Radio 1. &quot;Arabesque&quot; was the first Coldplay song to feature profanity. The album was released on 22 November 2019 and accompanied by a double concert at the Amman Citadel in Jordan. The performance was broadcast live on YouTube, being carried out at sunrise and sunset to match the album&#x27;s two halves. Inside the &quot;Everyday Life&quot; booklet, the words &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; appeared written on a billboard.

Martin had earlier said that the band would not tour to promote the album until they could work out &quot;how our tour can not only be sustainable (but) how can it be actively beneficial&quot;, and hope that it would be entirely carbon-neutral. However, Coldplay performed a one-off show on 25 November 2019 for the charity ClientEarth at London&#x27;s Natural History Museum. The band played beneath Hope, a giant 128-year-old skeleton of a blue whale in the museum&#x27;s great hall. The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with 81,000 copies sold, making it the band&#x27;s eighth consecutive UK number-one album. It was also the third fastest-selling album of 2019, behind &quot;No.6 Collaborations Project&quot; and &quot;Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent&quot;. On 24 November 2020, Coldplay received two nominations for the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, with one of them being Album of the Year, their first nomination in the category since &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;. On 21 December 2020, &quot;Flags&quot; was released internationally, the song was originally included as a Japanese bonus track of &quot;Everyday Life&quot;.

=== 2021–present: &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; and &quot;Moon Music&quot; ===

On 29 April 2021, Coldplay announced &quot;Higher Power&quot; for release on 7 May 2021, coinciding with a video livestream from the International Space Station. Chris Martin stated in an interview with Zane Lowe that the band would be working with producer Max Martin and his team on both the song and the new album. He said, &quot;Max is our producer right now for everything we do&quot;. On 4 May 2021, they were revealed as the opening act for the 2021 Brit Awards, where they performed &quot;Higher Power&quot; for the first time.
On 22 May 2021, the band participated in the &quot;Live at Worth Farm&quot; broadcast, showcasing a new song called &quot;Human Heart&quot; with R&amp;B duo We Are King. On 8 June 2021, the official music video for &quot;Higher Power&quot;, directed by Dave Meyers, premiered on YouTube, following a visualiser with Coldplay performing the song while dancing with CGI alien holograms that premiered on 7 May 2021. On 20 July 2021, the group announced that their ninth album, &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot;, would be released on 15 October 2021, scheduling closing track &quot;Coloratura&quot; for release on 23 July 2021 in anticipation for the project.

On 13 September 2021, Coldplay announced that the album&#x27;s second single, &quot;My Universe&quot;, a collaboration with South Korean pop group BTS, would be made available on 24 September 2021. The song debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart, becoming their first Top 10 single in the country since &quot;Something Just Like This&quot; in 2017. It also debuted at number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. A short documentary about the collaboration was released on 26 September 2021 on the official BTS YouTube channel.
&quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; went number one the UK Albums Chart with 101,045 units sold, becoming the fastest-selling record in the country since Ed Sheeran&#x27;s &quot;No.6 Collaborations Project&quot; (2019). It debuted at number four on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, and reached the top on both the Top Alternative Albums and the Top Rock Albums charts. On 14 October 2021, Coldplay announced the Music of the Spheres World Tour, which began in San José&#x27;s Estadio Nacional de Costa Rica on 18 March 2022 and visited over 40 countries.

The concert run&#x27;s announcement also included a series of environmental plans developed in two years with help from sustainability experts; they were aimed at reducing CO2 emissions by 50% in comparison to the Head Full of Dreams Tour. The shows became a leading topic of news coverage in visited regions, boosted local economies, and Coldplay&#x27;s discography experienced a resurgence in sales and streaming. The band also managed to beat their initial carbon footprint target, reducing it by 59% as of June 2024.

On 23 November 2021, &quot;Higher Power&quot; was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. In December 2021, Martin said Coldplay would release three more albums until 2025 during an interview for BBC, with one of them being &quot;kind of a musical&quot; while their last will be a &quot;back to the basics&quot; self-titled record. He added, however, that the band will still be active with smaller releases and worldwide touring after 2025. On 23 February 2022, the band released a new stripped-down version of &quot;Let Somebody Go&quot; and a cover of Kid Cudi&#x27;s &quot;Day &#x27;n&#x27; Nite&quot;. Both songs were part of the Spotify Singles series. They later received three nominations at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album.
On 13 June 2024, Coldplay announced &quot;Feelslikeimfallinginlove&quot; as the lead single for &quot;Moon Music&quot;. Details about the album were shared through their social media, being scheduled for release on 4 October. CD and vinyl pressings were crafted from recycled polycarbonate and PET-plastic bottles, respectively. Two weeks later, the band headlined Glastonbury Festival for the fifth time, extending the record set in June 2016. Guests included Victoria Canal, Michael J. Fox and Laura Mvula. They also revealed &quot;We Pray&quot;, featuring Little Simz, Burna Boy, Elyanna and Tini. It was made available as the second single on 23 August. During their stay in Rome on the Music of the Spheres World Tour, the group premiered &quot;Good Feelings&quot;, with Ayra Starr.

&quot;Moon Music&quot; reached number one in 16 countries, outselling the rest of the Top 40 combined in the United Kingdom. The album also topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in the United States, marking the first time a British group led both rankings simultaneously since 2016. Its visual companion, named &quot;A Film for the Future&quot;, was released in January 2025. Coldplay held two shows at the Narendra Modi Stadium during the same month, earning the largest stadium attendance of the 21st century with more than 111,000 people each night.

== Artistry ==
=== Creative process ===
During an interview for &quot;NME&quot;, Berryman explained the band usually have a title and concept in mind before the music arrives, which serves to provide a &quot;framework into which we can work thematically&quot;. Martin described their way of writing new songs as &quot;a series of doors&quot;. He brings initial ideas to Buckland and the guitarist either disapproves or gives his input; the same happens from Buckland to Berryman, then Champion, allowing all band members to express themselves artistically. However, this process is known to not always be linear, as tracks like &quot;Magic&quot; and &quot;Adventure of a Lifetime&quot; were started through the bass and guitar riffs from Berryman and Buckland, respectively. Coldplay regularly switch instruments while in the studio as well. When questioned about avoiding explicit language in lyrics, Champion affirmed swear words are &quot;extremely useful at times&quot;, but overusing them &quot;lessens their impact&quot;. Moreover, music critics claim the band have a pattern which alternates between &quot;overt bids for mainstream success and more self-consciously artsy prestige pieces&quot;. Buckland stated that knowing the &quot;big [album] is coming allows us to go a lot smaller&quot; and be more &quot;insular about what music we make sense&quot;.

=== Musical and lyrical style ===
Coldplay have explored many musical styles throughout their career, with their sound being considered alternative rock, alternative pop, pop rock, post-Britpop, soft rock, and pop. After winning a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 2009, Martin jokingly stated in his acceptance speech that they were &quot;limestone rock&quot;, in comparison to &quot;hard rock&quot;. The extended plays released in 1998 and 1999 have characteristics of dream pop, setting them apart from future releases. Their first studio album, &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000), was described as melodic pop which combined &quot;bits of distorted guitar riffs and swishing percussion&quot;, being &quot;exquisitely dark and artistically abrasive&quot;. Berryman called it a &quot;quiet, polite record&quot;, while Champion has compared the lyrics to Lou Reed&#x27;s &quot;Perfect Day&quot;, as they are moody but with twists that imply optimism, ultimately making an album defined by the contrast between beautiful and happy messages and notoriously sad sounds.

On the other hand, 2002&#x27;s &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; is full of &quot;plaintive strums, weary arpeggios and pained melodies&quot;, along with a sense of urgency and heartbreak. During an interview, Martin affirmed the title means &quot;doing something on impulse&quot;. Music critics described it as larger, darker, and colder than its predecessor, praising Coldplay for showing a newfound confidence as well. This style was kept for their third album, &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005), although now with the addition of electronic influences and extensive use of synthesisers, having a grander scale in terms of both sound and existential themes. Craig McLean from &quot;The Guardian&quot; called it &quot;the work of an increasingly driven, punchier band&quot;, describing the melodies as &quot;heartfelt stuff, with thumping guitar lines and emotive piano&quot;. Lyrics have been described as the ruminations on Martin&#x27;s &quot;doubts, fears, hopes, and loves&quot;, with words that &quot;are earnest and vague, so listeners can identify with the underlying concepts in the songs&quot;.
With &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; and the subsequent &quot;Prospekt&#x27;s March&quot; (both released in 2008), Coldplay further diversified their style and explored new territory following the completion of what they saw as a trilogy of albums. The band experimented with numerous different instruments, including electric violins, tack pianos, santoors and orchestras, all while using more layered productions. They also tried distinct song structures and vocal identities at the suggestion of producer Brian Eno, drawing influences from Oriental, Hispanic, African, and Middle Eastern sounds. The title track, &quot;Viva la Vida&quot;, is considered baroque pop and fourth single &quot;Strawberry Swing&quot; was described as having psychedelic inspirations. They dabbled in shoegaze on hidden track &quot;Chinese Sleep Chant&quot; as well. Lyrics are more universal in comparison to previous material, with the subject matter being more collective as the band &quot;delves into love, life, war and death&quot;. Martin commented the revolution motifs were inspired by Victor Hugo&#x27;s &quot;Les Misérables&quot; (1862).

Those themes, along with some of the oriental influences, remained in 2011&#x27;s &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot;, a concept album that follows the story of two characters in the style of a rock opera. It expanded the spectrum of Coldplay&#x27;s sound by including more electronic elements than before and featuring mostly upbeat tones for the first time, resulting in a pop rock style with modern, urban and dance melodies. According to Champion, the band originally wanted to make an acoustic record, so when &quot;Paradise&quot; started to take shape, they decided to begin a separate electronic album. However, the two of them ultimately became a single body of work, with songs like &quot;Charlie Brown&quot; and &quot;Us Against the World&quot; getting reworked into their current versions. Berryman declared they approached the project with confidence. Lyrically, Martin said he was mostly inspired by old school American graffiti, the White Rose movement, and &quot;being able to speak out or follow your passion, even if everybody seems against it&quot;. In 2013, a comic book based on the record&#x27;s plot was released in partnership with Mark Osborne.

For &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; (2014), Coldplay adopted a melancholic and somber style considered reminiscent of their debut, while incorporating electronica, R&amp;B, synth-pop and ambient influences. Its melodies are also noticeably darker and more minimalistic than &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot;, having sparse arrangements that reflect their desire to &quot;keep a sense of space&quot; without &quot;being afraid of silence&quot; or &quot;layering too many sounds&quot;. The project is considered a break-up album as well, exploring lyrically how past events in one&#x27;s life (their ghosts) affect the present. Martin called it a journey of learning about unconditional love after he divorced from Gwyneth Paltrow. A year later, &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; was released with a similar style, but featuring bright and uplifting tones instead, making contrast with its predecessor while introducing elements of disco and funk, most notably in lead single &quot;Adventure of a Lifetime&quot;. In the lyrics, they worked on subjects of unity, dreaming, parenthood, forgiveness, healing, and thankfulness.

In 2017, the band made &quot;Kaleidoscope EP&quot; available as a companion piece to the album. It included a live version of &quot;Something Just Like This&quot;, their EDM collaboration with the Chainsmokers, and Brian Eno&#x27;s returning production in &quot;Aliens&quot;. Meanwhile, tracks such as &quot;All I Can Think About Is You&quot; and &quot;Hypnotised&quot; mixed Coldplay&#x27;s newfound pop style with their alternative rock roots, setting the template for &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019), which saw a return to the experimentation and organic sounds of &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; while having new influences from gospel, blues and classical music. Released as the lead single along with &quot;Orphans&quot;, the song &quot;Arabesque&quot; drew from jazz fusion and afrobeat inspirations. The band continued their lyrical themes of positivity, equality, hope, legacy and humanity, but added loss, pain and commentaries on issues such as racism, police brutality, gun control and refugee crisis, being their first album to feature profanity.

This multi-style approach was similarly present in 2021&#x27;s &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot;, although leaning towards pop sounds. According to Berryman, the record &quot;was created with one eye on the live performances&quot; and that &quot;shaped the overall energy levels and song selections&quot; for it. Martin added he was inspired by the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise, which made him wonder what other artists could be like across the universe after watching the Mos Eisley Cantina band perform. New musical influences included &quot;Human Heart&quot; (an a cappella collaboration with R&amp;B duo We Are King and Jacob Collier) and &quot;Coloratura&quot; (a progressive rock ballad running at 10 minutes and 18 seconds, making it the longest song the band have ever released). The phrase &quot;Everyone is an alien somewhere&quot; was frequently used to promote the project; Champion stated it is meant to get people to look at what brings them together instead of what keeps them apart, since &quot;from another planet&#x27;s perspective, we would be the aliens&quot;.

=== Influences ===

Coldplay&#x27;s music has been compared to a-ha, U2, Oasis, R.E.M. and Radiohead. They acknowledged Scottish band Travis and American singer Jeff Buckley as major influences on their early material as well, which was mostly produced by Ken Nelson. Martin is known to be a fan of Bruce Springsteen, mentioned &quot;spending three years trying to sound like Eddie Vedder&quot; before Buckley, and commented listening to many hymns when he was young due to his religious upbringing. In 2021, he cited Belgian singer-songwriter Stromae as another influence, affirming &quot;He is one of our heroes you know, he is one of those people that comes along and completely inspires you all over again&quot;.

Buckland, on the other hand, stated the Stone Roses were one of the reasons why he learned to play guitar. In 2020, he shared on social media playlists with some of his favorite tracks and artists from each decade, including the Velvet Underground, Carole King, Joy Division, Talking Heads, Kate Bush, Donna Summer, Björk, Beastie Boys and many others. He said during an interview in the following year his favorite song of all time is &quot;Teardrop&quot; by Massive Attack. Meanwhile, Berryman is known to be inspired by artists like James Brown, Marvin Gaye, Kool &amp; the Gang and the Funk Brothers. He further added that his musical taste is difficult to condense it down, but could not live without the Beatles or Motown. As for Champion, he commented knowing how to play violin and piano since he was eight years old gave him a different perspective on drums, which he only learned to play after joining the band. During his youth, he listened to Bob Dylan, Tom Waits, Nick Cave and traditional Irish folk music. He has named Ginger Baker, Dave Grohl and John Bonham as some of his favorite drummers.

For &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; (2002), they drew inspiration from Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, George Harrison, and Muse. Their third album, &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005), was particularly influenced by Kraftwerk and Depeche Mode. The song &quot;Til Kingdom Come&quot; was first written as a collaboration with Johnny Cash before he died. Aside from Nelson, Coldplay also worked with Danton Supple during recording sessions. On &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; (2008), the band moved towards art rock sensibilities, with inspirations including My Bloody Valentine, Blur and Arcade Fire. After partnering with Brian Eno and Jon Hopkins, they began to incorporate elements of ambient music and electronica into compositions. Both producers returned for &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; (2011), with Eno having a more direct role in the songwriting process.

In 2014, Paul Epworth contributed to &quot;Ghost Stories&quot;. Producers Tim Bergling and Madeon were involved as well, which resulted in tracks like &quot;A Sky Full of Stars&quot; having a more &quot;danceable flavor&quot;. Made available in the following year, &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; (2015) featured producing duo Stargate. Long-time partners of the band include Davide Rossi, Bill Rakho, Rik Simpson and Dan Green. The last three are referred as The Dream Team on &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019) and all four have been working with Coldplay since &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot;. For their ninth album, &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (2021), the group invited Swedish producer Max Martin. The song &quot;People of the Pride&quot; has an introduction inspired by a Beyoncé performance at the Global Citizen Festival, while promotional single &quot;Coloratura&quot; drew comparisons to Pink Floyd.

=== Live performances ===

Coldplay have been said to &quot;make sure each tour is its own dazzling, light-up spectacular&quot;. Their concerts often use fireworks, lasers and confetti cannons. Furthermore, &quot;Pollstar&quot; stated they were the first artist to include LED wristbands in live performances. The group are widely credited with popularising the feature as well. Writing a review of &quot;Live in Buenos Aires&quot; (2018), Sam Sodomsky from &quot;Pitchfork&quot; hailed them as &quot;one of the 21st century&#x27;s most enduring live acts&quot;. Meanwhile, &quot;The Guardian&quot; Alexis Petridis commented that the set lists used by the band were &quot;a bullish reminder of how [they] got, and then stayed, huge&quot;. Both reviewers also noted how Martin usually interacts with the audience between each song&#x27;s performance.

For Ghost Stories Tour (2014), however, they performed intimate sets at venues like Royal Albert Hall and the Beacon Theatre. The concerts made use of new features including a laser harp and the reactable. A similar approach was taken for &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019) over their environmental concerns, with the band playing small shows for charity and a special livestream at the Amman Citadel in Jordan. When reviewing these shows, Dan Stubbs from &quot;NME&quot; stated &quot;on stage is where Coldplay come alive, and where they make the most sense&quot;. In 2022, Champion said the Flaming Lips were instrumental in shaping their idea of how entertaining a concert can be, as the American band&#x27;s tours have &quot;a sense of wonder and sense of fun which we really respond to&quot;.

=== Fashion and aesthetic ===
While members of the band dress casually on their personal lives, they have adopted multiple styles and visuals for each album&#x27;s promotion. Jon O&#x27;Brien from the Recording Academy observed Coldplay&#x27;s fashion sense did not &quot;extend beyond the student staple of hoodies and corduroys&quot; during initial years. Martin often wore Make Trade Fair shirts and had multiple versions of the institution&#x27;s logo written on the back of his hand. In the marketing campaign for &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005), which featured a representation of the Baudot code on its artwork, the group wore black shirts, jackets, suits and pants, accompanied by white shoes. After being questioned about it, the singer commented there was a &quot;great security&quot; in feeling part of a team. In 2007, they began to work with stylist Beth Fenton to make clothes fit the &quot;universe&quot; or the stories being told. They met her through Stella McCartney and Sara Jowett, who helped Coldplay to produce uniforms for &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; (2008). Inspirations cited include the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1967) and jackets worn by French Revolution armies. The piece Martin used at Wembley Stadium in 2009 was added to the V&amp;A Museum permanent collection as well. During recording sessions for &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; (2011), the band drew influence from graffiti and designed instruments, cover artworks and stages with street artist Paris. Conversely, Mila Fürstová&#x27;s melancholic etchings were adopted for &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; (2014). Non-customised outfits returned, but with darker tones.
Around the same period, Martin started to wear buttons from Love Button Global Movement, which became his signature accessory. The organization is focused on transforming the world through individual and collaborative &quot;acts of kindness&quot;. Clothes made for &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; (2015) then included details based on tie-dye and kaleidoscope visuals reminiscent of the 1970s decade. Berryman&#x27;s jacket and shirts worn by Buckland and Champion also had the flower of life as a reference to the album cover, while Martin drew media attention for using custom-made Air Jordans. Additionally, instruments were decorated with stickers, some of which featured the names of the band&#x27;s children. In 2016, Fenton stated Coldplay&#x27;s pieces are typically sourced from Rag &amp; Bone and Levi&#x27;s. Three years later, a photograph of Buckland&#x27;s great-grandfather spawned the old-fashioned imagery of &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019), characterised as &quot;a sepia-tinged 1919 jazz band&quot;. Nods to the Arab world were prominently made as well. To promote &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (2021), they incorporated a &quot;cosmic&quot; edge to all items and photoshoots. Wardrobe was provided by fashion label Applied Art Forms, which Berryman designed in the previous year. Each member chose the basic pieces by themselves, later modifying them with embroidery or patches.

== Achievements ==

Coldplay are considered the most successful band of the 21st century. With over 100 million albums sold globally, they are one of the best-selling artists of all time. &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000), &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; (2002) and &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005) have all been listed among the 50 best-selling albums in the United Kingdom, marking the most appearances by a group in the ranking. The latter was also the third-fastest-selling album in the country&#x27;s history upon release. In 2008, &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; became the first song by a British act to top the UK Singles Chart and &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 simultaneously since Rod Stewart&#x27;s &quot;Maggie May&quot; (1971). Moreover, its namesake album was the best-selling digital record of the 2000s decade. In 2013, Coldplay were cited as the most influential British celebrities in the world on &quot;Forbes&quot;″ power list, while 2014 saw them become the first band ever to surpass a billion streams on Spotify. Their performance at the Super Bowl 50 halftime show earned the biggest audience in history for a group and helped to make them the most googled band of 2016. During the same year, Coldplay headlined Glastonbury Festival for the fourth time, a record for any musician. In 2021, &quot;My Universe&quot; became the first song by a British group to debut atop &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. They have made over $2 billion from touring, with both the Head Full of Dreams (2016–17) and Music of the Spheres (2022–25) tours ranking among the 15 highest-grossing runs of all time. The latter is also the most-attended tour in history and the first by a group to surpass $1 billion. In 2024, Coldplay became the 21st century&#x27;s most played band in the United Kingdom and the first to reach 90 million monthly listeners on Spotify.

The band have received numerous accolades throughout their career as well, becoming the most awarded and nominated group of all time at the Brit Awards (nine victories from 32 nominations). They are the first act to ever win British Album of the Year three times and British Group four times, scoring the most nominations for both categories. Coldplay have also won seven Grammy Awards from 39 nominations, receiving Song of the Year and Record of the Year once, while being nominated for the Album of the Year category three times. In January 2009, they received a NRJ Award of Honour in recognition of their career accomplishments and impact. The band were then named Songwriters of the Year at the ASCAP London Music Awards in the following year, having previously received the same honor from the Ivor Novello Awards in 2003. Their single &quot;Atlas&quot;, which was released as part of &quot;The Hunger Games: Catching Fire&quot; (2013) soundtrack, was nominated for the 19th Critics&#x27; Choice Awards and shortlisted at the 87th Academy Awards. In 2014, Coldplay were ranked as the sixth-most-awarded group of all time by Fuse. Two years later, the band were chosen for &quot;NME&quot; Awards&#x27; Godlike Genius Award, which honours &quot;careers of music icons who have been pioneers in the industry&quot;. They have earned two American Music Awards; nine &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards; seven MTV Video Music Awards; three Juno Awards; two silver prizes at the Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity; and established 15 &quot;Guinness World Records&quot;, currently holding 10 of them. In May 2022, it was reported that the band&#x27;s estimated combined wealth — without Harvey — exceeded £471 million, placing them among the richest musicians on the planet.

== Legacy ==
Coldplay are considered one of the most influential bands of the 21st century. Writing for &quot;Firstpost&quot;, Lakshmi Govindrajan Javeri commented they have &quot;mastered the art of reinvention&quot;, consequently widening the &quot;roster of artists inspired by them&quot; and creating &quot;a rich multi-genre legacy&quot; which impacted a variety of mainstream and indie musicians worldwide. Songs from the group have been covered and sampled on many occasions as well. They were credited with bringing the sound of mainstream rock towards &quot;something more gentle and melodic&quot; and ushering into new forms of songwriting when &quot;British music struggled to define itself&quot;. Neil McCormick from &quot;The Telegraph&quot; stated that the band represent the evolution of rock into a brand new era, while &quot;Afisha&quot; Sergey Stepanov described them as the 21st century equivalent to the Beatles. Publications have also frequently labeled Coldplay as successors to U2 as the biggest band in the world.

Despite their popularity and impact, the group earned a reputation as polarising cultural icons, since they have attracted criticism as much as praise from the public and the music critics throughout their career. Michael Baumann explained for &quot;The Ringer&quot; that Coldplay&#x27;s rise to fame coincided with a decade marked by &quot;artistic snark and cynicism: hipsterism, the peak of pop punk&quot; and the new rebirth of rockism, meaning that their &quot;earnest, nonthreatening, and profoundly accessible&quot; public image was established at &quot;the worst time of the past 40 years to be those things&quot;. In a piece for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Jon Pareles named them &quot;the most insufferable band of the decade&quot;. Conversely, Lanre Bakare told &quot;El País&quot; that Martin is new kind of pop star who connects with fans emotionally. In 2022, &quot;The Times&quot;″ Mark Beaumont defended that Coldplay regained respect and credibility in all fields by dedicating themselves to stadium spectacles.

Felipe Branco Cruz from &quot;Veja&quot; credited them with reinventing the concept of arena rock by turning fans into protagonists of the concert instead of mere spectators, which included popularising the use of interactive LED wristbands on live performances. With the Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–25), the group became &quot;pioneers for sustainability&quot; in live entertainment, reducing CO2 emissions by 59% in comparison to their previous concert run. They were listed as one of the most influential climate action leaders in the world by &quot;Time&quot; as well. The British Phonographic Industry (BPI) has attributed rises in British music exportation to Coldplay&#x27;s international success on several occasions. The band were also praised for having creative and &quot;forward-thinking&quot; marketing strategies, with their use of the internet as a tool for promotion being considered revolutionary in the early 21st century. In 2016, &quot;Q&quot; ranked their first five albums among the best of the last 30 years. The second, &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; (2002), was added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; definitive editorials. As another result of their impact and legacy, the group have spawned various tribute albums, events and acts.

== Other activities ==
=== Philanthropy ===
Coldplay donate 10% from all of their profits to charity. The fund is held in a bank account none of the band members can access. They have endorsed over 30 organisations over the years, including Amnesty International, Migrant Offshore Aid Station and Global Citizen Festival. In 2003, an acoustic cover of the single &quot;2000 Miles&quot; was released to raise funds for Stop Handgun Violence and Future Forests. Two years later, they partnered with the Make Poverty History movement, being featured in one of their television campaigns. Coldplay have also auctioned significant memorabilia for Kids Company in 2009, including Martin&#x27;s first guitar, the globe from the &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000) album cover and costumes worn on Viva la Vida Tour (2008–10). They additionally became patrons for ClientEarth.
The band performed a modified version of &quot;A Message&quot; (named &quot;A Message 2010&quot;) at &quot;Hope for Haiti Now&quot;, a telethon which raised money for the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Berryman mentioned that &quot;You can make people aware of issues. It isn&#x27;t very much effort for us at all, if it can help people, then we want to do it&quot;. In 2012, Album Artists staged an exhibition with artworks from &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; (2011) era to raise £610,000 for Kids Company. Two years later, Martin joined Band Aid for a second time and provided vocals to a new version of &quot;Do They Know It&#x27;s Christmas?&quot;, which focused on aiding the Ebola crisis.

In 2017, Coldplay made a donation of undisclosed value to the Centre for Cancer Immunology at University of Southampton, the first and only centre dedicated to cancer immunology research in the United Kingdom. The organisation reunited cancer scientists worldwide to enable the development of clinical trials and lifesaving drugs. In the following year, the band contributed to the &quot;Plastic Oceans Album&quot; from Artists&#x27; Project Earth, which was released on 20 February at London&#x27;s Ocean Plastics Crisis Summit to raise awareness and funds to counter plastic pollution. Still in 2018, they made &quot;Global Citizen – EP 1&quot; available under the pseudonym Los Unidades, with royalties being directed to the institution&#x27;s endeavours of education and advocacy towards the end of extreme poverty.

In 2020, the music video of &quot;Trouble in Town&quot; was inspired by George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Animal Farm&quot; (1944) and had all of its proceeds from streaming and publishing donated to Innocence Project and the African Children&#x27;s Feeding Scheme. Coldplay pledged support to the Ocean Cleanup as well, sponsoring two watercrafts that collect plastic from polluted rivers in Malaysia. According to &quot;The Times&quot;, the band donated more than £2.1 million to environmental causes through their J Van Mars Foundation in 2021. As part of their efforts to make touring sustainable, they collaborated with One Tree Planted to fund a tree per ticket at the Music of the Spheres World Tour. Following their first Indonesia concert in 2023, Coldplay announced the renewal of their Ocean Cleanup alliance, with a new watercraft being deployed in Jakarta. In 2024, it was revealed that 10% of the proceeds from their Wembley Stadium and Craven Park performances will be donated to Music Venue Trust next year, helping grassroots venues and artists in the United Kingdom.

=== Politics and activism ===

The band have been vocal about fair trade and supported Oxfam&#x27;s Make Trade Fair campaign by collecting more than 70,000 signatures for their Big Noise petition on A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour (2002–03) and Twisted Logic Tour (2005–07). Martin, who lives in the United States, criticised the 2003 invasion of Iraq during a show for Teenage Cancer Trust at Royal Albert Hall, encouraging people at the venue to &quot;sing against war&quot;. He has also backed Democratic presidential candidates John Kerry in 2004 and Barack Obama in 2008. Coldplay take part in Meat Free Mondays as well; the campaign was launched by Paul McCartney in hopes to slow climate change by having at least one meat free day a week. In 2011, they endorsed the song &quot;Freedom for Palestine&quot; by posting the music video on their social media and received over 12,000 comments debating the message in less than a day. Facebook later removed their publication because its content was reported as abusive by numerous users. The band have also refused to play in Israel. In 2023, Martin reaffirmed their support for Palestine during a show, adding that &quot;We don&#x27;t believe in oppression, or occupation, terrorism or genocide&quot;.

Coldplay have supported the LGBT community as well, sparking controversy with their Super Bowl 50 halftime show performance. The band were accused by conservatives of promoting a &quot;gay agenda&quot; at the end, when rainbow-coloured placards were flipped to form the phrase &quot;Believe in Love&quot;. American magazine &quot;The Advocate&quot; ranked it among the most memorable LGBTQ moments of the event. In 2016, they favoured &quot;Vote Remain&quot; at the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum. Following Brexit, Martin stated the &quot;decision does not represent us or indeed most of our generation and the generation following us&quot;. A year later, the group appeared at One Love Manchester, a benefit concert organised by Ariana Grande in response to the Manchester Arena bombing which raised funds to help victims of the attack. Coldplay were also special guests at Concert for Charlottesville, a show focused on aiding the victims of the Unite the Right rally. In 2019, the band released &quot;Everyday Life&quot;, which saw them voicing more prominently their stance against racism, police brutality and gun violence. Two years later, they were among the artists who signed a public letter endorsing the Equality Act. In 2023, the Malaysian Islamic Party attempted to cancel the group&#x27;s concert at Bukit Jalil National Stadium, as Martin often waves the pride flag during performances.

=== Endorsements ===
Despite their worldwide popularity, Coldplay have remained notoriously protective of how their material appears in media. The band allow songs to be used in television shows and movies regularly, but most commercials are forbidden. In 2002, &quot;NME&quot; reported they turned down over $85 million in contracts from companies including Gatorade, Diet Coke and Gap. Martin stated &quot;We would not be able to live with ourselves if we sold the songs&#x27; meanings like that&quot;. The first time one of their songs were used for advertisements was with &quot;Viva la Vida&quot; in 2008, the group signed a deal with Apple to promote the exclusive availability of the single on iTunes Store. In 2010, Martin appeared at the company&#x27;s annual special event. Following the death of Steve Jobs, Coldplay performed on his memorial service at Apple Campus, posthumously thanking his support.
Six years later, they took part in a Target commercial which promoted the exclusive deluxe edition of &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; (2014). Meanwhile, the music video for &quot;Adventure of a Lifetime&quot;, which was directed by Mat Whitecross and recorded at The Imaginarium, had a Beats product placement. The company was allowed to use some parts of the video on their commercials as a return for covering the budget. In 2018, director Jon M. Chu revealed he sent a letter directly to the band laying out all his reasons in order to get a permission for using &quot;Yellow&quot; on &quot;Crazy Rich Asians&quot;. After it was granted, a Chinese-language cover of the track was commissioned as well.

In 2021, Coldplay announced a major partnership with German multinational BMW as part of their efforts to make touring as sustainable as possible. They commented the company&#x27;s technology, which includes the first recyclable car batteries in the world, is able to power live performances almost entirely from renewable energy. As part of the deal, the band contributed on the marketing of two electric cars from the company and allowed &quot;Higher Power&quot; to be used in advertisements. In 2022, DHL became Coldplay&#x27;s freight partner for the Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–25) in order to reduce the logistical impact of the shows and avoid the use of fossil fuels.

== Band members ==
* Chris Martin – lead vocals, piano, keyboards, acoustic guitar (1997–present)
* Jonny Buckland – guitars, keyboards, backing vocals (1997–present)
* Guy Berryman – bass guitar, keyboards (1997–present)
* Will Champion – drums, percussion, backing vocals (1998–present)
* Phil Harvey – manager (1998–2002; 2022–present), creative director (2006–present)

== Discography ==

* &quot;Parachutes&quot; (2000)
* &quot;A Rush of Blood to the Head&quot; (2002)
* &quot;X&amp;Y&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Mylo Xyloto&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; (2014)
* &quot;A Head Full of Dreams&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Everyday Life&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Moon Music&quot; (2024)

== Filmography ==

* &quot;How We Saw the World – Live in Toronto&quot; (2006)
* &quot;&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Everyday Life – Live in Jordan&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Reimagined&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Music of the Spheres: Live at River Plate&quot; (2023)
* &quot;Tutto Passa – A Tribute to Napoli&quot; (2024)
* &quot;A Film for the Future&quot; (2025)

== Tours ==

* Parachutes Tour (2000–2001)
* A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour (2002–2003)
* Twisted Logic Tour (2005–2007)
* Viva la Vida Tour (2008–2010)
* Mylo Xyloto Tour (2011–2012)
* Ghost Stories Tour (2014)
* A Head Full of Dreams Tour (2016–2017)
* Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–2025)

== See also ==
* List of people associated with University College London
* List of British Grammy winners and nominees
* List of best-selling music artists
* List of highest-grossing live music artists
* List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="0" end="8" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="23" end="27" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="43" end="49" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="96" end="108" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q822029" start="120" end="134" title="Jonny Buckland" label="Jonny Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q601617" start="144" end="156" title="Guy Berryman" label="Guy Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q822036" start="184" end="197" title="Will Champion" label="Will Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060318" start="211" end="222" title="Phil Harvey (band manager)" label="Phil Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q116179460" start="248" end="271" title="List of Coldplay live performances" label="their live performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q122238551" start="277" end="308" title="Cultural impact of Coldplay" label="their impact on popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q547583" start="317" end="328" title="Coldplay discography" label="their music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="399" end="424" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929493" start="545" end="551" title="Safety (EP)" label="Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="601" end="611" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="656" end="666" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q529026" start="721" end="727" title="Yellow (Coldplay song)" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816594" start="747" end="787" title="Brit Award for British Album of the Year" label="Brit Award for British Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="794" end="839" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="875" end="902" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="947" end="954" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="1034" end="1049" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1057" end="1070" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="1093" end="1134" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1199" end="1237" title="List of best-selling albums#Best-selling album by year worldwide" label="best-sellers of their respective years"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="1305" end="1316" title="Viva la Vida" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1367" end="1396" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1401" end="1417" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="1531" end="1542" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="1563" end="1576" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="1597" end="1618" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="1639" end="1652" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="1673" end="1693" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q126710155" start="1717" end="1727" title="Moon Music" label="Moon Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="1766" end="1777" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="1779" end="1786" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="1788" end="1795" title="Ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="1797" end="1802" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="1804" end="1808" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="1810" end="1816" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="1818" end="1823" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="1828" end="1844" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298143" start="2039" end="2053" title="Mat Whitecross" label="Mat Whitecross"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="2165" end="2200" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music acts of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="2235" end="2242" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997743" start="2271" end="2288" title="List of most-streamed artists on Spotify" label="monthly listeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142959" start="2290" end="2294" title="Fuse (TV channel)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254230" start="2317" end="2337" title="List of awards and nominations received by Coldplay" label="most awarded artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="2382" end="2393" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q468505" start="2457" end="2476" title="List of best-selling albums in the United Kingdom" label="best-selling albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="2487" end="2502" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q108538742" start="2633" end="2644" title="My Universe (song)" label="My Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q468494" start="2773" end="2807" title="List of highest-grossing concert tours" label="highest-grossing tours of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q122577356" start="2816" end="2829" title="List of most-attended concert tours" label="most attended"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="2835" end="2864" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2961" end="2987" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830891" start="3041" end="3062" title="List of 200 Definitive Albums in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="200 Definitive Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3169" end="3173" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3287" end="3312" title="Cultural impact of Coldplay#Public image" label="polarising cultural icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="3375" end="3387" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q822029" start="3392" end="3406" title="Jonny Buckland" label="Jonny Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="3438" end="3463" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q601617" start="3572" end="3584" title="Guy Berryman" label="Guy Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q822036" start="3760" end="3773" title="Will Champion" label="Will Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q149836" start="4258" end="4264" title="Camden Town" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929493" start="4346" end="4352" title="Safety (EP)" label="Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="4375" end="4377" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060318" start="4421" end="4432" title="Phil Harvey (band manager)" label="Phil Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278291" start="4736" end="4745" title="Dingwalls" label="Dingwalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q73079" start="4939" end="4962" title="Trinity College, Oxford" label="Trinity College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046616" start="5071" end="5085" title="Tim Rice-Oxley" label="Tim Rice-Oxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="5298" end="5308" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953792" start="5479" end="5501" title="Brothers &amp;amp; Sisters (song)" label="Brothers &amp;amp; Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894021" start="5524" end="5538" title="Universal Music Publishing Group" label="BMG Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="5647" end="5657" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447280" start="5742" end="5762" title="Fierce Panda Records" label="Fierce Panda Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142472" start="5786" end="5798" title="Steve Lamacq" label="Steve Lamacq"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="6225" end="6241" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="6456" end="6476" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929391" start="6526" end="6539" title="The Blue Room (EP)" label="The Blue Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="6647" end="6657" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7165" end="7175" title="Recreational drug use#Drug harmfulness" label="hard drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="7245" end="7251" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="7256" end="7258" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q925637" start="7552" end="7569" title="Rockfield Studios" label="Rockfield Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q757007" start="7591" end="7611" title="Wessex Sound Studios" label="Wessex Sound Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586466" start="7626" end="7636" title="Ken Nelson (British record producer)" label="Ken Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="7711" end="7720" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828803" start="7804" end="7818" title="Michael Brauer" label="Michael Brauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954729" start="7905" end="7917" title="NME Tours" label="Carling Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="8024" end="8030" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q796554" start="8091" end="8097" title="Shiver (Coldplay song)" label="Shiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891362" start="8169" end="8197" title="The Forum, Tunbridge Wells" label="The Forum in Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="8317" end="8333" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="8475" end="8495" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q529026" start="8537" end="8543" title="Yellow (Coldplay song)" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q385621" start="8725" end="8737" title="Studland Bay" label="Studland Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="9296" end="9306" title="Parlophone Records" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="9347" end="9362" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029135" start="9415" end="9423" title="Nettwerk" label="Nettwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="9610" end="9618" title="Compact cassette" label="Cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="9631" end="9638" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="9705" end="9707" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752735" start="9886" end="9893" title="Trouble (Coldplay song)" label="Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="10022" end="10039" title="Alternative Songs" label="Alternative Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591491" start="10199" end="10237" title="Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" label="Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="10368" end="10387" title="Mercury Music Prize" label="Mercury Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="10601" end="10612" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770228" start="10653" end="10671" title="BRIT Award for British Group" label="Best British Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="10875" end="10903" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542326" start="10919" end="10937" title="2003 Grammy Awards" label="2003 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="11614" end="11641" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772944" start="11913" end="11924" title="In My Place" label="In My Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q615063" start="12779" end="12785" title="Clocks (song)" label="Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991424" start="12814" end="12827" title="The Scientist (song)" label="The Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="12857" end="12872" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033752" start="12896" end="12916" title="All Things Must Pass (song)" label="All Things Must Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819895" start="12986" end="13018" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="13092" end="13112" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007098" start="13114" end="13119" title="V Festival" label="V2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547650" start="13124" end="13137" title="Rock Werchter" label="Rock Werchter"/>
<link wikidata="Q955379" start="13234" end="13248" title="Elevation Tour" label="Elevation Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="13253" end="13268" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477674" start="13275" end="13289" title="Fragility Tour" label="Fragility Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q681424" start="13360" end="13369" title="Live 2003 (Coldplay album)" label="Live 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902970" start="13394" end="13410" title="Hordern Pavilion" label="Hordern Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="13424" end="13435" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130746" start="13444" end="13455" title="Earls Court Exhibition Centre" label="Earls Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q849845" start="13608" end="13635" title="2003 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2003 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="13643" end="13664" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13740" end="13753" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="13864" end="13878" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015794" start="13901" end="13911" title="2000 Miles" label="2000 Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096639" start="14110" end="14131" title="Stop Handgun Violence" label="Stop Handgun Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="14191" end="14236" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542326" start="14244" end="14262" title="2003 Grammy Awards" label="2003 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="14271" end="14289" title="2004 Grammy Awards" label="2004 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="14307" end="14325" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="14595" end="14602" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="14880" end="14891" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772950" start="14899" end="14913" title="Speed of Sound (song)" label="Speed of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991309" start="15229" end="15236" title="Fix You" label="Fix You"/>
<link wikidata="Q76163433" start="15266" end="15270" title="Talk (Coldplay song)" label="Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15422" end="15440" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="15567" end="15570" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="15841" end="15843" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496684" start="16169" end="16187" title="Twisted Logic Tour" label="Twisted Logic Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="16224" end="16233" title="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival" label="Coachella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084114" start="16235" end="16257" title="Isle of Wight Festival 2006" label="Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="16259" end="16270" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241091" start="16279" end="16312" title="Austin City Limits Music Festival" label="Austin City Limits Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q193892" start="16349" end="16355" title="Live 8" label="Live 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="16359" end="16368" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q488916" start="16403" end="16412" title="the Verve" label="the Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338452" start="16426" end="16447" title="Bitter Sweet Symphony" label="Bitter Sweet Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q368354" start="16459" end="16475" title="Richard Ashcroft" label="Richard Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q849543" start="16554" end="16581" title="2005 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2005 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316033" start="16700" end="16709" title="War Child (charity)" label="War Child"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16723" end="16747" title="Help!: A Day in the Life" label="Help!: A Day in the Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="16845" end="16856" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q661282" start="16919" end="16935" title="The Hardest Part (Coldplay song)" label="The Hardest Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="17142" end="17183" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="17205" end="17214" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="17519" end="17527" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="17838" end="17846" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982928" start="17939" end="17950" title="Violet Hill (song)" label="Violet Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="17982" end="17986" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="18398" end="18410" title="Viva la Vida" label="Viva la Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="18524" end="18553" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="18566" end="18581" title="Official Charts Company" label="Official Charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q926568" start="18642" end="18663" title="2008 MTV Movie Awards" label="2008 MTV Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783310" start="19236" end="19256" title="Q Awards" label="&amp;quot;Q&amp;quot; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118960" start="19447" end="19465" title="2008 World Music Awards" label="World Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q135417" start="19688" end="19709" title="Prospekt&amp;#x27;s March" label="Prospekt&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q371528" start="19944" end="19966" title="Life in Technicolor II" label="Life in Technicolor II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058418" start="20024" end="20041" title="Viva la Vida Tour" label="Viva la Vida Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q795613" start="20197" end="20218" title="BBC Television Centre" label="BBC Television Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758478" start="20249" end="20254" title="Lost!" label="Lost!"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="20330" end="20335" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q390075" start="20416" end="20428" title="Sound Relief" label="Sound Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q856393" start="20436" end="20457" title="Sydney Cricket Ground" label="Sydney Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="20573" end="20598" title="Black Saturday bushfires" label="Victorian Bushfire Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="20618" end="20623" title="Flood" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q194287" start="20646" end="20658" title="Joe Satriani" label="Joe Satriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="20667" end="20689" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889764" start="20722" end="20755" title="United States District Court for the Central District of California" label="California Central District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q279825" start="20920" end="20943" title="Is There Love in Space?" label="Is There Love in Space?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="21030" end="21063" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q747902" start="21068" end="21118" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632245" start="21288" end="21304" title="2009 Brit Awards" label="2009 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481140" start="21463" end="21481" title="51st Grammy Awards" label="51st Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="21519" end="21532" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q580196" start="21778" end="21800" title="LeftRightLeftRightLeft" label="LeftRightLeftRightLeft"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="22326" end="22383" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="22548" end="22549" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072897" start="22629" end="22645" title="Christmas Lights (song)" label="Christmas Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="22725" end="22730" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="22742" end="22752" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301743" start="22813" end="22831" title="Elvis impersonator" label="Elvis impersonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="23439" end="23459" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q540724" start="23461" end="23474" title="T in the Park" label="T in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241091" start="23476" end="23509" title="Austin City Limits Music Festival" label="Austin City Limits Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133749" start="23511" end="23522" title="Rock in Rio" label="Rock in Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="23528" end="23540" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q592969" start="23676" end="23693" title="Princess of China" label="Princess of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768200" start="23710" end="23739" title="Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall" label="Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871288" start="23811" end="23822" title="HitQuarters" label="HitQuarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411724" start="24216" end="24229" title="Charlie Brown (Coldplay song)" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q127810" start="24243" end="24260" title="Hurts Like Heaven" label="Hurts Like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738253" start="24342" end="24353" title="Major Minus" label="Major Minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="24438" end="24449" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416004" start="24571" end="24579" title="Paradise (Coldplay song)" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="24963" end="24973" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="25002" end="25012" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q756621" start="25198" end="25226" title="Las Ventas" label="Plaza de Toros de Las Ventas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109638" start="25279" end="25286" title="webcast" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q349842" start="25299" end="25312" title="Anton Corbijn" label="Anton Corbijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337556" start="25392" end="25417" title="54th Annual Grammy Awards" label="54th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="25499" end="25506" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="25576" end="25587" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416004" start="25813" end="25821" title="Paradise (Coldplay song)" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q577600" start="25909" end="25936" title="2012 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2012 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25963" end="25978" title="2012 MTV Video Music Awards#Best Rock Video" label="Best Rock Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626859" start="26069" end="26121" title="2012 Summer Paralympics closing ceremony" label="closing ceremony of the London 2012 Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854720" start="26341" end="26359" title="Bandstand Marathon" label="Bandstand Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="26411" end="26423" title="Viva la Vida" label="Viva la Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q127810" start="26530" end="26547" title="Hurts Like Heaven" label="Hurts Like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556635" start="26862" end="26871" title="Live 2012 (Coldplay album)" label="Live 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q576446" start="27162" end="27178" title="Mylo Xyloto Tour" label="Mylo Xyloto Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="27298" end="27313" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q967303" start="27653" end="27660" title="2Day FM" label="2Day FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14846927" start="28186" end="28191" title="Atlas (Coldplay song)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28221" end="28231" title="The Hunger Games: Catching Fire – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28251" end="28282" title="The Hunger Games: Catching Fire" label="The Hunger Games: Catching Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="28473" end="28489" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="28528" end="28546" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="28573" end="28591" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="28597" end="28600" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885802" start="28648" end="28656" title="Midnight (Coldplay song)" label="Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="28787" end="28800" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012348" start="29445" end="29463" title="Ghost Stories Tour" label="Ghost Stories Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="29543" end="29557" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171194" start="29585" end="29595" title="Royce Hall" label="Royce Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187828" start="29622" end="29637" title="Casino de Paris" label="Casino de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267633" start="29658" end="29678" title="Tokyo Dome City Hall" label="Tokyo Dome City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379114" start="29700" end="29714" title="Enmore Theatre" label="Enmore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="29764" end="29781" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="29854" end="29860" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15889471" start="29889" end="29894" title="Magic (Coldplay song)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740098" start="29941" end="29960" title="A Sky Full of Stars" label="A Sky Full of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17606180" start="29977" end="29986" title="True Love (Coldplay song)" label="True Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027891" start="30217" end="30237" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album" label="Best Pop Vocal Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027880" start="30293" end="30323" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance" label="Best Pop Duo/Group Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="30343" end="30350" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="30450" end="30460" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="30465" end="30471" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="30605" end="30616" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="30698" end="30719" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="30802" end="30814" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q133698" start="31090" end="31099" title="Jo Whiley" label="Jo Whiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636099" start="31390" end="31398" title="Miracles (Coldplay song)" label="Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31445" end="31457" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146380" start="31475" end="31483" title="Unbroken (film)" label="Unbroken"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="31502" end="31516" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865422" start="31525" end="31552" title="2015 Billboard Music Awards" label="2015 Billboard Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080368" start="31664" end="31687" title="Global Citizen Festival" label="Global Citizen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="31691" end="31703" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="31840" end="31847" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="31849" end="31859" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="31865" end="31874" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q547486" start="32004" end="32017" title="Nick Grimshaw" label="Nick Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759224" start="32031" end="32053" title="The Radio 1 Breakfast Show" label="Radio 1 Breakfast Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402925" start="32211" end="32234" title="Adventure of a Lifetime" label="Adventure of a Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="32311" end="32326" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="32328" end="32342" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948790" start="32344" end="32351" title="Tove Lo" label="Tove Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="32356" end="32368" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="32507" end="32512" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q21168841" start="32526" end="32528" title="25 (Adele album)" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="32683" end="32702" title="performance capture" label="performance capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q206922" start="32709" end="32720" title="Andy Serkis" label="Andy Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21665666" start="32773" end="32799" title="A Head Full of Dreams Tour" label="A Head Full of Dreams Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="32893" end="32908" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202357" start="33076" end="33092" title="Jingle Bell Ball" label="Jingle Bell Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364202" start="33110" end="33118" title="The O2 Arena" label="O2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025581" start="33158" end="33185" title="Super Bowl 50 halftime show" label="Super Bowl 50 halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="33203" end="33210" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="33215" end="33225" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="33366" end="33386" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q296872" start="33438" end="33448" title="Barry Gibb" label="Barry Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="33483" end="33491" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="33532" end="33547" title="MetLife Stadium" label="MetLife Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="33606" end="33620" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="33641" end="33659" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q281624" start="33691" end="33702" title="Earth Angel" label="Earth Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q931481" start="33801" end="33816" title="Johnny B. Goode" label="Johnny B. Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080368" start="33898" end="33921" title="Global Citizen Festival" label="Global Citizen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="33925" end="33931" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590187" start="34113" end="34127" title="Absolute Radio" label="Absolute Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053759" start="34222" end="34237" title="Kaleidoscope EP" label="Kaleidoscope EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721993" start="34612" end="34628" title="The Chainsmokers" label="The Chainsmokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28824109" start="34642" end="34666" title="Something Just Like This" label="Something Just Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q28100413" start="34935" end="34951" title="2017 Brit Awards" label="2017 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="35013" end="35027" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q28863477" start="35110" end="35120" title="Hypnotised (Coldplay song)" label="Hypnotised"/>
<link wikidata="Q30459815" start="35168" end="35196" title="All I Can Think About Is You" label="All I Can Think About Is You"/>
<link wikidata="Q32390944" start="35213" end="35219" title="Aliens (song)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="35489" end="35502" title="San Diego Stadium" label="SDCCU Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="35506" end="35515" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q40355642" start="35553" end="35570" title="2017 Puebla earthquake" label="Puebla earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="35647" end="35662" title="benefit concert" label="benefit concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="35666" end="35677" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="35685" end="35691" title="Zócalo" label="Zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q468494" start="35937" end="35984" title="List of highest-grossing concert tours" label="third-highest-grossing concert tour of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q74294746" start="36031" end="36052" title="Global Citizen – EP 1" label="Global Citizen – EP 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q59340572" start="36195" end="36215" title="Live in Buenos Aires (Coldplay album)" label="Live in Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q44059" start="36303" end="36311" title="La Plata" label="La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="37035" end="37048" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016099" start="37339" end="37349" title="Daily Post (North Wales)" label="Daily Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421648" start="37425" end="37443" title="Express &amp;amp; Echo" label="Express &amp;amp; Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q72227509" start="37512" end="37519" title="Orphans (Coldplay song)" label="Orphans"/>
<link wikidata="Q72278755" start="37536" end="37545" title="Arabesque (Coldplay song)" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955223" start="37596" end="37605" title="Annie Mac" label="Annie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="37614" end="37625" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="37688" end="37697" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157009" start="37785" end="37798" title="Amman Citadel" label="Amman Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="37848" end="37855" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="38287" end="38301" title="carbon neutrality" label="carbon-neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132479" start="38382" end="38393" title="ClientEarth" label="ClientEarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="38411" end="38433" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38459" end="38463" title="Natural History Museum, London#Major specimens and exhibits" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="38583" end="38598" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q64000750" start="38756" end="38783" title="No.6 Collaborations Project" label="No.6 Collaborations Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q63975374" start="38800" end="38839" title="Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent" label="Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent"/>
<link wikidata="Q101111612" start="38910" end="38935" title="63rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="63rd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106676156" start="39335" end="39347" title="Higher Power (Coldplay song)" label="Higher Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="39425" end="39452" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248734" start="39495" end="39504" title="Zane Lowe" label="Zane Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="39550" end="39560" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320430" start="39744" end="39760" title="Brit Awards 2021" label="2021 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212909" start="39985" end="39996" title="We Are King" label="We Are King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="40192" end="40195" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="40309" end="40329" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q107636410" start="40406" end="40416" title="Coloratura (song)" label="Coloratura"/>
<link wikidata="Q108538742" start="40569" end="40580" title="My Universe (song)" label="My Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="40609" end="40625" title="K-pop" label="South Korean pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580495" start="40632" end="40635" title="BTS" label="BTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="40723" end="40739" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28824109" start="40803" end="40827" title="Something Just Like This" label="Something Just Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="40883" end="40912" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="41082" end="41097" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="41180" end="41190" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q64000750" start="41204" end="41231" title="No.6 Collaborations Project" label="No.6 Collaborations Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="41282" end="41307" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="41347" end="41369" title="Top Alternative Albums" label="Top Alternative Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="41378" end="41393" title="Top Rock Albums" label="Top Rock Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="41445" end="41476" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="41493" end="41501" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522000" start="41509" end="41539" title="Estadio Nacional de Costa Rica (2011)" label="Estadio Nacional de Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41639" end="41670" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour#Ecological plan" label="a series of environmental plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="41761" end="41774" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="CO2 emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21665666" start="41803" end="41827" title="A Head Full of Dreams Tour" label="Head Full of Dreams Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="42049" end="42065" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027880" start="42175" end="42205" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance" label="Best Pop Duo/Group Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084271" start="42213" end="42238" title="64th Annual Grammy Awards" label="64th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="42346" end="42349" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q113133343" start="42668" end="42683" title="Let Somebody Go" label="Let Somebody Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q299138" start="42705" end="42713" title="Kid Cudi" label="Kid Cudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553272" start="42727" end="42749" title="Day &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Nite" label="Day &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="42785" end="42800" title="Spotify" label="Spotify Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q114708205" start="42854" end="42879" title="65th Annual Grammy Awards" label="65th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q126811456" start="42977" end="43001" title="Feelslikeimfallinginlove" label="Feelslikeimfallinginlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q126710155" start="43037" end="43047" title="Moon Music" label="Moon Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="43300" end="43320" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003556" start="43396" end="43410" title="Victoria Canal" label="Victoria Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="43412" end="43426" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286484" start="43431" end="43442" title="Laura Mvula" label="Laura Mvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q129487892" start="43469" end="43476" title="We Pray" label="We Pray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547427" start="43494" end="43505" title="Little Simz" label="Little Simz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305712" start="43507" end="43516" title="Burna Boy" label="Burna Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108124205" start="43518" end="43525" title="Elyanna" label="Elyanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699591" start="43530" end="43534" title="Tini (singer)" label="Tini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="43614" end="43618" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q106462586" start="43711" end="43721" title="Ayra Starr" label="Ayra Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531421" start="44131" end="44152" title="Narendra Modi Stadium" label="Narendra Modi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489238" start="44184" end="44234" title="List of most-attended concerts" label="the largest stadium attendance of the 21st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="44348" end="44351" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q15889471" start="44912" end="44917" title="Magic (Coldplay song)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402925" start="44934" end="44957" title="Adventure of a Lifetime" label="Adventure of a Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="45778" end="45794" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="45796" end="45811" title="alternative pop" label="alternative pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="45813" end="45821" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231749" start="45823" end="45835" title="post-Britpop" label="post-Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="45837" end="45846" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="45852" end="45855" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="45873" end="45905" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="46029" end="46038" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q592330" start="46115" end="46124" title="dream pop" label="dream pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="46199" end="46209" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="46495" end="46503" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463270" start="46517" end="46528" title="Perfect Day (Lou Reed song)" label="Perfect Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="46745" end="46772" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="47185" end="47192" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="47284" end="47295" title="synthesizer" label="synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="47392" end="47404" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="47825" end="47866" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q135417" start="47898" end="47919" title="Prospekt&amp;#x27;s March" label="Prospekt&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q685663" start="48154" end="48169" title="electric violin" label="electric violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673920" start="48172" end="48182" title="tack piano" label="tack piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912399" start="48185" end="48192" title="santoor" label="santoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="48198" end="48207" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="48344" end="48353" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="48389" end="48397" title="Hispanic music" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="48399" end="48406" title="Music of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503406" start="48412" end="48426" title="Middle Eastern music" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="48458" end="48470" title="Viva la Vida" label="Viva la Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q46046" start="48492" end="48503" title="baroque pop" label="baroque pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004401" start="48528" end="48544" title="Strawberry Swing" label="Strawberry Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="48575" end="48586" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272167" start="48617" end="48625" title="shoegaze" label="shoegaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="48910" end="48921" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180736" start="48935" end="48949" title="Les Misérables" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="49053" end="49064" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="49074" end="49087" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="49147" end="49157" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="49328" end="49336" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416004" start="49474" end="49482" title="Paradise (Coldplay song)" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411724" start="49651" end="49664" title="Charlie Brown (Coldplay song)" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="49886" end="49894" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q153364" start="49900" end="49910" title="White Rose" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387218" start="50032" end="50042" title="Mylo Xyloto (comics)" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900331" start="50108" end="50120" title="Mark Osborne (filmmaker)" label="Mark Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="50133" end="50146" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="50268" end="50279" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="50281" end="50288" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="50290" end="50299" title="synth-pop" label="synth-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="50304" end="50311" title="Ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="50619" end="50627" title="Breakup" label="break-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="50820" end="50835" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="50857" end="50878" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="51037" end="51042" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="51047" end="51051" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402925" start="51087" end="51110" title="Adventure of a Lifetime" label="Adventure of a Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053759" start="51259" end="51274" title="Kaleidoscope EP" label="Kaleidoscope EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28824109" start="51362" end="51386" title="Something Just Like This" label="Something Just Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="51400" end="51403" title="Electronic dance music" label="EDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721993" start="51423" end="51439" title="the Chainsmokers" label="the Chainsmokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32390944" start="51492" end="51498" title="Aliens (song)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30459815" start="51538" end="51566" title="All I Can Think About Is You" label="All I Can Think About Is You"/>
<link wikidata="Q28863477" start="51583" end="51593" title="Hypnotised (Coldplay song)" label="Hypnotised"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="51707" end="51720" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="51886" end="51892" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="51894" end="51899" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="51904" end="51913" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q72227509" start="51966" end="51973" title="Orphans (Coldplay song)" label="Orphans"/>
<link wikidata="Q72278755" start="51996" end="52005" title="Arabesque (Coldplay song)" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="52022" end="52033" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q388296" start="52038" end="52046" title="afrobeat" label="afrobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="52209" end="52215" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="52217" end="52233" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="52235" end="52246" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397926" start="52251" end="52265" title="refugee crisis" label="refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="52302" end="52311" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="52383" end="52403" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="52668" end="52677" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q946074" start="52789" end="52807" title="Mos Eisley" label="Mos Eisley Cantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="52882" end="52892" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212909" start="52924" end="52935" title="We Are King" label="We Are King"/>
<link wikidata="Q24900882" start="52940" end="52953" title="Jacob Collier" label="Jacob Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q107636410" start="52965" end="52975" title="Coloratura (song)" label="Coloratura"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="52985" end="53001" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q156305" start="53461" end="53465" title="a-ha" label="a-ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="53467" end="53469" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="53471" end="53476" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="53478" end="53484" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="53489" end="53498" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q160103" start="53532" end="53538" title="Travis (band)" label="Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215855" start="53559" end="53571" title="Jeff Buckley" label="Jeff Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586466" start="53654" end="53664" title="Ken Nelson (British record producer)" label="Ken Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="53697" end="53714" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="53774" end="53786" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q313453" start="53942" end="53949" title="Stromae" label="Stromae"/>
<link wikidata="Q29606" start="54152" end="54167" title="the Stone Roses" label="the Stone Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="54341" end="54363" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q217787" start="54365" end="54376" title="Carole King" label="Carole King"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="54378" end="54390" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="54392" end="54405" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="54407" end="54416" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="54418" end="54430" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="54432" end="54437" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="54439" end="54451" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027829" start="54558" end="54566" title="Teardrop (song)" label="Teardrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="54576" end="54590" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="54652" end="54663" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="54665" end="54676" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q850290" start="54678" end="54697" title="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang" label="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346570" start="54702" end="54719" title="the Funk Brothers" label="the Funk Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="54822" end="54833" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="54837" end="54843" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="55071" end="55080" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="55082" end="55091" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="55093" end="55102" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55107" end="55135" title="Music of Ireland#Traditional music" label="traditional Irish folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q122232" start="55150" end="55162" title="Ginger Baker" label="Ginger Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="55164" end="55174" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="55179" end="55190" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="55236" end="55263" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q925641" start="55305" end="55328" title="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen" label="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="55330" end="55345" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="55351" end="55355" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="55382" end="55389" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="55435" end="55444" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="55449" end="55461" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="55543" end="55554" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q104732087" start="55616" end="55629" title="Danton Supple" label="Danton Supple"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="55666" end="55707" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="55745" end="55753" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q841042" start="55797" end="55816" title="My Bloody Valentine (band)" label="My Bloody Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="55818" end="55822" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q58608" start="55827" end="55838" title="Arcade Fire" label="Arcade Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="55862" end="55871" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q903592" start="55876" end="55887" title="Jon Hopkins" label="Jon Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="55927" end="55940" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="55945" end="55956" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="56010" end="56021" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q515883" start="56109" end="56121" title="Paul Epworth" label="Paul Epworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="56143" end="56156" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="56174" end="56186" title="Avicii" label="Tim Bergling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355154" start="56191" end="56197" title="Madeon" label="Madeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740098" start="56257" end="56276" title="A Sky Full of Stars" label="A Sky Full of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="56371" end="56392" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417412" start="56429" end="56437" title="Stargate (record producers)" label="Stargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703615" start="56478" end="56490" title="Davide Rossi" label="Davide Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333990" start="56504" end="56515" title="Rik Simpson" label="Rik Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="56586" end="56599" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="56748" end="56768" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="56818" end="56828" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="56905" end="56912" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080368" start="56932" end="56955" title="Global Citizen Festival" label="Global Citizen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q107636410" start="56988" end="56998" title="Coloratura (song)" label="Coloratura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="57025" end="57035" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="57192" end="57201" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="57203" end="57208" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q815530" start="57214" end="57230" title="Confetti" label="confetti cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="57251" end="57259" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045415" start="57311" end="57325" title="Xyloband" label="LED wristbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q59340572" start="57443" end="57463" title="Live in Buenos Aires (Coldplay album)" label="Live in Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="57502" end="57511" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="57618" end="57630" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="57637" end="57652" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012348" start="57893" end="57911" title="Ghost Stories Tour" label="Ghost Stories Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="57973" end="57990" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="57999" end="58013" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q202094" start="58065" end="58075" title="laser harp" label="laser harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473977" start="58084" end="58093" title="reactable" label="reactable"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="58134" end="58147" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157009" start="58274" end="58287" title="Amman Citadel" label="Amman Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="58349" end="58352" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="58476" end="58492" title="the Flaming Lips" label="the Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="58883" end="58904" title="the Recording Academy" label="the Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463015" start="59062" end="59077" title="Make Trade Fair" label="Make Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="59211" end="59218" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="59272" end="59283" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q232812" start="59649" end="59665" title="Stella McCartney" label="Stella McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="59733" end="59774" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="59816" end="59827" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="59840" end="59882" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="59916" end="59933" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="59967" end="59982" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="60008" end="60022" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="V&amp;amp;A Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="60089" end="60100" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="60308" end="60321" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="60663" end="60684" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569969" start="60729" end="60736" title="tie-dye" label="tie-dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q180049" start="60741" end="60753" title="kaleidoscope" label="kaleidoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q64759813" start="60872" end="60886" title="Overlapping circles grid" label="flower of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q420953" start="60978" end="60988" title="Air Jordan" label="Air Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282768" start="61182" end="61196" title="Rag &amp;amp; Bone" label="Rag &amp;amp; Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="61201" end="61212" title="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co." label="Levi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="61326" end="61339" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="61426" end="61436" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="61485" end="61505" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="61952" end="61984" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="61992" end="62002" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="62023" end="62050" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="62074" end="62081" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q468505" start="62129" end="62170" title="List of best-selling albums in the United Kingdom" label="best-selling albums in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="62339" end="62351" title="Viva la Vida" label="Viva la Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="62408" end="62424" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="62429" end="62458" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="62480" end="62491" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499453" start="62505" end="62515" title="Maggie May" label="Maggie May"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="62544" end="62558" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="namesake album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473564" start="62580" end="62594" title="Music download" label="digital record"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="62711" end="62717" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="62816" end="62823" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025581" start="62850" end="62877" title="Super Bowl 50 halftime show" label="Super Bowl 50 halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="63025" end="63045" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q108538742" start="63109" end="63120" title="My Universe (song)" label="My Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21665666" start="63272" end="63291" title="A Head Full of Dreams Tour" label="Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="63306" end="63326" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q468494" start="63364" end="63397" title="List of highest-grossing concert tours" label="highest-grossing runs of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q122577356" start="63422" end="63451" title="List of most-attended concert tours" label="most-attended tour in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="63793" end="63804" title="The Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816594" start="63878" end="63903" title="Brit Award for British Album of the Year" label="British Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770228" start="63920" end="63933" title="Brit Award for British Group" label="British Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="64025" end="64037" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="64070" end="64086" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="64091" end="64109" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="64146" end="64163" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102214" start="64219" end="64238" title="NRJ Music Award" label="NRJ Award of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="64354" end="64379" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="ASCAP London Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="64454" end="64473" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q14846927" start="64502" end="64507" title="Atlas (Coldplay song)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64551" end="64582" title="The Hunger Games: Catching Fire" label="The Hunger Games: Catching Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15338774" start="64630" end="64662" title="19th Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="19th Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16773560" start="64686" end="64705" title="87th Academy Awards" label="87th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142959" start="64784" end="64788" title="Fuse (TV channel)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="64832" end="64854" title="NME Awards" label="&amp;quot;NME&amp;quot; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="64993" end="65014" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="65021" end="65055" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="65063" end="65085" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="65093" end="65103" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q621422" start="65131" end="65180" title="Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity" label="Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="65207" end="65229" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616621" start="65408" end="65439" title="List of music artists by net worth" label="richest musicians on the planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453524" start="65552" end="65561" title="Firstpost" label="Firstpost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65800" end="65853" title="Cultural impact of Coldplay#Creative inspiration" label="a variety of mainstream and indie musicians worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q119438474" start="65886" end="65893" title="List of cover versions of Coldplay songs" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668155" start="66151" end="66165" title="Neil McCormick" label="Neil McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="66177" end="66190" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072772" start="66284" end="66290" title="Afisha" label="Afisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="66362" end="66373" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="66443" end="66445" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66551" end="66576" title="Cultural impact of Coldplay#Public image" label="polarising cultural icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470793" start="66731" end="66741" title="The Ringer (website)" label="The Ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="66875" end="66883" title="Pop-punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130750875" start="66913" end="66920" title="Rockism and poptimism" label="rockism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271357" start="67151" end="67162" title="Jon Pareles" label="Jon Pareles"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="67264" end="67271" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="67365" end="67374" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766684" start="67382" end="67395" title="Mark Beaumont (journalist)" label="Mark Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886657" start="67545" end="67549" title="Veja (magazine)" label="Veja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045415" start="67741" end="67755" title="Xyloband" label="LED wristbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="67787" end="67818" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="67919" end="67932" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="CO2 emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21665666" start="67957" end="67983" title="A Head Full of Dreams Tour" label="their previous concert run"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="68078" end="68082" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="68102" end="68131" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="68481" end="68482" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="68575" end="68602" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830891" start="68634" end="68660" title="List of 200 Definitive Albums in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="68671" end="68684" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68791" end="68822" title="Cultural impact of Coldplay#Tribute projects" label="tribute albums, events and acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="69066" end="69087" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209263" start="69089" end="69117" title="Migrant Offshore Aid Station" label="Migrant Offshore Aid Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080368" start="69122" end="69145" title="Global Citizen Festival" label="Global Citizen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015794" start="69194" end="69204" title="2000 Miles" label="2000 Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096639" start="69243" end="69264" title="Stop Handgun Violence" label="Stop Handgun Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183278" start="69326" end="69346" title="Make Poverty History" label="Make Poverty History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404919" start="69467" end="69479" title="Kids Company" label="Kids Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="69552" end="69562" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058418" start="69609" end="69626" title="Viva la Vida Tour" label="Viva la Vida Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132479" start="69675" end="69686" title="ClientEarth" label="ClientEarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543513" start="69795" end="69813" title="Hope for Haiti Now" label="Hope for Haiti Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="69874" end="69895" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="70131" end="70142" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q806231" start="70227" end="70235" title="Band Aid (band)" label="Band Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188494" start="70300" end="70333" title="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?" label="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569761" start="70369" end="70381" title="2014 Ebola outbreaks" label="Ebola crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76473" start="70478" end="70503" title="University of Southampton" label="University of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801296" start="70804" end="70831" title="Artists&amp;#x27; Project Earth" label="Artists&amp;#x27; Project Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="70870" end="70876" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q74294746" start="71003" end="71024" title="Global Citizen – EP 1" label="Global Citizen – EP 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714378" start="71187" end="71202" title="extreme poverty" label="extreme poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="71277" end="71290" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="71304" end="71315" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664111" start="71398" end="71415" title="Innocence Project" label="Innocence Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q21438194" start="71492" end="71509" title="the Ocean Cleanup" label="the Ocean Cleanup"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="71591" end="71599" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="71620" end="71629" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="71873" end="71904" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="72059" end="72066" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="72129" end="72144" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338927" start="72149" end="72160" title="Craven Park, Hull" label="Craven Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049783" start="72193" end="72210" title="Music Venue Trust" label="Music Venue Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q188485" start="72346" end="72356" title="fair trade" label="fair trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="72371" end="72376" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q463015" start="72384" end="72399" title="Make Trade Fair" label="Make Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819895" start="72483" end="72515" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496684" start="72530" end="72548" title="Twisted Logic Tour" label="Twisted Logic Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="72615" end="72636" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694371" start="72655" end="72675" title="Teenage Cancer Trust" label="Teenage Cancer Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="72679" end="72696" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="72782" end="72792" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="72817" end="72827" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="72840" end="72852" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804324" start="72884" end="72901" title="Meatless Monday" label="Meat Free Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="72940" end="72954" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500685" start="73070" end="73091" title="Freedom for Palestine" label="Freedom for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="73222" end="73230" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="73570" end="73584" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025581" start="73626" end="73653" title="Super Bowl 50 halftime show" label="Super Bowl 50 halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="73692" end="73705" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634937" start="73727" end="73737" title="gay agenda" label="gay agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="73872" end="73884" title="The Advocate (magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="74008" end="74059" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="74071" end="74077" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30125323" start="74242" end="74261" title="One Love Manchester" label="One Love Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="74294" end="74307" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015850" start="74327" end="74351" title="Manchester Arena bombing" label="Manchester Arena bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317605" start="74439" end="74466" title="A Concert for Charlottesville" label="Concert for Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="74512" end="74533" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Unite the Right rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="74568" end="74581" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="74650" end="74656" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="74658" end="74674" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618454" start="74679" end="74691" title="gun violence" label="gun violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857928" start="74779" end="74791" title="Equality Act (United States)" label="Equality Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547025" start="74806" end="74829" title="Malaysian Islamic Party" label="Malaysian Islamic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q635363" start="74878" end="74906" title="Bukit Jalil National Stadium" label="Bukit Jalil National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51401" start="74934" end="74944" title="Rainbow flag (LGBT)" label="pride flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="75235" end="75238" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q304992" start="75326" end="75334" title="Gatorade" label="Gatorade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="75336" end="75345" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="75350" end="75353" title="Gap Inc." label="Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q626490" start="75550" end="75562" title="Viva la Vida" label="Viva la Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="75607" end="75612" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="75668" end="75680" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="75774" end="75784" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150741" start="75832" end="75844" title="Apple Infinite Loop" label="Apple Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="75918" end="75924" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="75989" end="76002" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402925" start="76054" end="76077" title="Adventure of a Lifetime" label="Adventure of a Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298143" start="76107" end="76121" title="Mat Whitecross" label="Mat Whitecross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741451" start="76138" end="76153" title="The Imaginarium" label="The Imaginarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961036" start="76161" end="76166" title="Beats Electronics" label="Beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702754" start="76317" end="76327" title="Jon M. Chu" label="Jon M. Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q529026" start="76447" end="76453" title="Yellow (Coldplay song)" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29588623" start="76469" end="76486" title="Crazy Rich Asians (film)" label="Crazy Rich Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="76655" end="76658" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q106676156" start="77027" end="77039" title="Higher Power (Coldplay song)" label="Higher Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q489815" start="77085" end="77088" title="DHL" label="DHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="77136" end="77167" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="77289" end="77301" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q822029" start="77368" end="77382" title="Jonny Buckland" label="Jonny Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q601617" start="77437" end="77449" title="Guy Berryman" label="Guy Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q822036" start="77492" end="77505" title="Will Champion" label="Will Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060318" start="77559" end="77570" title="Phil Harvey (band manager)" label="Phil Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131977" start="77669" end="77679" title="Parachutes (Coldplay album)" label="Parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207970" start="77701" end="77728" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q158738" start="77750" end="77757" title="X&amp;amp;Y" label="X&amp;amp;Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q158740" start="77779" end="77820" title="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" label="Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q679632" start="77842" end="77853" title="Mylo Xyloto" label="Mylo Xyloto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885808" start="77875" end="77888" title="Ghost Stories (Coldplay album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363369" start="77910" end="77931" title="A Head Full of Dreams" label="A Head Full of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="77953" end="77966" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q107597380" start="77988" end="78008" title="Music of the Spheres (Coldplay album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q126710155" start="78030" end="78040" title="Moon Music" label="Moon Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78082" end="78120" title="Twisted Logic Tour#Video release" label="How We Saw the World – Live in Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q72087708" start="78164" end="78194" title="Everyday Life (Coldplay album)" label="Everyday Life – Live in Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78216" end="78226" title="Coldplay discography#Extended plays" label="Reimagined"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78248" end="78289" title="Coldplay – Music of the Spheres: Live at River Plate" label="Music of the Spheres: Live at River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78311" end="78344" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour#Releases" label="Tutto Passa – A Tribute to Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q126710155" start="78366" end="78387" title="Moon Music" label="A Film for the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363191" start="78417" end="78432" title="Parachutes Tour" label="Parachutes Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819895" start="78447" end="78479" title="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour" label="A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496684" start="78494" end="78512" title="Twisted Logic Tour" label="Twisted Logic Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058418" start="78527" end="78544" title="Viva la Vida Tour" label="Viva la Vida Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q576446" start="78559" end="78575" title="Mylo Xyloto Tour" label="Mylo Xyloto Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012348" start="78590" end="78608" title="Ghost Stories Tour" label="Ghost Stories Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21665666" start="78618" end="78644" title="A Head Full of Dreams Tour" label="A Head Full of Dreams Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q108897049" start="78659" end="78690" title="Music of the Spheres World Tour" label="Music of the Spheres World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603007" start="78721" end="78777" title="List of people associated with University College London" label="List of people associated with University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815660" start="78780" end="78823" title="List of British Grammy winners and nominees" label="List of British Grammy winners and nominees"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="78826" end="78860" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="List of best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561868" start="78863" end="78906" title="List of highest-grossing live music artists" label="List of highest-grossing live music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606236" start="78909" end="78971" title="List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80105" wikidata="Q63708" url="?curid=80105" title="Ellsworth Bunker">
<text>Ellsworth F. Bunker (May 11, 1894 – September 27, 1984) was an American businessman and diplomat who served as ambassador to Argentina, Italy, India, Nepal and South Vietnam. He is perhaps best known for being a hawk on the war in Vietnam and Southeast Asia during the 1960s and 1970s. , Bunker is one of only two people to have been awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom twice, and the only person to receive both awards With Distinction.

==Early life and education==
Ellsworth Bunker was born on May 11, 1894, in Yonkers, New York. He was the eldest of three children of George Raymond Bunker and Jeanie Polhemus (&quot;née&quot; Cobb), whose family descended from prominent early Dutch settlers including the Evertson family (of the Great Nine Partners) and the Schuyler family. His great-grandmother Eliza Brodhead Polhemus &quot;née&quot; Heyer was a niece of Stephen Whitney, reputedly the wealthiest American of his time after John Jacob Astor, while her first cousin Charles Suydam was the brother-in-law of Astor&#x27;s grandson William Backhouse Astor Jr. and his wife Caroline Schermerhorn Astor. 

Bunker&#x27;s father was one of the founders and chairman of the board of National Sugar Refining Company. His younger brother, Arthur Hugh Bunker (July 29, 1895 – May 19, 1964), was also a noted businessman, chairman of the executive committee of the War Production Board (1941–1945) during World War II, and president and then board chairman of American Metal Climax (AMAX). He was married to actress and writer Isabel Leighton. His first cousin Dorothy Penrose Cobb was married to historian Frederick Lewis Allen.

Ellsworth Bunker was enrolled at Yale University in 1912 and graduated in 1916 with a major in economics and a minor in history.

==Career==

Bunker first worked in his father&#x27;s company, National Sugar Refining Company, eventually becoming the company&#x27;s president, succeeding Horace Havemeyer Sr., in 1942. During World War II he served as chairman of the War Production Board&#x27;s cane sugar advisory committee. He retired as an active executive in 1951 and purchased a 600-acre dairy farm in Putney, Vermont. He remained a member of the board of National Sugar until 1966.

He then moved to government during the Harry S. Truman administration, when Truman appointed him ambassador to Argentina in April 1951. Next he was ambassador to Italy in February 1952. From November 1953 until November 1956 he was president of the American Red Cross. In November 1956 he was appointed ambassador to India and Nepal by Dwight D. Eisenhower, and sworn in December 1956, where he played a crucial role in the covert alliance between the two powers against China. He was replaced by John Kenneth Galbraith in 1961. During 1962 he acted as U.S. mediator in the New York Agreement over Western New Guinea.

After a period back in Washington, D.C., he was made U.S. ambassador to the Organization of American States, 1964–1966. President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed him U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, 1967–1973. Once in Saigon, he strongly supported the war efforts of Presidents Johnson and Richard Nixon, and applauded US incursions into Laos and Cambodia. Following the conclusion of the Vietnam War, Bunker headed the US team involved in the drawing up of the 1977 Torrijos-Carter Treaties.

He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom with Distinction twice—the first time by John F. Kennedy in 1963 (though the ceremony took place during Lyndon B Johnson&#x27;s term) and the second time by Lyndon B. Johnson in 1967. He is one of only two persons (the other being Colin Powell) who received the award twice, and the only person to receive it both times with distinction.

==Personal life==
Bunker married a neighbor, Harriet Allen Butler, daughter of Ellen Mudge and George Prentiss Butler, in Yonkers, New York on April 24, 1920. Harriet had made friends with Bunkers&#x27; sister Katherine when the two girls attended Miss Porter&#x27;s School in Farmington, Connecticut. They had three children, John Birkbeck, Samuel Emmet, and Ellen Mudge. She died in 1964.

On January 3, 1967 he married fellow ambassador Caroline Clendening &quot;Carol&quot; Laise in Katmandu, Nepal. Their marriage was the first between two American Ambassadors on active duty. Later that year, Bunker was named ambassador to South Vietnam and for nearly the first six years of their marriage they only saw each other monthly, via a special government flight offered by President Johnson as enticement for Bunker to accept the post. Laise died in 1991. Ambassador Laise was a friend of the first Mrs. Bunker.

Bunker died on September 27, 1984, at his dairy farm in Putney, Vermont. The funeral was attended by his good friend and neighbor former senator George Aiken and former president Richard M. Nixon. Aiken died two months later.

His middle child, John Birkbeck Bunker (March 8, 1926 – May 26, 2005), a first lieutenant in World War II, died of cancer at his home in Wheatland, Wyoming at age 79.

==In popular culture==
* In a 1977 &quot;Doonesbury&quot; cartoon, one of the supposed terms of the Torrijos–Carter Treaties was that &quot;We get to keep Ellsworth Bunker.&quot;
* In a 1978 &quot;Doonesbury &quot;cartoon, a New York tailor fitting Phred with a very old-fashioned suit says &quot;Ellsworth Bunker used to get everything from me&quot;. 
* Bunker is mentioned in Allen Ginsberg&#x27;s poem &quot;September on Jessore Road&quot;, which includes the line &quot;Where is Ambassador Bunker today? Are his Helios machine gunning children at play?&quot;
* In chapter 7 of John Irving&#x27;s 1989 novel &quot;A Prayer for Owen Meany&quot;: &quot;And whom did Ellsworth Bunker replace? Remember that? Of course you don&#x27;t!&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Oral History Interviews with Ellsworth Bunker, from the Rutherford Living History project at Duke University.
** Part 1: The Making of a Diplomat, with David Barber (February 26, 1979)
** Part 2: Vietnam, with Bruce Kuniholm (February 26, 1979)
** Part 3: India, with Ralph Braibanti (February 26, 1979)
** Part 4: Latin America, with Arturo Valenzuela (February 27, 1979)
** Part 5: Lecture Follow-up, with Taylor Cole (February 28, 1979)
** Part 6: Europe, with Charles Maier (February 28, 1979)
* &quot;Ambassador Bunker meeting the press; Saigon.&quot;, photograph; &quot;Bunker with Zorthian; Saigon&quot; as Bunker speaks to reporters, photograph; &quot;Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker arrival in Saigon; Top U.S. officials: Barry Zorthian, Jack Steward, Porter Calhoun&quot; (Bunker not pictured), photograph; all &quot;date covered&quot; April 25, 1967 and credited to François Sully; all copyright Healey Library, UMass Boston; via openvault.wgbh.org. Zorthian was press media advisor to the ambassador.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63708" start="0" end="19" title="Ellsworth Bunker" label="Ellsworth F. Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185212" start="212" end="216" title="War Hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="231" end="257" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam and Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="346" end="375" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128114" start="520" end="537" title="Yonkers, New York" label="Yonkers, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="717" end="725" title="List_of_United_States_political_families_(E)#The_Evertsons_and_Smiths" label="Evertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599627" start="741" end="760" title="Great Nine Partners Patent" label="Great Nine Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433084" start="770" end="785" title="Schuyler family" label="Schuyler family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610844" start="870" end="885" title="Stephen Whitney" label="Stephen Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="939" end="955" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497723" start="1043" end="1070" title="William Backhouse Astor Jr." label="William Backhouse Astor Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1044554" start="1084" end="1111" title="Caroline Schermerhorn Astor" label="Caroline Schermerhorn Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="1367" end="1387" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q108769758" start="1529" end="1544" title="Isabel Leighton" label="Isabel Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498277" start="1609" end="1630" title="Frederick Lewis Allen" label="Frederick Lewis Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1666" end="1681" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439416" start="2139" end="2154" title="Putney, Vermont" label="Putney, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2260" end="2275" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889257" start="2318" end="2341" title="United States Ambassador to Argentina" label="ambassador to Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056264" start="2369" end="2388" title="United States Ambassador to Italy" label="ambassador to Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="2470" end="2488" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837650" start="2524" end="2543" title="United States Ambassador to India" label="ambassador to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889345" start="2548" end="2553" title="United States Ambassador to Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2557" end="2577" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2692" end="2697" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="2718" end="2740" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822794" start="2795" end="2813" title="New York Agreement" label="New York Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="2819" end="2837" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2863" end="2879" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q15726790" start="2893" end="2908" title="Ambassadors from the United States" label="U.S. ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="2916" end="2947" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="2970" end="2987" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3021" end="3034" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="3055" end="3061" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="3127" end="3140" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="3175" end="3179" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3184" end="3192" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3226" end="3237" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="3304" end="3328" title="Torrijos-Carter Treaties" label="Torrijos-Carter Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="3350" end="3379" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3421" end="3436" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3484" end="3500" title="Lyndon B Johnson" label="Lyndon B Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3537" end="3554" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="3611" end="3623" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128114" start="3841" end="3858" title="Yonkers, New York" label="Yonkers, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250108" start="3967" end="3992" title="Miss Porter&amp;#x27;s School" label="Miss Porter&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044429" start="4159" end="4202" title="Carol Laise" label="Caroline Clendening &amp;quot;Carol&amp;quot; Laise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="4206" end="4221" title="Katmandu, Nepal" label="Katmandu, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="4349" end="4362" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439416" start="4689" end="4704" title="Putney, Vermont" label="Putney, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q116751" start="4778" end="4790" title="George Aiken" label="George Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4812" end="4828" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q547093" start="4997" end="5015" title="Wheatland, Wyoming" label="Wheatland, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q429433" start="5069" end="5079" title="Doonesbury" label="Doonesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="5128" end="5152" title="Torrijos–Carter Treaties" label="Torrijos–Carter Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569224" start="5277" end="5282" title="Phred (Doonesbury)" label="Phred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="5406" end="5420" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705406" start="5544" end="5550" title="Helio Courier" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q310379" start="5609" end="5620" title="John Irving" label="John Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q13911" start="5645" end="5668" title="A Prayer for Owen Meany" label="A Prayer for Owen Meany"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="5898" end="5913" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978167" start="6015" end="6029" title="Bruce R. Kuniholm" label="Bruce Kuniholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287265" start="6073" end="6088" title="Ralph Braibanti" label="Ralph Braibanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801814" start="6140" end="6157" title="Arturo Valenzuela" label="Arturo Valenzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q324543" start="6269" end="6282" title="Charles S. Maier" label="Charles Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493411" start="6678" end="6692" title="François Sully" label="François Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144" start="6724" end="6736" title="UMass Boston" label="UMass Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864926" start="6762" end="6770" title="Barry Zorthian" label="Zorthian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80107" wikidata="Q3309155" url="?curid=80107" title="Kim Mitchell">
<text>Joseph Kim Mitchell (born July 10, 1952) is a Canadian rock musician. He was the lead singer and guitarist for the band Max Webster before going on to a solo career. His 1984 single, &quot;Go for Soda&quot;, was his only charted song on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, reaching number 86. Several other singles such as &quot;Patio Lanterns&quot;, &quot;Rock and Roll Duty&quot;, and &quot;Rockland Wonderland&quot;, reached the top 20 in Canada.

==Early life==
Mitchell attended St. Clair Secondary School in Sarnia. During the 1970s, Mitchell began playing with local bands in Sarnia, Ontario. After going through a few name changes with essentially the same band, Mitchell and &quot;Zooom&quot; headed for Toronto, Ontario. Zooom eventually dissolved, with Mitchell travelling to the Greek islands.

==Career==
===1972–2003===
On his return to Canada, he formed the band Max Webster with fellow Sarnia native Pye Dubois. Max Webster toured extensively and built a string of hits. Mitchell&#x27;s solo career began after his departure from Max Webster in 1982, with session work and a succession of solo albums.

A new sound was tested on the club circuit and recorded on his 1982 self-titled mini-album. Songs such as &quot;Chain of Events&quot; featured Mitchell&#x27;s lead vocal and guitar and Dubois&#x27; suburban storytelling, anchored by the visceral drum/bass combination of Paul DeLong and Robert Sinclair Wilson. Peter Fredette added a vocal and guitar counterpoint.

In early 1985, the song &quot;Go for Soda&quot; from the &quot;Akimbo Alogo&quot; album became an international hit and remains his best known song outside of his native Canada. His most successful Canadian album was the follow-up, 1986&#x27;s &quot;Shakin&#x27; Like a Human Being&quot;, featuring the hits &quot;Alana Loves Me&quot;, &quot;Easy to Tame&quot;, and the biggest hit of his career, &quot;Patio Lanterns&quot;. His 1989 album, &quot;Rockland&quot;, achieved critical acclaim and was the highest placing chart album of his career.

In 1992, Mitchell played guitar on the track &quot;Brave and Crazy&quot; from Tom Cochrane&#x27;s album &quot;Mad Mad World&quot;. In that same year he also made a cameo appearance (as himself) on the third-season finale of the Canadian sketch program &quot;The Kids in the Hall&quot;. In 1995, Mitchell participated in the Kumbaya Festival to raise money for AIDS research.

===2004–present===
Mitchell entered the radio broadcasting industry, becoming an afternoon drivetime host on Toronto classic rock radio station Q107 (CILQ-FM) from April 2004 until August 2015.

On November 15, 2004, Mitchell was awarded the National Achievement Award by SOCAN at the 2004 SOCAN Awards in Toronto.

In 2006, Mitchell provided a guitar solo on the song &quot;Wind It Up&quot; from the Barenaked Ladies&#x27; album &quot;Barenaked Ladies Are Me&quot;.

Mitchell opened for Def Leppard at the Molson Amphitheatre in Toronto on July 16, 2007. His eighth studio album, &quot;Ain&#x27;t Life Amazing&quot;, was released on July 17, 2007.

Mitchell has been on the same live bill with many acts over the course of his solo career including Sammy Hagar, Def Leppard, Aerosmith, and Van Halen.

In January 2016, Mitchell suffered a heart attack, for which he underwent emergency surgery.

On May 21, 2020, Mitchell was inducted into the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame, although due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada the honour was not formally presented to him until 2021.

On October 2, 2021, Mitchell performed a sold-out show at the &quot;Sarnia OktBorderFest&quot; in Point Edward, Ontario, followed by the Barenaked Ladies. It is estimated that over 6,000 people were in attendance over the two-night event.

==Discography==

===Albums===
====Studio albums====
====Extended plays====
====Live albums====
====Compilation albums====
===Singles===
====Guest singles====
==Juno Awards==
Mitchell has been awarded several Juno Awards for his work:
*1983 – Most Promising Male Vocalist of the Year
*1987 – Album of the Year: &quot;Shakin&#x27; Like A Human Being&quot;
*1990 – Male Vocalist of the Year

==Television appearances==
*Mitchell made a cameo appearance on the show &quot;Twitch City&quot;.
*In 2005, Mitchell played a taxi driver on the sixth episode of the third season of &quot;Puppets Who Kill&quot;, titled &quot;Buttons and the Paternity Suit&quot;.
*On the sixth episode of the seventh season of the Canadian sitcom &quot;Trailer Park Boys&quot;, Ricky (Robb Wells) plays one of Mitchell&#x27;s songs, &quot;Go For Soda&quot;, on 8 track, while exclaiming &quot;Bubbles, while you rock a piss, I&#x27;ll rock some Mitchell.&quot;
*Mitchell appeared in a skit on the Canadian show &quot;The Kids in the Hall&quot;, teaching senior citizens how to tune the electric guitar.
*&quot;Go For a Soda&quot; was in Season 2, Episode 5:Buddies, on &quot;Miami Vice&quot;

== Family ==
Kim Mitchell has two sons, Josh and Jesse. Jesse works for his father as a drum tech and road manager.

== In popular culture ==
He was the subject of the Rush song, &quot;I Think I&#x27;m Going Bald&quot;.

== See also ==
* Max Webster
* Canadian rock
* Music of Canada
* Juno Award

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Kim Mitchell Music Summary 
* &quot;Kim Mitchell&quot; &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3309155" start="0" end="19" title="Kim Mitchell" label="Joseph Kim Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208006" start="120" end="131" title="Max Webster" label="Max Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587932" start="189" end="200" title="Go for Soda" label="Go for Soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="266" end="273" title="Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111781" start="331" end="345" title="Patio Lanterns" label="Patio Lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587580" start="486" end="512" title="St. Clair Secondary School" label="St. Clair Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="516" end="522" title="Sarnia" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="593" end="600" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="715" end="722" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208006" start="880" end="891" title="Max Webster" label="Max Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262952" start="918" end="928" title="Pye Dubois" label="Pye Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587932" start="1517" end="1528" title="Go for Soda" label="Go for Soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701030" start="1550" end="1562" title="Akimbo Alogo" label="Akimbo Alogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462934" start="1737" end="1768" title="Shakin&amp;#x27; Like a Human Being" label="Shakin&amp;#x27; Like a Human Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111781" start="1890" end="1904" title="Patio Lanterns" label="Patio Lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355428" start="1934" end="1942" title="Rockland (Kim Mitchell album)" label="Rockland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360993" start="2110" end="2122" title="Tom Cochrane" label="Tom Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089409" start="2142" end="2155" title="Mad Mad World" label="Mad Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560903" start="2290" end="2310" title="The Kids in the Hall (TV series)" label="The Kids in the Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="2499" end="2508" title="drivetime" label="drivetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="2525" end="2537" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011724" start="2558" end="2565" title="CILQ-FM" label="CILQ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207432" start="2680" end="2685" title="SOCAN" label="SOCAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="2809" end="2825" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860426" start="2844" end="2867" title="Barenaked Ladies Are Me" label="Barenaked Ladies Are Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="2896" end="2907" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2938" end="2945" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q435780" start="3158" end="3169" title="Sammy Hagar" label="Sammy Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="3171" end="3182" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="3184" end="3193" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="3199" end="3208" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362498" start="3353" end="3386" title="Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="3408" end="3435" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="3942" end="3952" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721234" start="4202" end="4213" title="Twitch City" label="Twitch City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260730" start="4311" end="4327" title="Puppets Who Kill" label="Puppets Who Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400775" start="4459" end="4476" title="Trailer Park Boys" label="Trailer Park Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434261" start="4491" end="4501" title="Robb Wells" label="Robb Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q270171" start="4567" end="4574" title="8-track tape" label="8 track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560903" start="4723" end="4743" title="The Kids in the Hall (TV series)" label="The Kids in the Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="4881" end="4891" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="5067" end="5071" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q582220" start="5084" end="5111" title="I Think I&amp;#x27;m Going Bald" label="I Think I&amp;#x27;m Going Bald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208006" start="5137" end="5148" title="Max Webster" label="Max Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437821" start="5151" end="5164" title="Canadian rock" label="Canadian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="5167" end="5182" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="5185" end="5195" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80110" wikidata="Q374315" url="?curid=80110" title="William Calley">
<text>William Laws Calley Jr. (June 8, 1943 – April 28, 2024) was a United States Army officer convicted by court-martial of the murder of 22 unarmed South Vietnamese civilians in the My Lai massacre on March 16, 1968, during the Vietnam War. Calley was released to house arrest under orders by President Richard Nixon three days after his conviction. The United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia granted him a new trial, but that ruling was overturned by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. His initial life sentence having been modified to a term of 20 years and then further reduced to ten, Calley ultimately served three years of house arrest for the murders. Public opinion at the time about Calley was divided. After his dismissal from the U.S. Army and release from confinement, Calley avoided public attention.

== Early life and education ==
Calley was born on June 8, 1943, in Miami, Florida. His father, William Laws Calley Sr., was a United States Navy veteran of World War II. Calley Jr. graduated from Miami Edison High School in Miami and then attended Palm Beach Junior College in 1963. He dropped out in 1964, having failed a majority of his classes.

Calley then had a variety of jobs before his army career, including as a bellhop, dishwasher, salesman, insurance appraiser, and train conductor.

== Career ==
Calley enlisted in the U.S. Army on July 26, 1966, and underwent eight weeks of basic combat training at Fort Bliss, Texas, followed by eight weeks of advanced individual training as a company clerk at Fort Lewis, Washington. Having scored high enough on his Armed Forces Qualification tests, he applied for and was accepted into Officer Candidate School (OCS).

He then began 26 weeks of junior officer training at Fort Benning in mid-March 1967. Upon graduating from OCS Class No. 51 on September 7, 1967, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry. He was assigned to 1st Platoon, Company C, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, 11th Infantry Brigade, 23rd Infantry Division &quot;The Americal Division&quot;, and began training at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii, in preparation for deployment to South Vietnam.

Calley&#x27;s officer evaluations described his performance as average. Later, as the My Lai investigation progressed, a more negative picture emerged. Men in his platoon reported to Army investigators that Calley lacked common sense and could not read a map or use a compass properly.

In May or June 1969 near Chu Lai Base Area, Calley and two other Americal Division lieutenants were involved in a physical confrontation with five enlisted members of the United States Marine Corps. The fight ended after one of the Army officers pulled his pistol and fired a round into the air; the two other officers were briefly hospitalized, while Calley was &quot;merely beaten up.&quot; The Marines pleaded guilty at special courts-martial, where they said they had not known that they were fighting officers.

=== My Lai massacre ===

On March 16, 1968, Calley led around 100 soldiers of Charlie company into the village of My Lai. Although they faced no resistance, they entered the village shooting. They murdered hundreds of civilians consisting mostly of South Vietnamese elderly men, women, children, and infants using automatic weapons, grenades and bayonets. Infants and children were killed with bayonets, and females were raped and shot.

The official American estimate of those murdered was 347, but a Vietnamese memorial at the site lists 504 names, with ages ranging from 1 to 82. In the My Lai museum in Vietnam, a marble plaque lists the names and ages of the victims. The count of the dead is a total of 504 people from 247 families. Of these, 24 families lost everyone – three generations, no survivors. Included in the 504 were 60 elderly men, and 282 women (17 of whom were pregnant). A total of 173 children were killed; 53 were infants.

=== Murder trial ===
The events in My Lai were initially covered up by the U.S. Army. In April 1969, nearly 13 months after the massacre, Ron Ridenhour, a GI who had been with the 11th Brigade, wrote letters to the President, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of Defense and 30 members of Congress. In these letters, Ridenhour described some of the atrocities committed by the soldiers at My Lai that he had been told about.

Due to Article 4 of the Fourth Geneva Convention excluding allied civilians from the status of protected persons in an international armed conflict, Calley and his fellow soldiers could not be legally tried as war criminals. Calley was instead charged on September 5, 1969, with six specifications of premeditated murder under Article 118 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for the deaths of 109 South Vietnamese civilians near the village of Son My, at a hamlet called My Lai. On November 12, 1969, investigative reporters Seymour Hersh and Wayne Greenhaw broke the story and revealed that Calley had been charged with murdering 109 South Vietnamese.

Calley&#x27;s trial started on November 17, 1970. It was the military prosecution&#x27;s contention that Calley, in defiance of the rules of engagement, ordered his men to deliberately murder unarmed Vietnamese civilians, even though his men were not under enemy fire at all. Testimony revealed that Calley had ordered the men of 1st Platoon, Company C, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry of the 23rd Infantry Division to kill everyone in the village.

In presenting the case, the two military prosecutors, Aubrey M. Daniel III and John Partin, were hamstrung by the reluctance of many soldiers to testify against Calley. Some soldiers refused to answer questions on the witness stand by citing the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.

One holdout, Private First Class Paul David Meadlo, having been granted immunity, was ordered by Judge Reid W. Kennedy to testify or face contempt of court charges. Meadlo thus took the stand and recounted that as he stood guard over some 30 villagers whom he, along with Private Dennis Conti, had gathered at a defoliated area at the hamlet&#x27;s southern tip, he was approached by Calley and told, regarding the civilians, &quot;You know what to do with &#x27;em.&quot; Meadlo took that as orders to only keep watch over them. Calley, however, returned 10 minutes later and became enraged by the fact that the villagers were still alive. After telling Meadlo that he had wanted them dead, Calley backed up about 20 feet, opened fire on them himself and ordered Meadlo to join in, which he did. Meadlo then proceeded to round up more villagers to be massacred.

Conti&#x27;s testimony corroborated that given by Meadlo, and laid the blame on Calley not only for the initiation of the massacre but also for the participation in it by his subordinates. Another witness, Leonard Gonzalez, told of finding seven women, all naked, all dead, killed by several M-79 grenade launcher rounds.

Calley&#x27;s original defense, that the death of the villagers was the result of an accidental airstrike, was overcome by prosecution witnesses. In his new defense, Calley claimed he was following the orders of his immediate superior, Captain Ernest Medina. Whether this order was actually given is disputed; Medina was acquitted of all charges relating to the incident at a separate trial in August 1971.

Taking the witness stand, Calley, under the direct examination by his civilian defense lawyer George W. Latimer, claimed that on the previous day, his commanding officer, Captain Medina, made it clear that his unit was to move into the village and that everyone was to be shot, saying that they all were Viet Cong. Medina publicly denied that he had ever given such orders and stated that he had meant enemy soldiers, while Calley assumed that his order to &quot;kill the enemy&quot; meant to kill everyone. On direct examination during his court martial, Calley stated:

Calley expressed no remorse.

Latimer also used Calley&#x27;s low intelligence and poor performance in training as a defense, arguing that Calley was incompetent, should not have been made an infantry officer, and had been commissioned only because of manpower shortages.

The prosecution called over 100 witnesses to testify against Calley during the trial. After President Nixon intervened in the trial, the assistant prosecutor, Captain Partin, wrote a letter to the White House saying that the presidential intervention had &quot;degraded&quot; and &quot;defiled&quot; the military justice system.

After deliberating for 79 hours, the six-officer jury (five of whom had served in Vietnam) convicted him on March 29, 1971, of the premeditated murder of 22 South Vietnamese civilians. On March 31, 1971, Calley was sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labor at Fort Leavenworth, which includes the United States Disciplinary Barracks, the Department of Defense&#x27;s only maximum security prison. Calley was the only one convicted of the 26 officers and soldiers initially charged for their part in the My Lai massacre or the subsequent cover-up. Many observers saw My Lai as a direct result of the military&#x27;s attrition strategy with its emphasis on body counts and kill ratios.

Many in the United States were outraged by what they perceived to be an overly harsh sentence for Calley. Georgia&#x27;s Governor, Jimmy Carter, future President of the United States, instituted American Fighting Man&#x27;s Day, and asked Georgians to drive for a week with their lights on. Indiana&#x27;s Governor Edgar Whitcomb asked that all state flags be flown at half-staff for Calley, and the governors of Utah and Mississippi also publicly disagreed with the verdict. The legislatures of Arkansas, Kansas, Texas, New Jersey, and South Carolina requested clemency for Calley. Alabama&#x27;s governor, George Wallace, visited Calley in the stockade and requested that President Richard Nixon pardon him. After the conviction, the White House received over 5,000 telegrams; the ratio was 100 to 1 in favor of leniency. In a telephone survey of the U.S. public, 79 percent disagreed with the verdict, 81 percent believed that the life sentence Calley had received was too stern, and 69 percent believed Calley had been made a scapegoat.

Nixon received so many telegrams from Americans requesting clemency or a pardon for William Calley that he remarked to Henry Kissinger, &quot;Most people don&#x27;t give a shit whether he killed them or not.&quot;

In a recollection on the Vietnam War, South Korea&#x27;s Vietnam Expeditionary Forces commander Chae Myung-shin stated that &quot;Calley tried to get revenge for the deaths of his troops. In a war, this is natural.&quot; Conversely, U.S. Army Colonel Harry G. Summers Jr. declared that Calley and Medina should have been hanged, drawn, and quartered, with their remains placed &quot;at the gates of Fort Benning, at the Infantry School, as a reminder to those who pass under it of what an infantry officer ought to be.&quot;

===Appeals===
Three days after Calley&#x27;s conviction, Nixon ordered Calley removed from prison and placed under house arrest at Fort Benning. On August 20, 1971, Lt. Gen. Albert O. Connor, Commanding General of Third Army, in his capacity as the convening authority, reduced Calley&#x27;s sentence to 20 years in prison. As required by law, his conviction and sentence were reviewed and sustained by the United States Army Court of Military Review, and the United States Court of Military Appeals.

Calley appealed his conviction to the United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia. On February 27, 1974, Judge J. Robert Elliott granted a writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; and set Calley free on bail. The court held that Calley had been improperly convicted due to extensive pre-trial publicity, the military court&#x27;s refusal to permit certain defense witnesses, the refusal of the United States House of Representatives to release testimony about the My Lai massacre taken in executive session, and inadequate notice of charges. As the Army appealed Judge Elliott&#x27;s decision, Secretary of the Army Howard H. Callaway reviewed Calley&#x27;s conviction and sentence as required by law. After reviewing the conclusions of the court-martial, Court of Military Review, and Court of Military Appeals, Callaway reduced Calley&#x27;s sentence to just 10 years. Under military regulations, a prisoner is eligible for parole after serving one-third of his sentence. This made Calley eligible for parole after serving three years and four months.

A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the district court&#x27;s ruling and returned Calley to custody on June 13, 1974. Calley once more appealed his conviction to Judge Elliott. He asked the Circuit Justice of the Fifth Circuit, Lewis F. Powell Jr., to set him free on bail while his appeal was pending, but Justice Powell denied the request.

The district court once more found the pre-trial publicity, the denial of defense witnesses, and improperly drawn charges had denied Calley a fair trial, and ordered him released on September 25, 1974. Calley was released on bail while the government appealed the ruling. The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals heard the Army&#x27;s latest appeal &quot;en banc&quot;. The full court ruled 8-to-5 to overturn the district court, and ordered Calley&#x27;s conviction and sentence reinstated on September 10, 1975. Because Calley had less than 10 days to serve before his possible parole, and because Army Secretary Callaway had expressed his intention to parole Calley as soon as possible, the Army refused to incarcerate Calley for the remaining 10 days of his sentence.

Calley appealed the Fifth Circuit&#x27;s ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court, but it declined to hear his case on April 5, 1976.

== After release ==
On May 15, 1976, Calley married Penny Vick, the daughter of a Columbus, Georgia, jewelry store owner. Judge Elliott attended the wedding. The couple had one son, William Laws Calley III, and divorced in 2005 or 2006. Calley worked at his father-in-law&#x27;s store and became a gemologist and obtained his real estate license, which had initially been denied due to his criminal record. During his divorce proceedings, Calley stated that he had prostate cancer and gastrointestinal problems that gave him no chance of earning a living.

On August 19, 2009, while speaking to the Kiwanis Club of Greater Columbus, Calley issued an apology for his role in the My Lai massacre. Calley said:

There is not a day that goes by that I do not feel remorse for what happened that day in My Lai. I feel remorse for the Vietnamese who were killed, for their families, for the American soldiers involved and their families. I am very sorry.

==Later life and death==
As of 2018, Calley was living in Gainesville, Florida. He died there on April 28, 2024, at the age of 80. His death was not reported until July 29, when it was discovered in public records. On his death certificate, a question asking if he had ever served &quot;in [the] U.S. armed forces&quot; was marked &quot;no&quot;.

== See also ==
* Glenn Andreotta, Lawrence Colburn, and Hugh Thompson Jr. – U.S. helicopter crew members who intervened to stop the My Lai killings
* Samuel W. Koster – Commanding officer of the Americal Division
* John W. Donaldson – Later Commander of the 11th Infantry Brigade who in 1971 was accused and acquitted of killing six Vietnamese civilians in 1968/9
* Terry Nelson – One-hit wonder who released &quot;The Battle Hymn of Lt. Calley&quot; (1971), a song about Calley
* Robert Bales – Former United States Army soldier who murdered 16 Afghan civilians and was sentenced to life in prison without parole
* Superior orders – The practice of pleading not guilty, by means of &quot;following orders&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==

* Hugh Thompson Foundation web site: 501(c)(3) nonprofit founded by Lawrence Colburn in honor of Hugh Thompson
* Famous American Trials: The My Lai Courts-Martial 1970
* Beidler, Philip D., &quot;Calley&#x27;s Ghost&quot;, &quot;Virginia Quarterly Review&quot;, Winter 2003
* 1971: Calley Guilty of My Lai Massacre—On This Day, 29 March, BBC News
* The Issue with Alfred as Lt. Calley Was Not a &quot;Mad&quot; Magazine ... – Doug Gilford&#x27;s &quot;Mad&quot; Cover Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374315" start="0" end="23" title="William Calley" label="William Laws Calley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="62" end="80" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="102" end="115" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="144" end="157" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q183421" start="178" end="193" title="My Lai massacre" label="My Lai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="224" end="235" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="260" end="272" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="299" end="312" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889814" start="350" end="413" title="United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia" label="United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="477" end="529" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="985" end="1003" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1015" end="1027" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827311" start="1055" end="1079" title="Miami Edison High School" label="Miami Edison High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128010" start="1107" end="1132" title="Palm Beach State College" label="Palm Beach Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043489" start="1281" end="1288" title="bellhop" label="bellhop"/>
<link wikidata="Q621696" start="1312" end="1331" title="Economic appraisal" label="insurance appraiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q228422" start="1337" end="1352" title="train conductor" label="train conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1391" end="1400" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="1473" end="1483" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505731" start="1570" end="1580" title="Fort Lewis (Washington)" label="Fort Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821794" start="1627" end="1659" title="Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery" label="Armed Forces Qualification tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q14319576" start="1698" end="1722" title="Officer Candidate School (United States Army)" label="Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="1784" end="1796" title="Fort Benning" label="Fort Benning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1898" end="1915" title="Second lieutenant#United States" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="1923" end="1931" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="1980" end="1989" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630761" start="1991" end="2013" title="20th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="20th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547880" start="2015" end="2036" title="11th Infantry Brigade (United States)" label="11th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q215790" start="2038" end="2094" title="23rd Infantry Division (United States)" label="23rd Infantry Division &amp;quot;The Americal Division&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430708" start="2118" end="2136" title="Schofield Barracks" label="Schofield Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="2179" end="2192" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639545" start="2507" end="2524" title="Chu Lai Base Area" label="Chu Lai Base Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q215790" start="2547" end="2564" title="23rd Infantry Division (United States)" label="Americal Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2653" end="2679" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q719341" start="4085" end="4098" title="Ronald Ridenhour" label="Ron Ridenhour"/>
<link wikidata="Q973748" start="4416" end="4440" title="Fourth Geneva Convention" label="Fourth Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109641" start="4487" end="4504" title="protected persons" label="protected persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="4602" end="4615" title="war crime" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4693" end="4712" title="Murder#Degrees of murder" label="premeditated murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="4738" end="4770" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="4860" end="4866" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q435792" start="4928" end="4941" title="Seymour Hersh" label="Seymour Hersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976280" start="4946" end="4960" title="Wayne Greenhaw" label="Wayne Greenhaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="5750" end="5765" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q482511" start="6957" end="6961" title="M79 grenade launcher" label="M-79"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="7084" end="7093" title="airstrike" label="airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="7224" end="7231" title="Captain (United States O-3)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q374329" start="7232" end="7245" title="Ernest Medina" label="Ernest Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949783" start="7490" end="7507" title="George W. Latimer" label="George W. Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="7700" end="7709" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="8836" end="8852" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q642270" start="8873" end="8908" title="United States Disciplinary Barracks" label="United States Disciplinary Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8914" end="8935" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8948" end="8971" title="Incarceration in the United States#Security levels" label="maximum security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435473" start="9231" end="9241" title="body count" label="body count"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683725" start="9247" end="9258" title="Loss exchange ratio" label="kill ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="9367" end="9374" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="9392" end="9404" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="9552" end="9559" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q880457" start="9576" end="9590" title="Edgar Whitcomb" label="Edgar Whitcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="9757" end="9765" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="9767" end="9773" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="9775" end="9780" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="9782" end="9792" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="9798" end="9812" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="9869" end="9883" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="9945" end="9958" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="9997" end="10008" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912143" start="10291" end="10300" title="Scapegoating" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12592350" start="10556" end="10603" title="South Korea in the Vietnam War" label="South Korea&amp;#x27;s Vietnam Expeditionary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q625834" start="10614" end="10629" title="Chae Myung-shin" label="Chae Myung-shin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669001" start="10769" end="10789" title="Harry G. Summers Jr." label="Harry G. Summers Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q108815322" start="11218" end="11234" title="Albert O. Connor" label="Albert O. Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166149" start="11293" end="11312" title="Convening authority (court-martial)" label="convening authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889474" start="11451" end="11494" title="United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals" label="United States Army Court of Military Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772201" start="11504" end="11543" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces" label="United States Court of Military Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889814" start="11584" end="11647" title="United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia" label="United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106951" start="11677" end="11694" title="J. Robert Elliott" label="J. Robert Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="11705" end="11738" title="habeas corpus" label="writ of &amp;quot;habeas corpus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11953" end="11991" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591470" start="12153" end="12174" title="United States Secretary of the Army" label="Secretary of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631824" start="12175" end="12193" title="Bo Callaway" label="Howard H. Callaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="12641" end="12693" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="12895" end="12914" title="Lewis F. Powell Jr." label="Lewis F. Powell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5375046" start="13359" end="13366" title="en banc" label="en banc"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="13986" end="14003" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243330" start="14202" end="14212" title="gemologist" label="gemologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301146" start="14230" end="14249" title="real estate license" label="real estate license"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="14369" end="14384" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586640" start="14503" end="14515" title="Kiwanis" label="Kiwanis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="14912" end="14932" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407561" start="15219" end="15234" title="Glenn Andreotta" label="Glenn Andreotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503932" start="15236" end="15252" title="Lawrence Colburn" label="Lawrence Colburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q719138" start="15258" end="15275" title="Hugh Thompson Jr." label="Hugh Thompson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7412842" start="15352" end="15368" title="Samuel W. Koster" label="Samuel W. Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663246" start="15417" end="15434" title="John W. Donaldson" label="John W. Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116166" start="15568" end="15580" title="Terry Nelson (musician)" label="Terry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054291" start="15583" end="15597" title="One-hit wonder" label="One-hit wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715829" start="15617" end="15646" title="The Battle Hymn of Lt. Calley" label="The Battle Hymn of Lt. Calley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341830" start="15683" end="15695" title="Robert Bales" label="Robert Bales"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="15818" end="15833" title="Superior orders" label="Superior orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934467" start="16183" end="16208" title="Virginia Quarterly Review" label="Virginia Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="16292" end="16300" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80111" wikidata="Q7180008" url="?curid=80111" title="Phaedriades">
<text>In Greece, the Phaedriades (Φαιδριάδες, meaning &quot;the shining ones&quot;) are the pair of cliffs, &quot;ca&quot; 700 m high on the lower southern slope of Mt. Parnassos, which rise above the sacred site of Delphi. Strabo, Plutarch and Pausanias all mentioned the Phaedriades when describing the site, a narrow valley of the Pleistos (today Xeropotamos) formed by Parnassos and Mount Cirphis. Between them rises the Castalian Spring. Even nowadays, at noontime, the rock surfaces reflect a dazzling glare.

==Geology==
The Phaedriades consist of dark limestone formed in the Jurassic period. 

==Historical narrations==
Herodotus mentions that during the Persian invasion of Greece in 480 B.C. Apollo sent an oracle to the priests of Delphi saying that he would defend his sacred site himself. The priests thus refused the offer of the Athenians to help. Indeed, as the Persian army approached, thunderbolts fell from the sky and killed several of the enemy. Defensive weapons appeared magically in front of the temple of Apollo and of that of Athena Pronaia. Finally, as the Persians reached the Phaedriades, boulders cleaved from the cliffs and, without hitting the monuments and the sacred site, fell on the Persians and crushed them. Herodotus mentions that in his day, one could see these rocks embedded in the ground within the sacred precinct of Athena Pronaia. 

It is also claimed that in antiquity, those who committed sacrilege against the sanctuary were thrown from the cliffs.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3" end="9" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180008" start="15" end="26" title="Phaedriades" label="Phaedriades"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="163" end="172" title="Parnassos" label="Parnassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="210" end="216" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="218" end="224" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="226" end="234" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="239" end="248" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537166" start="328" end="336" title="Pleistos" label="Pleistos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657875" start="381" end="394" title="Mount Cirphis" label="Mount Cirphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152348" start="419" end="435" title="Castalian Spring" label="Castalian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="578" end="593" title="Jurassic period" label="Jurassic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="658" end="684" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Persian invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751359" start="1015" end="1031" title="temple of Apollo (Delphi)" label="temple of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915645" start="1047" end="1061" title="Temple of Athena Pronaia" label="Athena Pronaia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80112" wikidata="Q7186701" url="?curid=80112" title="Phoebus Apollo">
<text>Phoebus Apollo may refer to:

*Apollo, a figure in Greek and Roman mythology, god of sun, medicine, music, poetry, and sciences. Apollo&#x27;s chief epithet was Phoebus, literally &quot;bright&quot;.
*&quot;Parnassius phoebus&quot;, a swallowtail butterfly commonly known as the Phoebus Apollo
*A track by Carl Cox on the &quot;Hackers&quot; soundtrack</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="31" end="37" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="149" end="156" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q370269" start="207" end="225" title="Parnassius phoebus" label="Parnassius phoebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="322" end="352" title="Hackers (film)#Soundtrack" label="&amp;quot;Hackers&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80113" wikidata="Q649128" url="?curid=80113" title="Pythian Games">
<text>The Pythian Games () were one of the four Panhellenic Games of Ancient Greece. They were held in honour of Apollo at his sanctuary in Delphi every four years, two years after the Olympic Games, and between each Nemean and Isthmian Games. The Pythian Games were founded sometime in the 6th century BC. In legend they were started by Apollo after he killed Python and set up the Oracle at Delphi. They continued until the 4th century AD.

The Pythian Games were ranked second in importance behind the Olympics. Unlike the Olympics, the Pythian Games also featured competitions for art and dance, which pre-dated the athletic portion of the games, and women were allowed to take part in some events. Victors received a wreath of bay laurel, sacred to Apollo, from the Vale of Tempe, in Thessaly. Smaller versions of the Pythian Games were celebrated in many other cities of the Levant and Greece.

== Mythology ==
The Pythian Games supposedly start with the death of the mythical serpent, Python. Ovid states that the games were inaugurated to celebrate Apollo&#x27;s killing of the serpent, &quot;Lest in a dark oblivion time should hide
the fame of this achievement, sacred sports
he instituted&quot; (&quot;Metamorphoses,&quot; 1.445-6). According to Ovid, the python was produced spontaneously by Gaea (mother earth) at the beginning of primordial time and was a threat to human beings.

When Earth, spread over with diluvian ooze,&lt;br&gt;
felt heat ethereal from the glowing sun,&lt;br&gt;
unnumbered species to the light she gave,&lt;br&gt;
and gave to being many an ancient form,&lt;br&gt;
or monster new created. Unwilling she&lt;br&gt;
created this enormous Python.—Thou&lt;br&gt;
unheard of serpent spread so far athwart&lt;br&gt;
the side of a vast mountain, didst fill with fear&lt;br&gt;
the race of newly created man. The God&lt;br&gt;
that bears the bow (a weapon used till then&lt;br&gt;
only to hunt the deer and agile goat)&lt;br&gt;
destroyed the monster with myriad darts,&lt;br&gt;
and almost emptied all his quiver, till&lt;br&gt;
envenomed gore oozed forth from livid wounds.

-- &quot;Metamorphoses, 1.434-444.&quot;

By killing the monster, Apollo rendered the area safe for human beings and established his ownship of the site. 
After burying the body, Apollo founded the oracle of Delphi. However, by slaying Python, Apollo had committed a crime and Zeus declared that he had to make amends. Apollo then created the Pythian Games to pay for the death. Other versions of the legend state that Apollo established the games to celebrate his victory over the python.

==History==

The historical timeframe of the Pythian Games started in 582 BC, when the administration of the Games was handed over to the Delphic Amphictyony, a council of twelve Greek tribes, at the end of the First Sacred War. As of that time, they did not take place every eight years as in the past, but every four years, two years before and after the Olympic Games, presumably at the end of August.

Preparations for the games began six months prior. Nine citizens from Delphi, called theoroi, were sent to all Greek cities to announce the beginning of the games in order to attract athletes, as well as to declare the period of the Sacred Truce (Hieromenia), aiming at protecting not only the theoroi and the athletes who traveled to Delphi but also the temple of Apollo itself. If a city was involved in armed conflict or in robberies during that period, its citizens were forbidden to enter the Sanctuary, participate in the games, or consult the Oracle. At the same time, the truce allowed the Amphictyony to focus on preparing for the games, which included restorations for all structures of the Sanctuary, from the temples to the streets and fountains. Scores of people flocked to the games from all over Greece, bringing in substantial revenue to the city. 

Despite the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire during the 4th century, Delphi remained an active pagan site and the Pythian Games continued to be celebrated at least until AD 424.

== Overview ==
Unfortunately, the testimonials and documents covering the Pythian Games were mainly destroyed by human violence and natural catastrophes. All the remaining resources highlight the glory and glamour of the Games. The records of Aristotle present an overview of the festivities: the Games lasted for six to eight days and were started by a reenactment of the victory of Apollo over Python. In a festive and glamorous procession, a ritual sacrifice was performed in the Temple of Apollo. After four days of festivities, the Games began.

===Events===
The athletic and equestrian events were the same as those at Olympia, apart from the lack of the four-horse chariot, and the addition of running races for boys.

Unlike at Olympia where there was a separate festival for women (the Heraean Games), women were allowed to compete at Delphi in both athletic and artistic events. The only recorded female victor is Tryphosa, winner of the girl&#x27;s stadion running race.

The athletic competition included four-track sports: stade, diaulos, dolichos and hoplitodromos (racing encumbered with pieces of Hoplite armor), as well as wrestling, boxing, pankration, and the pentathlon. These sports were introduced to the games gradually over time. The final day of the games was dedicated to equestrian races which gradually came to include harness racing, synoris (a chariot drawn by two horses), a chariot drawn by four horses, and racing with a horse (without a chariot), held in a hippodrome in the plain of Krisa, not far from the sea, in the place where the original stadium was sited. (ref: Pindar) The other athletic contests took place in the Stadium.

In the Roman period theatrical competitions were introduced, carried out in the late-Hellenistic theater.

====Music====
Pausanias writing in the 2nd century AD, says the oldest contest at Delphi was the singing of a hymn to Apollo, god of arts and music. The first Games run by the Delphic Amphictyony, which he dates to the third year of the forty-eighth Olympiad (i.e. 586  BC) featured contests of singing accompanied by cithara (a lyre), and separate contests for playing the aulos (a double-reeded wind instrument) solo, and accompanied. The latter of these was abolished by the second Games because the music was considered &quot;ill-omened&quot; with dismal tunes accompanied by lamentations. Pythocritus of Sicyon was aulos victor at six consecutive festivals, the only player so to distinguish himself. He accompanied the pentathlon at the Olympics where a statue was erected to him.

Pausanias ascribes the introduction of the cithara contest without vocals to the eighth Pythian Games.

====Poetry, prose and drama====
Poetry and prose contests were another feature of the Pythian Games. A panel of judges chose victors. Contests of Tragic acting probably involved both individual performances and dramatic productions.

====Painting====
Painting competitions were introduced in the mid-5th century BC.

===Prizes===
No monetary prizes were awarded to winners in the Games. Instead they received a wreath of bay laurel, sacred to Apollo, from the Vale of Tempe, in Thessaly. This is similar to the practice in the other Panhellenic games, which were all on this account called &quot;stephanitic&quot; (&quot;crown&quot;) games. Smaller versions of the Pythian Games were celebrated in many other cities of the Levant and Greece.

==Pindar and the Pythionikoi==
Of the 45 poems composed by the Theban poet Pindar in honor of winners at the Panhellenic games, 12 were called &quot;Pythionikoi&quot;, since they were composed for winners at the Pythian Games. In those poems, Pindar praises not only the victors, but also their families, as well as the aristocratic and athletic ideals of the late archaic period.

===The Pythionikoi as a source of information===
Pindar worked on lyric poetry. The largest part of his surviving works is the Victory Odes (Epinikia), chorus songs to be sung in the homeland of the winner of the Games upon his return.

The Greek aristocracy of the first half of the 5th century BC, mostly the tyrants of Sicily and the conservative aristocracy of Aegina, constituted the clientele of the poet. Thus, his Odes of Victory reflect the aristocratic ideals which were losing ground so fast. 
The winner&#x27;s laudation is reinforced by adding mythological details. However, a prerequisite for understanding and cherishing the poems is a well-educated audience. The poet uses his work not only to speak of the victory won by his client and his family, but also to accentuate the family&#x27;s history and its connections all over Greece.

The total number of Victory Odes is 45 celebrating the winners in the four most famous panhellenic athletic competitions: the Olympic, the Nemean, the Pythian and the Isthmian Games. The hymns celebrating victories in Pythian Games include 12 odes and offer information on the exact competition of each athlete.
Thus, we can constitute a list of the winners as follows:

In 498 B.C. Hippokles from Thessaly won at the children&#x27;s diaulos (10th Pythionicus).

In 490 B.C. Midas from Akragas won at the musical contests as a flute player (12th Pythionicus).

In 486 B.C. Megakles from Athens won at the chariot racing (7th Pythionicus).

In 475 (?) and in 474(?) B.C. Hieron of Syracuse won the chariot racing (2nd Pythionicus).

In 474 Thrasydaeus from Thebes won at the children&#x27;s stadium (11th Pythionicus) and Telesikrates from Cyrene won at the armed race (9th Pythionicus).

In 470 B.C. Hieron from Aetna won at the chariot racing (1st Pythinicus).

Finally, in 462/1 B.C. Arkesilaus from Cyrene won at the chariot racing (4th and 5th Pythionikoi).

== References ==
== External links ==

* Pythian Games
* International Pythian Council
* Modern Pythian Games
* Ecumenical Delphic Union
* Pythian council gets coimbatore based state conveners
*India paves the way to modern Pythian Games
*Indian paves the way to modern Pythian Games Uni India
*APN Live Indian paves the way to modern Pythian Games
*Zee5 India paves the way to modern Pythian Games
*Assia News India paves the way to modern Pythian Games
*The One India - India paves the way to modern Pythian Games
*Maghreb Observateur
*Bijander Goel founder modern Pythian Games
*Maghreb Observateur
*Bijender Goel
*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jY4kRyZapsg
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="4" end="17" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q508557" start="42" end="59" title="Panhellenic Games" label="Panhellenic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="63" end="77" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="107" end="113" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="134" end="140" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="179" end="192" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q527006" start="211" end="217" title="Nemean Games" label="Nemean"/>
<link wikidata="Q675181" start="222" end="236" title="Isthmian Games" label="Isthmian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="355" end="361" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="377" end="393" title="Pythia" label="Oracle at Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="726" end="736" title="bay laurel" label="bay laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258540" start="773" end="778" title="Vale of Tempe" label="Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="783" end="791" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="875" end="881" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="986" end="992" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="994" end="998" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1051" end="1057" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12737222" start="2297" end="2313" title="Delphic Sibyl" label="oracle of Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2376" end="2380" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2728" end="2747" title="Amphictyonic League#The Delphic Amphictyony" label="Delphic Amphictyony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249250" start="2801" end="2817" title="First Sacred War" label="First Sacred War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782402" start="3081" end="3088" title="theoroi" label="theoroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753239" start="3243" end="3253" title="Hieromenia" label="Hieromenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3902" end="3914" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4292" end="4301" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751359" start="4532" end="4548" title="Temple of Apollo (Delphi)" label="Temple of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="4785" end="4792" title="ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605458" start="4844" end="4857" title="Heraean Games" label="Heraean Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q675770" start="5009" end="5029" title="stadion (running race)" label="stadion running race"/>
<link wikidata="Q675770" start="5085" end="5090" title="Stadion (running race)" label="stade"/>
<link wikidata="Q631917" start="5092" end="5099" title="Diaulos (running race)" label="diaulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q536836" start="5101" end="5109" title="Dolichos (race)" label="dolichos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577" start="5114" end="5127" title="hoplitodromos" label="hoplitodromos"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="5162" end="5169" title="Hoplite" label="Hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="5189" end="5198" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="5200" end="5206" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q201252" start="5208" end="5218" title="pankration" label="pankration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163125" start="5228" end="5238" title="pentathlon" label="pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="5412" end="5419" title="synoris" label="synoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="5540" end="5550" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="5653" end="5659" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5802" end="5813" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757" start="5814" end="5821" title="Roman theatre (structure)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5838" end="5847" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6000" end="6019" title="Amphictyonic League#Delphic Amphictyony" label="Delphic Amphictyony"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="6074" end="6082" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="6142" end="6149" title="cithara" label="cithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="6198" end="6203" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q29811838" start="6207" end="6220" title="double reed" label="double-reeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="6862" end="6875" title="Tragedy" label="Tragic acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="7137" end="7147" title="bay laurel" label="bay laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258540" start="7184" end="7189" title="Vale of Tempe" label="Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="7194" end="7202" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="7439" end="7445" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="7534" end="7540" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="7824" end="7831" title="Archaic Greece" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="8163" end="8169" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="8206" end="8212" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="8819" end="8826" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q527006" start="8832" end="8838" title="Nemean Games" label="Nemean"/>
<link wikidata="Q675181" start="8860" end="8874" title="Isthmian Games" label="Isthmian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q13678" start="9179" end="9186" title="Akragas" label="Akragas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="9695" end="9701" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80114" wikidata="Q152348" url="?curid=80114" title="Castalian Spring">
<text>The Castalian Spring, in the ravine between the Phaedriades at Delphi, is where all visitors to Delphi — the contestants in the Pythian Games, and especially pilgrims who came to consult the Delphic Oracle — stopped to wash themselves and quench their thirst; it is also here that the Pythia and the priests cleansed themselves before the oracle-giving process. Finally Roman poets regarded it as a source of poetic inspiration. According to some mythological versions it was here that Apollo killed the monster, Python, who was guarding the spring, and that is why it was considered to be sacred.

==The Archaic fountain==

Two fountains, which were fed by the sacred spring, still survive. The archaic 6th century BCE fountain house has a marble-lined basin surrounded by benches. Water was brought here by means of a short and small aqueduct and was distributed by a system of water pipes ending in lion-headed spouts.

==The Roman fountain==
The Roman fountain dates to the 1st century B.C. and is situated about 50 meters higher than the Archaic one. Niches carved on the rock were intended for the ex votos of the pilgrims. One of them was later transformed into a church of St. John the Baptist. The water of the spring reached the fountain with a closed aqueduct. On the facade of the fountain there were seven bronze spouts. In front of it there was a paved courtyard with stone benches on its three sides.

==Aftermath and other uses==
A modern fountain currently stands close to the street leading to the archaeological site of Delphi to offer respite to the travelers.
The Castalian Spring fueled poetic inspiration, albeit often confused with the Spring of Pieris. The Castalian Band, a group of poets or makars associated with the Court of James VI of Scotland (including the king himself) drew their name from this source.

There is a town named Castalian Springs in Tennessee. A natural spring in this location was a gathering place for animals. Isaac Bledsoe discovered the spring in 1772. Having built a fort in 1783, Bledsoe, his brother, and their families settled near the spring in 1787. Native Americans killed the two brothers, who are now buried 500 yards northwest of the spring. Consequently, this area was known locally as Bledsoe&#x27;s Lick. In 1828, a log inn was built, providing guests with &quot;healthy&quot; drinking water and mineral baths. Almost ten years later when the post office was built, the community changed its name from Bledsoe&#x27;s Lick to Castalian Springs. During this period of time in history, there was a reawakening of interest in classical Greece and Rome.

In Castalia, Ohio, named after the famed site, the Blue Hole limestone configurations were tourist attractions for many years and are now fish hatcheries. Waters in the blue holes are of a constant temperature and never freeze over despite northern Ohio&#x27;s cold temperatures. The water which averages 30,000 gallons an hour was first used to supply a local mill.

Castalian Springs was the name of a now-abandoned spa near Durant, Mississippi.

==See also==
*Castalia

==References==
== External links ==

* Livius.org: Castalian Spring</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152348" start="4" end="20" title="Castalian Spring" label="Castalian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042028" start="29" end="35" title="ravine" label="ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180008" start="48" end="59" title="Phaedriades" label="Phaedriades"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="63" end="69" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="128" end="141" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="191" end="205" title="Pythia" label="Delphic Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="486" end="492" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="513" end="519" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="629" end="637" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="669" end="675" title="Spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="716" end="719" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="741" end="747" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q683010" start="1104" end="1112" title="Ex-voto" label="ex votos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362487" start="1660" end="1676" title="Spring of Pieris" label="Spring of Pieris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941335" start="1682" end="1696" title="Castalian Band" label="Castalian Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125354" start="1718" end="1724" title="makars" label="makars"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1754" end="1762" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1766" end="1774" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350214" start="1861" end="1878" title="Castalian Springs, Tennessee" label="Castalian Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="1882" end="1891" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248670" start="2620" end="2634" title="Castalia, Ohio" label="Castalia, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929245" start="2668" end="2677" title="Blue Hole (Castalia)" label="Blue Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q798425" start="3044" end="3063" title="Durant, Mississippi" label="Durant, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170053" start="3080" end="3088" title="Castalia" label="Castalia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80121" wikidata="Q15530319" url="?curid=80121" title="A. Peter Dewey">
<text>Albert Peter Dewey (October 8, 1916 – September 26, 1945) was an American Office of Strategic Services operative shot to death in a case of mistaken identity by Communist aligned Viet Minh troops on September 26, 1945. Dewey was the first American fatality in French Indochina, killed during the 1945 Vietnamese uprising.

==Early life and education==
The younger son of Congressman Charles S. Dewey and his wife, Marie Suzette de Marigny Hall Dewey, and also a distant relative of New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey, Dewey was born in Chicago. He was educated in Switzerland at Institut Le Rosey, before attending at St. Paul&#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire). He graduated from Yale University, where he studied French history and was a member of the Berzelius Secret Society along with friends such as William Warren Scranton. Later, Dewey also attended the University of Virginia School of Law.

==Newspaper work==
After his graduation from Yale in 1939, Dewey worked as a journalist for the &quot;Chicago Daily News&quot; in its Paris bureau.

Dewey later worked for family friend Nelson Rockefeller and his Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. Rockefeller once sent him to France to meet secretly with General Charles de Gaulle.

==Battle of France==
While reporting on the German invasion of France for the &quot;Daily News&quot;, Dewey became more directly involved in the war.

In May 1940, during the Battle of France, Dewey enlisted as a lieutenant in the Polish Military Ambulance Corps with the Polish Army fighting in France. Following the defeat of the French army, Dewey escaped through Spain to Portugal, where he was interned for a short time.

==Marriage and family==
On August 1, 1942, Dewey married Nancy Weller. The couple had one child, a daughter, Mrs. Nancy (Charles) Hoppin. Dewey&#x27;s widow, Nancy, married John Pierrepont in 1950.

Dewey&#x27;s nephew David Dewey Alger, a descendant of Michigan political scion Russell A. Alger, was killed in the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center.

==Office of Strategic Services==
On August 10, 1944, Dewey parachuted into southern France as the leader of a 10-man team from the United States Office of Strategic Services (OSS). Operating behind enemy lines for six weeks, he transmitted intelligence reports on German troop movements. For his service, General William &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Donovan personally awarded him the Legion of Merit and the French gave him the Legion of Honor and a second Croix de Guerre.

Dewey arrived on September 4, 1945, in Saigon to head a seven-man OSS team &quot;to represent American interests&quot; and collect intelligence. Working with the Viet Minh, he arranged the repatriation of 4,549 Allied POWs, including 240 Americans, from two Japanese camps near Saigon, code named Project Embankment. Because the British occupation forces who had arrived to accept the Japanese surrender were short of troops, they armed French POWs on September 22 to protect the city from a potential Viet Minh attack. In taking control of the city, the French soldiers were quick to beat or shoot Vietnamese who resisted the reestablishment of French authority.

Dewey complained about the abuse to the British commander, General Douglas Gracey, who took exception to Dewey&#x27;s objections and declared Dewey &quot;persona non grata&quot;. Adhering to strict tradition, Gracey prohibited anyone but general officers from flying flags from their vehicles. Dewey had wanted to fly an American flag for easy identification among the Viet Minh, who Dewey claimed were only concerned about attacking the French. The jeep he rode in prior to his death had a flag wrapped around a pole that was unidentifiable.

On the night of September 24–25, Capt. Joseph R. Coolidge IV, part of the OSS team in Saigon, became the first post-World War II U.S. casualty in Vietnam when he was shot and critically wounded in a Viet Minh ambush in Thủ Đức, outside of Saigon. He was rescued by the Japanese, treated at a British field hospital and airlifted out of Vietnam to Ceylon by the USAAF.

On September 26 because the airplane scheduled to fly Dewey out did not arrive on time at Tan Son Nhat International Airport, he returned for a lunch meeting with war correspondents Bill Downs and Jim McGlincy at the villa that OSS had requisitioned in Saigon. As he neared the villa, he was shot in the head in an ambush by Viet Minh troops. Dewey&#x27;s jeep overturned, and Dewey&#x27;s subordinate, Captain Herbert Bluechel, escaped without serious injury, pursued by Viet Minh soldiers.

The Viet Minh afterward claimed that their troops mistook him for a Frenchman after he had spoken to them in French. Bluechel later recalled that Dewey had shaken his fist and yelled at three Vietnamese soldiers in French while driving back to headquarters. According to Vietnamese historian Trần Văn Giàu, Dewey&#x27;s body was dumped in a nearby river and was never recovered. Another version is that his body was first hidden in a well and then reburied in nearby village of An Phu Dong. Reportedly, Ho Chi Minh sent a letter of condolence about Dewey&#x27;s death to U.S. President Harry S. Truman while also ordering a search for the colonel&#x27;s body. His body was never recovered.

A. Peter Dewey was noted for his prediction over the future of the First Indochina War and the Vietnam War: &quot;Cochinchina is burning, the French and the British are being destroyed there and we are forced to get out of Southeast Asia&quot; due to recent conflict between France and the Viet Minh.

==Memorials==
Dewey is not listed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. because the United States Department of Defense has ruled that the war officially started, from a U.S. perspective, on November 1, 1955, after the U.S. took over following the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu.

Dewey&#x27;s name is listed on the American Battle Monuments Commission&#x27;s Tablets of the Missing at Manila American Cemetery and Memorial as &quot;Major Albert P. Dewey.&quot; His name is also listed as a cenotaph on his parents&#x27; grave at Arlington National Cemetery.

Dewey is also remembered in an inscription on one of the walls in the National Cathedral, Washington, DC, which states that he was killed in action Indo-China 1945.

Dewey is also commemorated in a side chapel in Bayeux Cathedral.

After his death, Dewey&#x27;s non-fiction book, &quot;As They Were&quot;, about life in Paris before the war, was published with the help of his widow Nancy and the Rockefeller family.

Also, 2005&#x27;s &quot;Fatal Crossroads: A Novel of Vietnam 1945&quot; is based on Dewey&#x27;s time and death in Vietnam and written by journalist and Dewey family friend Seymour Topping. Topping dedicated the book to Dewey and his O.S.S. colleagues. He also had returned to visit Vietnam with Dewey&#x27;s daughter Nancy and her husband.

==References==

==External links==
* College photo . – Yale University Library.
* Peter Dewey in the OSS Society Newsletter. – Summer 2005. – pp. 3–4. – (Adobe Acrobat *.PDF)
* Bio and links to PDF&#x27;s of documents surrounding A. Peter Dewey First American MIA in Vietnam. (Archived. 2009-10-24)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15530319" start="0" end="18" title="A. Peter Dewey" label="Albert Peter Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="74" end="102" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="179" end="188" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365438" start="296" end="320" title="War in Vietnam (1945–46)" label="1945 Vietnamese uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082259" start="383" end="399" title="Charles S. Dewey" label="Charles S. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="500" end="515" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q627122" start="578" end="595" title="Institut Le Rosey" label="Institut Le Rosey"/>
<link wikidata="Q906930" start="617" end="664" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="684" end="699" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896132" start="757" end="766" title="Berzelius (secret society)" label="Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q880776" start="809" end="832" title="William Warren Scranton" label="William Warren Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896545" start="865" end="901" title="University of Virginia School of Law" label="University of Virginia School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963306" start="1006" end="1024" title="Chicago Daily News" label="Chicago Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="1090" end="1108" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282896" start="1117" end="1168" title="Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs" label="Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="1236" end="1253" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1431" end="1447" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202343" start="1528" end="1539" title="Polish Army in France (1939-40)" label="Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1937" end="1945" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q880655" start="1962" end="1978" title="Russell A. Alger" label="Russell A. Alger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1998" end="2002" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="2018" end="2036" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="2184" end="2212" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="2352" end="2389" title="William &amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Donovan" label="William &amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="2670" end="2679" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q375720" start="3240" end="3254" title="Douglas Gracey" label="Douglas Gracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="3327" end="3344" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q104050371" start="3936" end="3943" title="Thủ Đức" label="Thủ Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q478595" start="4176" end="4210" title="Tan Son Nhat International Airport" label="Tan Son Nhat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908822" start="4268" end="4278" title="Bill Downs" label="Bill Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284504" start="4283" end="4295" title="Jim McGlincy" label="Jim McGlincy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4871" end="4884" title=":vi:Trần Văn Giàu" label="Trần Văn Giàu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="5082" end="5093" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="5165" end="5180" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="5337" end="5356" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5365" end="5376" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="5560" end="5569" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q713628" start="5613" end="5638" title="Vietnam Veterans Memorial" label="Vietnam Veterans Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5642" end="5658" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="5671" end="5706" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="5852" end="5865" title="Dien Bien Phu" label="Dien Bien Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q463527" start="5903" end="5939" title="American Battle Monuments Commission" label="American Battle Monuments Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061468" start="5973" end="6010" title="Manila American Cemetery and Memorial" label="Manila American Cemetery and Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="6078" end="6086" title="cenotaph" label="cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="6117" end="6144" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636244" start="6360" end="6376" title="Bayeux Cathedral" label="Bayeux Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459233" start="6738" end="6753" title="Seymour Topping" label="Seymour Topping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80124" wikidata="Q2269564" url="?curid=80124" title="The Virgin Suicides">
<text>The Virgin Suicides is a coming-of-age thriller novel and the debut novel by American writer Jeffrey Eugenides, published in 1993. The story, which is set in Grosse Pointe, Michigan during the 1970s, centers on the lives of five doomed sisters, the Lisbon girls. The novel is written in first person plural from the perspective of an anonymous group of teenage boys who struggle to find an explanation for the Lisbons&#x27; deaths. The novel&#x27;s first chapter appeared in &quot;The Paris Review&quot; in 1990, and won the 1991 Aga Khan Prize for Fiction. The novel was adapted into a 1999 movie by director Sofia Coppola, starring Kirsten Dunst.

==Plot summary==
In 1975, as an ambulance arrives for the body of Mary Lisbon, the last Lisbon sister to die, a group of anonymous adolescent neighborhood boys recalls the events leading up to her death.

The Lisbons are a Catholic family living in the suburb of Grosse Pointe, Michigan during the 1970s. The father, Ronald Lisbon, is a math teacher at the local high school. The mother is a strict homemaker. The family has five blonde teenage daughters: 13-year-old Cecilia, 14-year-old Lux, 15-year-old Bonnie, 16-year-old Mary, and 17-year-old Therese.

About a year before Mary’s death, without warning, Cecilia attempts suicide by slitting her wrists in the bathtub. However, she is found in time by a neighborhood boy who had snuck into the home, and survives. Cecilia&#x27;s psychologist at the hospital suggests that the girls need more social interaction and that the potential cause of Cecilia&#x27;s suicide attempt was the suppression of her libidinal urges. The parents allow the girls to throw a chaperoned party at their house in hopes of cheering Cecilia up. However, Cecilia excuses herself from the party, which is happening in the basement, and goes upstairs and jumps out of her second-story bedroom window. Cecilia is impaled on the fence post below, and she dies almost immediately.

The Lisbon parents, particularly Mrs. Lisbon, begin to watch their four remaining daughters more closely, further isolating the family from their community. Cecilia&#x27;s death also heightens the air of mystery about the Lisbon sisters to the neighborhood boys, who long for more insight into the girls&#x27; lives.

When school begins in the fall, Lux begins a secret romance with the local heartthrob, Trip Fontaine. Trip negotiates with the overprotective Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon to take Lux to the homecoming dance, on the condition that he find dates for the other three sisters as well. After winning homecoming King and Queen, Trip persuades Lux to ditch their group to have sex on the school&#x27;s football field. Afterward, Trip abandons Lux, who falls asleep and misses her curfew. Trip and Lux never speak again.

Mrs. Lisbon withdraws the girls from school and keeps them home in what the boys describe as &quot;maximum security isolation&quot;. Mr. Lisbon is also fired from his teaching job over concerns from the parents of other students.

Through the winter, Lux is seen by the anonymous teen boys having sex on the roof of the Lisbon residence with unnamed and unknown men at night. The tight-knit community gossip and watch as the Lisbons&#x27; lives deteriorate without intervention. After many months of strict confinement, the remaining four sisters reach out to the boys across the street by using light signals and sending anonymous notes. The boys decide to call the Lisbon girls and communicate by playing records over the telephone for the girls to share and express their feelings.

Finally, one night the girls send a message to the boys to come over at midnight, leading the boys to believe that they will help the girls escape. Upon entering the house they are met by Lux, who invites them inside and tells them to wait for her sisters while she goes to start the car. As the boys wait, they explore the house. In the Lisbon basement, the boys discover Bonnie hanging from a rope tied to the ceiling rafters. Horrified, the boys flee the home.

In the morning, the authorities come for the dead bodies, as the girls had apparently made a suicide pact: Bonnie hanged herself, Therese overdosed on sleeping pills, and Lux died of carbon monoxide poisoning after sealing herself inside the garage with the car running. Mary, who had put her head in the gas oven, survives the attempt and lives for another month. She finally succeeds in ending her life by overdosing on sleeping pills. The adults in the community go on as if nothing happened. Local newspaper writer Linda Perl notes that the suicides came exactly one year after Cecilia&#x27;s first attempt and describes the girls as tragic creatures who were so cut off from life that death was not much of a change.

After the funerals, Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon leave Grosse Pointe and eventually divorce. The Lisbon house is sold to a young couple from the Boston area. All the furniture and personal belongings of the Lisbons are thrown out or sold during a garage sale. The narrators scavenge through the trash to collect mementos they will forever save as keepsakes. 20-something years later, as middle-aged men with families, they lament the suicides as selfish acts from which they have secretly not been able to emotionally recover. The novel closes with the now-grown men confessing that they had loved the girls but had never truly understood them and that they will never know the true motives behind the suicides.

==Film adaptation==
Sofia Coppola wrote the screenplay for and directed a 97-minute film version, which was shot in the summer of 1998, and released on May 19, 1999 at the Cannes Film Festival. &quot;The Virgin Suicides&quot; was Sofia Coppola&#x27;s feature directorial debut. The film then opened on April 21, 2000, in New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. The film starred Kirsten Dunst, James Woods, Kathleen Turner, and Josh Hartnett. The film is faithful to the novel; much of the dialogue and narration is taken verbatim from its source. The film received favorable reviews and was rated R for strong thematic elements involving teens.

The French band Air created the score to the film, also entitled &quot;The Virgin Suicides&quot;.

==Background==

The inspiration for the plot of the book came to Jeffrey Eugenides when his nephew&#x27;s teenage babysitter told him that she and her sisters had planned to commit suicide. When Eugenides asked why, the babysitter only replied, &quot;we were under a lot of pressure.&quot; Eugenides talks about this inspiration in his YouTube interview with &quot;The Paris Review&quot;.

Eugenides told &quot;3am Magazine&quot;: &quot;I think that if my name hadn&#x27;t been Eugenides, people wouldn&#x27;t have called the narrator a Greek chorus&quot;.

Several writers have also noted the similarities between &quot;The Virgin Suicides&quot; and the 1945 play &quot;The House of Bernarda Alba&quot; by Federico García Lorca.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Playground Love: Landscape and Longing in Sofia Coppola&#x27;s The Virgin Suicides by Sam Savage

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2975633" start="25" end="38" title="Coming-of-age story" label="coming-of-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="62" end="73" title="debut novel" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q357108" start="93" end="110" title="Jeffrey Eugenides" label="Jeffrey Eugenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869357" start="158" end="181" title="Grosse Pointe, Michigan" label="Grosse Pointe, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="287" end="306" title="Grammatical person" label="first person plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="481" end="497" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097912" start="530" end="556" title="Aga Khan Prize for Fiction" label="Aga Khan Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423971" start="587" end="597" title="The Virgin Suicides (film)" label="1999 movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="610" end="623" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="634" end="647" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869357" start="913" end="936" title="Grosse Pointe Michigan" label="Grosse Pointe, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="1049" end="1058" title="homemaker" label="homemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q750053" start="2456" end="2472" title="homecoming dance" label="homecoming dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="2739" end="2745" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305388" start="4124" end="4136" title="suicide pact" label="suicide pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="4214" end="4239" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4890" end="4896" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19811" start="4992" end="5003" title="garage sale" label="garage sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="5478" end="5491" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="5630" end="5650" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5779" end="5787" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="5789" end="5802" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5808" end="5819" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="5838" end="5851" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q193105" start="5853" end="5864" title="James Woods" label="James Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="5866" end="5881" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q303957" start="5887" end="5900" title="Josh Hartnett" label="Josh Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="6051" end="6058" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="rated R"/>
<link wikidata="Q318452" start="6122" end="6125" title="Air (French band)" label="Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="6138" end="6143" title="Film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q834171" start="6177" end="6196" title="The Virgin Suicides (score)" label="The Virgin Suicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6541" end="6548" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="6570" end="6586" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6616" end="6628" title="3:AM Magazine" label="3am Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q822850" start="6876" end="6902" title="The House of Bernarda Alba" label="The House of Bernarda Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="6912" end="6933" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886988" start="7059" end="7069" title="Sam Savage" label="Sam Savage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80125" wikidata="Q223677" url="?curid=80125" title="John Foster Dulles">
<text>John Foster Dulles (February 25, 1888 – May 24, 1959) was an American politician, lawyer, and diplomat who served as United States secretary of state under president Dwight D. Eisenhower from 1953 until his resignation in 1959. A member of the Republican Party, he was briefly a U.S. senator from New York in 1949. Dulles was a significant figure in the early Cold War era, who advocated an aggressive stance against communism throughout the world.

Born in Washington, D.C., Dulles joined the leading New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell after graduating from George Washington University Law School. His grandfather, John W. Foster, and his uncle, Robert Lansing, both served as U.S. secretary of state, while his brother, Allen Dulles, served as the director of central intelligence from 1953 to 1961. Dulles served on the War Industries Board during World War I and he was a U.S. legal counsel at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. He became a member of the League of Free Nations Association, which supported American membership in the League of Nations. Dulles also helped design the Dawes Plan, which sought to stabilize Europe by reducing German war reparations. During World War II, Dulles was deeply involved in post-war planning with the Federal Council of Churches Commission on a Just and Durable Peace.

Dulles served as the chief foreign policy adviser to Thomas E. Dewey, the Republican presidential nominee in 1944 and 1948. He also helped draft the preamble to the United Nations Charter and served as a delegate to the UN General Assembly. In 1949, Dewey appointed Dulles a U.S. senator for New York. Dulles served for four months before his defeat in a special election. Despite having supported his political opponents, Dulles became a special advisor to president Harry S. Truman, with a focus on the Indo-Pacific region. In this role from 1950 to 1952, he became the primary architect of the Treaty of San Francisco, which ended World War II in Asia, the U.S.–Japan Security Treaty, which established the U.S.–Japan Alliance, and the ANZUS security treaty between Australia, New Zealand, and the United States.

In 1953, President Eisenhower chose Dulles as secretary of state. Throughout his tenure, Dulles favored a strategy of massive retaliation in response to Soviet aggression and concentrated on building and strengthening Cold War alliances, most prominently NATO. He was the architect of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, an anti-communist defensive alliance between the U.S. and several nations in and near Southeast Asia. He also helped instigate the 1953 Iranian coup d&#x27;état and the 1954 Guatemalan coup d&#x27;état. Dulles advocated support of the French in their war against the Viet Minh in Indochina, but rejected the Geneva Accords between France and the communists, instead supporting South Vietnam after the 1954 Geneva Conference. In 1959, suffering from cancer, Dulles resigned from office and died shortly after.

== Early life and education ==
Dulles was born in Washington, D.C., eldest of five children of Presbyterian minister Allen Macy Dulles and his wife, Edith (née Foster). Allen Macy Dulles mixed theological liberalism with stern orthopraxy.

His paternal grandfather, John Welsh Dulles, had been a Presbyterian missionary in India. His maternal grandfather, John W. Foster, had been Secretary of State under Benjamin Harrison, and doted on Dulles and his brother Allen, who would later become the director of the Central Intelligence Agency. The brothers grew up in Watertown, New York and spent summers with their maternal grandfather in nearby Henderson Harbor. The brothers were also homeschooled, as their parents distrusted public education.

Dulles attended Princeton University and graduated as a member of Phi Beta Kappa in 1908. At Princeton, Dulles competed on the American Whig-Cliosophic Society debate team and was a member of University Cottage Club. He then attended the George Washington University Law School in Washington, D.C.

== Early career ==
Upon passing the bar examination, Dulles joined the New York City law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, where he specialized in international law. After US entry into World War I, Dulles tried to join the Army, but was rejected because of poor eyesight. Instead, Dulles received an army commission as major on the War Industries Board. Dulles later returned to Sullivan &amp; Cromwell and became a partner with an international practice.

In 1917, Dulles’ uncle, Robert Lansing, the then-Secretary of State, recruited him to travel to Central America. Dulles advised Washington to support Costa Rica&#x27;s dictator, Federico Tinoco, on the grounds that he was anti-German, and also encouraged Nicaragua&#x27;s dictator, Emiliano Chamorro, to issue a proclamation suspending diplomatic relations with Germany. In Panama, Dulles offered waiver of the tax imposed by the United States on the annual Canal fee, in exchange for a Panamanian declaration of war on Germany.

==Interwar and World War II activities==
===Versailles Peace Conference===
In 1918, President Woodrow Wilson appointed Dulles as legal counsel to the United States delegation to the Versailles Peace Conference, where he served under his uncle, Secretary of State Robert Lansing. Dulles made an early impression as a junior diplomat. While some recollections indicate he clearly and forcefully argued against imposing crushing reparations on Germany, other recollections indicate he ensured Germany&#x27;s reparation payments would extend for decades as perceived leverage militating against future German-born hostilities. Afterwards, he served as a member of the War Reparations Committee at Wilson&#x27;s request. He was also an early member, along with Eleanor Roosevelt, of the League of Free Nations Association, founded in 1918, and after 1923 known as the Foreign Policy Association, which supported American membership in the League of Nations.

===Dawes Plan===
As a partner in Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, Dulles expanded upon his late grandfather Foster&#x27;s expertise, specializing in international finance. He played a major role in designing the Dawes Plan, which reduced German reparations payments and temporarily resolved the reparations issue by having American firms lend money to German states and private companies. Under that compromise, the money was invested and the profits sent as reparations to Britain and France, which used the funds to repay their own war loans from the U.S. In the 1920s Dulles was involved in setting up a billion dollars&#x27; worth of these loans.
After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, Dulles&#x27;s previous practice brokering and documenting international loans ended. After 1931 Germany stopped making some of its scheduled payments. In 1934 Germany unilaterally stopped payments on private debts of the sort that Dulles was handling. After the Nazi Party came to power, Dulles expressed sympathies for Adolf Hitler, requiring his legal staff in Berlin to sign &quot;Heil Hitler&quot; on all of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell&#x27;s outgoing mail; fearful of the optics, Sullivan &amp; Cromwell&#x27;s junior partners forced Dulles to cut all business ties with Germany in 1935. Nonetheless, Dulles and his wife continued to visit Germany until 1939. He was prominent in the religious peace movement and an isolationist, but the junior partners were led by his brother Allen, so he reluctantly acceded to their wishes.

===Fosdick controversy===
Dulles, a deeply religious man, attended numerous international conferences of churchmen during the 1920s and 1930s. In 1924, he was the defense counsel in the church trial of Reverend Harry Emerson Fosdick, who had been charged with heresy by opponents in his denomination. The event sparked the continuing Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy in the international Christian Churches over the literal interpretation of Scripture against the newly developed &quot;Historical-Critical&quot; method including recent scientific and archeological discoveries. The case was settled when Fosdick, a liberal Baptist, resigned his pulpit in the Presbyterian Church congregation, which he had never joined.

===Six Pillars of Peace===
During the Second World War, Dulles engaged in Post-War Planning under the auspices of the Federal Council of Churches Commission on a Just and Durable Peace. Appointed in December 1940 at the behest of the theologian Henry P. Van Dusen, Dulles developed a vision of post-war order underpinned by a federal world government, taking inspiration from the ecumenical ideology of liberal Mainline Protestantism and the United States&#x27; experiences with federalism. In essence, Dulles sought to persuade allied war leaders to work toward reviving a more robust League of Nations. The core elements of this vision were spelled out in March 1943 with the publication of the book &quot;Six Pillars of Peace&quot;. Dulles was largely unsuccessful in persuading Franklin Delano Roosevelt to embrace such a radical platform, as the United States would issue the more moderate Moscow Declaration, but his work helped to build widespread consensus about the need for a United Nations.

==Advisor to Thomas Dewey==
Dulles was a prominent Republican and a close associate of Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, who became the Republican presidential nominee in the elections of 1944 and 1948. During the 1944 and the 1948 campaigns, Dulles served as Dewey&#x27;s chief foreign policy adviser. In 1944, Dulles took an active role in establishing the Republican plank calling for the establishment of a Jewish commonwealth in The British Mandate for Palestine.

In 1945, Dulles participated in the San Francisco Conference as an adviser to Arthur H. Vandenberg and helped draft the preamble to the United Nations Charter. He attended the United Nations General Assembly as a United States delegate in 1946, 1947, and 1950.

Dulles strongly opposed the American atomic attacks on Japan. In the immediate aftermath of the bombings, he drafted a public statement that called for international control of nuclear energy under United Nations auspices. He wrote:

Dulles never lost his anxiety about the destructive power of nuclear weapons, but his views on international control and on employing the threat of atomic attack changed in the face of the Berlin blockade, the Soviet detonation of an atomic bomb, and the advent of the Korean War. They convinced him that the communist bloc was pursuing expansionist policies.

In the late 1940s, as a general conceptual framework for contending with world communism, Dulles developed the policy known as rollback to serve as the Republican Party&#x27;s alternative to the Democrats&#x27; containment model. It proposed taking the offensive to push communism back, rather than to contain it within its areas of control and influence.

===U.S. Senator===
Dewey appointed Dulles to the United States Senate to replace the Democratic incumbent Robert F. Wagner, who had resigned for ill health. Dulles served from July 7 to November 8, 1949. He lost the 1949 special election to finish the term to Democratic nominee Herbert H. Lehman.

In 1950, Dulles published &quot;War or Peace&quot;, a critical analysis of the American policy of containment, which was favored by the foreign policy elite in Washington, particularly in the Democratic administration of Harry S. Truman, whose foreign policy Dulles criticized and instead advocated a policy of &quot;liberation.&quot;

==Advisor to Harry Truman==

Despite being a prominent Republican and having been a close advisor to Truman&#x27;s opponent Dewey, Dulles became a trusted advisor of Harry Truman, especially on the issue of what to do with Japan, which was still under U.S. military occupation. In his role as an external &quot;consultant&quot; to Truman&#x27;s State Department, Dulles became the key architect of the 1952 San Francisco Peace Treaty which ended the U.S. occupation of Japan, as well as the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, which ensured that Japan would remain firmly in the U.S. camp in the Cold War and allowed the continuing maintenance of U.S. military bases on Japanese soil.

In 1951, Dulles also helped initiate the ANZUS Treaty for mutual protection with Australia and New Zealand.

==Possible Chief Justice nomination==
Following the 1953 death of Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, President Eisenhower considered appointing Dulles in his place. In his later life Eisenhower is said to have considered only two men for the job: Dulles and eventual nominee Earl Warren. &quot;The Evening Star&quot; in fact initially viewed Dulles as the third most likely candidate after Warren and Thomas E. Dewey, while some Republican insiders at the time of Vinson&#x27;s death actually thought Dulles was more likely to be chosen for the post than Warren. Dulles was viewed by the press as too favourable to big business, and in Eisenhower&#x27;s own memoirs as too old to potentially wield significant influence upon the Court. Besides the issue of age, Eisenhower did not want to deprive himself of Dulles&#x27;s valuable contributions in the field of foreign policy.

==U.S. Secretary of State==
When Dwight Eisenhower succeeded Truman as president in January 1953, Dulles was appointed and confirmed as his Secretary of State. His tenure as Secretary was marked by conflict with communist governments worldwide, especially the Soviet Union; Dulles strongly opposed communism, calling it &quot;Godless terrorism.&quot; Dulles&#x27;s preferred strategy was containment through military build-up and the formation of alliances (dubbed &quot;pactomania&quot;).

Dulles was a pioneer of the strategies of massive retaliation and brinkmanship. In an article written for &quot;Life&quot; magazine, Dulles defined his policy of brinkmanship: &quot;The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art.&quot;

Dulles&#x27;s hard line alienated many leaders of non-aligned countries when on June 9, 1955, he argued in a speech that &quot;neutrality has increasingly become obsolete and, except under very exceptional circumstances, it is an immoral and shortsighted conception.&quot; In a June 1956 speech in Iowa, Dulles declared non-alignment to be &quot;immoral&quot;, further castigating the Non-Aligned Movement. Throughout the 1950s, Dulles was in frequent conflict with non-aligned statesmen who he deemed were too sympathetic to communism, including India&#x27;s V. K. Krishna Menon.

===Iran===
One of his first major policy shifts towards a more aggressive position against communism occurred in March 1953, when Dulles supported Eisenhower&#x27;s decision to direct the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), then headed by his brother Allen Dulles, to draft plans to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh of Iran. That led directly to the coup d&#x27;état via Operation Ajax in support of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who regained his position as the Shah of Iran.

===Vietnam===
During the First Indochina War, Dulles stated that he expected a French victory against the communist Viet Minh forces, stating, &quot;I do not expect that there is going to be a communist victory in Indochina&quot;. Dulles worked to reduce French influence in Vietnam and asked the United States to attempt to co-operate with the French in the aid of strengthening Diem&#x27;s army. Over time, Dulles concluded that he had to &quot;ease France out of Vietnam.&quot;

In 1954, at the height of the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, Dulles helped plan and promote Operation Vulture, a proposed B-29 aerial assault on the communist Viet Minh siege positions to relieve the beleaguered French Army. President Eisenhower made American participation reliant on British support, but Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden was opposed to it and so &quot;Vulture&quot; was canceled over Dulles&#x27;s objections. French Foreign Minister Georges Bidault later said that Dulles had offered him the use of atomic bombs to end the siege.

At the 1954 Geneva Conference, which concerned the breakup of French Indochina, he forbade any contact with the Chinese delegation and refused to shake hands with Zhou Enlai, the lead Chinese negotiator. Dulles also opposed the conference&#x27;s plan to partition the country of Vietnam and hold elections for a unified government, insisting that the anti-communist State of Vietnam should remain the legitimate Vietnamese government. He subsequently left to avoid direct association with the negotiations; Dulles&#x27;s exit contributed to the Geneva Conference&#x27;s failure to resolve the conflict in Vietnam.

===Asia and the Pacific===
As Secretary of State, Dulles carried out the &quot;containment&quot; policy of neutralizing the Taiwan Strait during the Korean War. Later, at Geneva, Dulles objected to any proposals by China and the Soviet Union for a diplomatic reunification of Korea, thus leaving the Korean conflict unresolved.

In 1954, Dulles designed the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), providing for collective action against aggression. The treaty was signed by representatives of Australia, Britain, France, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand, and the United States.

In 1958, Dulles authorized the Secretary of the Air Force to state publicly that the United States was prepared to use nuclear weapons in a conflict with China over the islands of Quemoy and Matsu.

After having resisted revision for many years, from 1957 to 1959, Dulles oversaw the renegotiation of a revised version of the U.S.–Japan Security Treaty, which was eventually ratified in 1960, after his death.

===Guatemala===

The same year, Dulles participated in the instigation of a military coup by the Guatemalan army through the CIA by claiming that the democratically elected Guatemalan President Jacobo Árbenz&#x27;s government and the Guatemalan Revolution were veering toward communism. Dulles had previously represented the United Fruit Company as a lawyer. Thomas Dudley Cabot, former CEO of United Fruit, held the position of Director of International Security Affairs in the State Department. John Moore Cabot, a brother of Thomas Dudley Cabot, was secretary of Inter-American Affairs during much of the coup planning in 1953 and 1954.

===Egypt===
In November 1956, Dulles strongly opposed the Anglo-French invasion of the Suez Canal zone in response to Egypt&#x27;s nationalization of the canal. During the most crucial days, Dulles was hospitalized after surgery and did not participate in the U.S. administration&#x27;s decision making. By 1958, he had become an outspoken opponent of Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and prevented Nasser&#x27;s government from receiving arms from the United States. That policy allowed the Soviet Union to gain influence in Egypt.

== Personal life ==
===Family===
Both his grandfather, Foster, and his uncle, Robert Lansing, the husband of Eleanor Foster, had held the position of Secretary of State. His younger brother, Allen Welsh Dulles, served as Director of Central Intelligence under Dwight D. Eisenhower, and his younger sister Eleanor Lansing Dulles was noted for her work in the successful reconstruction of the economy of post-war Europe during her twenty years with the State Department.

On June 26, 1912, Dulles married Janet Pomeroy Avery (1891–1969), granddaughter of Theodore M. Pomeroy, a former United States Congressman and Speaker of the House of Representatives. They had two sons and a daughter. Their older son John W. F. Dulles (1913–2008) was a professor of history and specialist in Brazil at the University of Texas at Austin. Their daughter Lillias Dulles Hinshaw (1914–1987) became a Presbyterian minister. Their son Avery Dulles (1918–2008) converted to Roman Catholicism, entered the Jesuit order, and became the first American theologian to be appointed a Cardinal.

===Non-governmental organizations===
Dulles served as the chairman and cofounder of the Commission on a Just and Durable Peace of the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America (later the National Council of Churches), the chairman of the board for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation from 1935 to 1952. Dulles was also a founding member of Foreign Policy Association and Council on Foreign Relations.

== Death ==
Dulles developed colon cancer, for which he was first operated on in November 1956 when it had caused a bowel perforation. He experienced abdominal pain at the end of 1958 and was hospitalized with a diagnosis of diverticulitis. In January 1959, Dulles returned to work, but with more pain and declining health underwent abdominal surgery in February at Walter Reed Army Medical Center when the cancer&#x27;s recurrence became evident. After recuperating in Florida, Dulles returned to Washington for work and radiation therapy. With further declining health and evidence of bone metastasis, he resigned from office on April 15, 1959.

Dulles died at Walter Reed on May 24, 1959, at the age of 71. Funeral services were held in Washington National Cathedral on May 27, 1959, and he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, in Arlington County, Virginia.

==Legacy==

Dulles was posthumously awarded the Medal of Freedom and the Sylvanus Thayer Award in 1959. A central West Berlin road was named John-Foster-Dulles-Allee in 1959 with a ceremony attended by Christian Herter, Dulles&#x27;s successor as Secretary of State.

The Washington Dulles International Airport in Dulles, Virginia and John Foster Dulles High, Middle, and Elementary Schools in Sugar Land, Texas (including the street (Dulles Avenue) where the school campuses are located), were named in his honor, as is John Foster Dulles Elementary School in Cincinnati, Ohio, and a school in Chicago, Illinois. New York named the Dulles State Office Building in Watertown, New York in his honor. In 1960 the U.S. Post Office Department issued a commemorative stamp honoring Dulles. At Princeton University, Dulles&#x27;s alma mater, a section of Firestone Library is dedicated to Dulles, named the John Foster Dulles Library of Diplomatic History, which houses, among many American diplomatic documents and books, the personal documents of John Foster Dulles. The library was built in 1962.

This quote is sometimes misattributed to Dulles: &quot;The United States of America does not have friends; it has interests.&quot; The words were spoken by President Charles de Gaulle of France, and the misquotation may be attributed to Dulles&#x27;s visit to Mexico in 1958, where anti-American protesters carried signs bearing de Gaulle&#x27;s quote.

===Popular culture===
Dulles was named &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s Man of the Year for 1954.

Entertainer Carol Burnett rose to prominence in 1957 singing a novelty song, &quot;I Made a Fool of Myself Over John Foster Dulles&quot;. When asked about the song on &quot;Meet the Press&quot;, Dulles responded with good humor: &quot;I never discuss matters of the heart in public.&quot;

== See also ==
* Vietnam War
* Brinkmanship
* New Look
* Peaceful Evolution theory

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Anderson, David L. &quot;J. Lawton Collins, John Foster Dulles, and the Eisenhower Administration&#x27;s &quot;Point of No Return&quot; in Vietnam.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 12.2 (1988): 127–147.
* Challener, Richard D. &quot;The Moralist as Pragmatist: John Foster Dulles as Cold War Strategist.&quot; in &quot;The Diplomats, 1939–1979&quot; (Princeton University Press, 2019) pp. 135–166. online
* Dingman, Roger. &quot;John Foster Dulles and the Creation of the South-East Asia Treaty Organization in 1954.&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; 11.3 (1989): 457–477.
* Gerson, Louis L. &quot;John Foster Dulles&quot; (1967), a major scholarly study online
* Goold-Adams, Richard. &quot;John Foster Dulles; a reappraisal&quot; (1962) online
* Greene, Daniel P. O&#x27;C. &quot;John Foster Dulles and the End of the Franco-American Entente in Indochina.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 16.4 (1992): 551–572.
* Guhin, Michael A. &quot;John Foster Dulles: a statesman and his times&quot; (Columbia University Press, 1972) online
* Hoopes Townsend, &quot;Devil and John Foster Dulles&quot; (1973) . a scholarly biography online
* Inboden III, William Charles. &quot;The soul of American diplomacy: Religion and foreign policy, 1945–1960&quot; (PhD diss. Yale University, 2003) online.
* Immerman, Richard H. &quot;John Foster Dulles: Piety, Pragmatism, and Power in U.S. Foreign Policy&quot; (1998) online
* Immerman, Richard H. &quot;John Foster Dulles.&quot; &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot; (1980) online
* Kinzer, Stephen. &quot;The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War&quot;. Times Books (2013). .
* Marks, Frederick. &quot;Power and Peace: The Diplomacy of John Foster Dulles&quot; (1995). . online
* Mosley, Leonard. &quot;Dulles : a biography of Eleanor, Allen and John Foster Dulles and their family network&quot; (1978) online
* Mulder, John M. &quot;The Moral World of John Foster Dulles: A Presbyterian Layman and International Affairs.&quot; &quot;Journal of Presbyterian History&quot; 49.2 (1971): 157–182. online
* Nelson, Anna Kasten. &quot;John Foster Dulles and the Bipartisan Congress.&quot; &quot;Political Science Quarterly&quot; 102.1 (1987): 43–64. online
* Pruessen, Ronald W. &quot;John Foster Dulles: The Road to Power&quot; (1982), The Free Press online
* Ruane, Kevin. &quot;Agonizing Reappraisals: Anthony Eden, John Foster Dulles and the Crisis of European Defence, 1953–54.&quot; &quot;Diplomacy and Statecraft&quot; 13.4 (2002): 151–185.
* Snyder, William P. &quot;Dean Rusk to John Foster Dulles, May–June 1953: The Office, the First 100 Days, and Red China.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 7.1 (1983): 79–86.
* Stang, Alan. . Belmont, Mass.: Western Islands (1968). .
* Toulouse, Mark G. &quot;The Transformation of John Foster Dulles: From Prophet of Realism to Priest of Nationalism&quot;. Mercer University Press (1985).
* Toulouse, Mark G. &quot;The Development of a Cold Warrior: John Foster Dulles and the Soviet Union, 1945–1952.&quot; &quot;American Presbyterians&quot;, vol. 63, no. 3 (1985), pp. 309–322. .
* Tudda, Chris. (2006)
* Wilsey, John D. &quot;God&#x27;s Cold Warrior: The Life and Faith of John Foster Dulles&quot; (2021). .
== External links ==

* 
* John Foster Dulles Papers at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University
* Papers of John Foster Dulles, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
* Annotated bibliography for John Foster Dulles from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues 
* at the Internet Archive
* John Foster Dulles (Radio Reports partially in German) from the archive of the Österreichische Mediathek</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="0" end="18" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="117" end="149" title="United States secretary of state" label="United States secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="166" end="186" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="244" end="260" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="279" end="291" title="U.S. senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="360" end="368" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069699" start="523" end="546" title="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell" label="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546035" start="569" end="608" title="George Washington University Law School" label="George Washington University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q703642" start="627" end="641" title="John W. Foster" label="John W. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q361366" start="658" end="672" title="Robert Lansing" label="Robert Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="733" end="745" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="761" end="793" title="director of central intelligence" label="director of central intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966797" start="834" end="854" title="War Industries Board" label="War Industries Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="913" end="940" title="1919 Paris Peace Conference" label="1919 Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468305" start="968" end="1002" title="League of Free Nations Association" label="League of Free Nations Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1047" end="1064" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="1096" end="1106" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q687013" start="1153" end="1175" title="World War I reparations" label="German war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050140" start="1255" end="1282" title="Federal Council of Churches" label="Federal Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="1377" end="1392" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q596667" start="1430" end="1437" title="1944 United States presidential election" label="in 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="1442" end="1446" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="1489" end="1511" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1544" end="1563" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362299" start="1663" end="1695" title="1949 United States Senate special election in New York" label="his defeat in a special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="1792" end="1807" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="1829" end="1841" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="1921" end="1944" title="Treaty of San Francisco" label="Treaty of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445004" start="1980" end="2010" title="Security Treaty between the United States and Japan" label="the U.S.–Japan Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862276" start="2034" end="2053" title="U.S.–Japan Alliance" label="U.S.–Japan Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q295875" start="2063" end="2068" title="ANZUS" label="ANZUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907788" start="2259" end="2278" title="massive retaliation" label="massive retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123143" start="2332" end="2377" title="Pactomania" label="building and strengthening Cold War alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2396" end="2400" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="2430" end="2464" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="2597" end="2626" title="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q976887" start="2635" end="2667" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="2717" end="2755" title="First Indochina War" label="war against the Viet Minh in Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="2843" end="2856" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="2867" end="2889" title="1954 Geneva Conference" label="1954 Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3026" end="3042" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3267684" start="3071" end="3083" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States of America" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22018037" start="3242" end="3259" title="John Welsh Dulles" label="John Welsh Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q703642" start="3332" end="3346" title="John W. Foster" label="John W. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="3382" end="3399" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="3487" end="3514" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378026" start="3540" end="3559" title="Watertown, New York" label="Watertown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130238" start="3620" end="3636" title="Henderson, New York" label="Henderson Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="3661" end="3673" title="Homeschooling" label="homeschooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3738" end="3758" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="3788" end="3802" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745375" start="3849" end="3881" title="American Whig-Cliosophic Society" label="American Whig-Cliosophic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894669" start="3914" end="3937" title="University Cottage Club" label="University Cottage Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546035" start="3960" end="3999" title="George Washington University Law School" label="George Washington University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069699" start="4118" end="4141" title="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell" label="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="4167" end="4184" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966797" start="4353" end="4373" title="War Industries Board" label="War Industries Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q361366" start="4502" end="4516" title="Robert Lansing" label="Robert Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q887715" start="4656" end="4671" title="Federico Tinoco Granados" label="Federico Tinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q727025" start="4760" end="4777" title="Emiliano Chamorro" label="Emiliano Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="5102" end="5116" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="5190" end="5217" title="Versailles Peace Conference" label="Versailles Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="5764" end="5781" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468305" start="5790" end="5824" title="League of Free Nations Association" label="League of Free Nations Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="5942" end="5959" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="6166" end="6176" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="6615" end="6640" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="6904" end="6914" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="6962" end="6974" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q841594" start="7674" end="7682" title="Reverend" label="Reverend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586481" start="7683" end="7704" title="Harry Emerson Fosdick" label="Harry Emerson Fosdick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508979" start="7806" end="7842" title="Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy" label="Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050140" start="8315" end="8342" title="Federal Council of Churches" label="Federal Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="8608" end="8630" title="Mainline Protestantism" label="Mainline Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="8979" end="9004" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q698269" start="9092" end="9110" title="Moscow Declaration" label="Moscow Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="9251" end="9261" title="History of the United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="9287" end="9295" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248443" start="9340" end="9371" title="List of United States Republican Party presidential tickets" label="Republican presidential nominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q596667" start="9392" end="9396" title="1944 United States presidential election" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="9401" end="9405" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504861" start="9710" end="9734" title="United Nations Conference on International Organization" label="San Francisco Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388292" start="9752" end="9772" title="Arthur H. Vandenberg" label="Arthur H. Vandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="9810" end="9832" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="9850" end="9881" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="9964" end="9996" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="American atomic attacks on Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678782" start="10658" end="10666" title="rollback" label="rollback"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="10742" end="10753" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10973" end="10983" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362299" start="11104" end="11125" title="1949 United States Senate special election in New York" label="1949 special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q879261" start="11167" end="11184" title="Herbert H. Lehman" label="Herbert H. Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="11285" end="11296" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="11379" end="11389" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824575" start="11390" end="11423" title="Truman administration" label="administration of Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="11775" end="11799" title="Occupation of Japan" label="U.S. military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="11930" end="11956" title="San Francisco Peace Treaty" label="San Francisco Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="11978" end="11997" title="occupation of Japan" label="occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445004" start="12014" end="12040" title="Security Treaty Between the United States and Japan" label="U.S.-Japan Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12111" end="12119" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q295875" start="12242" end="12247" title="ANZUS" label="ANZUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="12376" end="12389" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q460151" start="12390" end="12404" title="Fred M. Vinson" label="Fred M. Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318136" start="12406" end="12426" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower Supreme Court candidates" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="12580" end="12591" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="13216" end="13233" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="13395" end="13404" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13443" end="13455" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123143" start="13654" end="13664" title="pactomania" label="pactomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907788" start="13716" end="13735" title="massive retaliation" label="massive retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917519" start="13740" end="13752" title="brinkmanship (Cold War)" label="brinkmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="13786" end="13790" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="14331" end="14351" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595860" start="14506" end="14525" title="V. K. Krishna Menon" label="V. K. Krishna Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="14716" end="14743" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q123037" start="14835" end="14853" title="Mohammed Mossadegh" label="Mohammed Mossadegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="14909" end="14923" title="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Operation Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="14938" end="14959" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733253" start="14994" end="15006" title="List of monarchs of Persia" label="Shah of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="15034" end="15053" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="15125" end="15134" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q604897" start="15521" end="15544" title="Battle of Dien Bien Phu" label="Battle of Dien Bien Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097699" start="15577" end="15594" title="Operation Vulture" label="Operation Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="15607" end="15611" title="B-29" label="B-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="15644" end="15653" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="15813" end="15825" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q312026" start="15939" end="15954" title="Georges Bidault" label="Georges Bidault"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="16044" end="16066" title="1954 Geneva Conference" label="1954 Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="16099" end="16115" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="16200" end="16210" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="16316" end="16323" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="16403" end="16419" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="16776" end="16789" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="16801" end="16811" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16867" end="16872" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="16881" end="16893" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q482555" start="16911" end="16933" title="Korean reunification" label="reunification of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422559" start="16952" end="16967" title="Korean conflict" label="Korean conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="17010" end="17044" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="17578" end="17604" title="Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan" label="U.S.–Japan Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q976887" start="17739" end="17775" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup by the Guatemalan army"/>
<link wikidata="Q216943" start="17857" end="17870" title="Jacobo Árbenz" label="Jacobo Árbenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614269" start="17897" end="17918" title="Guatemalan Revolution" label="Guatemalan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771942" start="17988" end="18008" title="United Fruit Company" label="United Fruit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="18391" end="18401" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="18422" end="18463" title="Suez Crisis" label="Egypt&amp;#x27;s nationalization of the canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="18675" end="18693" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18801" end="18813" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361366" start="18921" end="18935" title="Robert Lansing" label="Robert Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="19034" end="19052" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Welsh Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="19064" end="19096" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="19103" end="19123" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q537370" start="19148" end="19170" title="Eleanor Lansing Dulles" label="Eleanor Lansing Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="19294" end="19310" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q451162" start="19396" end="19415" title="Theodore M. Pomeroy" label="Theodore M. Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10307903" start="19547" end="19564" title="John W. F. Dulles" label="John W. F. Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="19622" end="19628" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="19636" end="19665" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q546756" start="19759" end="19771" title="Avery Dulles" label="Avery Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19797" end="19814" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="19828" end="19834" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="19901" end="19909" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31870" start="20106" end="20134" title="National Council of Churches" label="National Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="20171" end="20213" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="20236" end="20258" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468305" start="20315" end="20341" title="Foreign Policy Association" label="Foreign Policy Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="20346" end="20374" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="20406" end="20418" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q279324" start="20493" end="20510" title="bowel perforation" label="bowel perforation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066061" start="20602" end="20616" title="diverticulitis" label="diverticulitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473658" start="20743" end="20774" title="Walter Reed Army Medical Center" label="Walter Reed Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q848085" start="20964" end="20979" title="bone metastasis" label="bone metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="21117" end="21146" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="21185" end="21212" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="21217" end="21243" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330790" start="21294" end="21310" title="Medal of Freedom (1945)" label="Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311715" start="21319" end="21340" title="Sylvanus Thayer Award" label="Sylvanus Thayer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="21360" end="21371" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240274" start="21448" end="21464" title="Christian Herter" label="Christian Herter"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="21518" end="21557" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q226045" start="21561" end="21577" title="Dulles, Virginia" label="Dulles, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313451" start="21582" end="21605" title="Dulles High School (Sugar Land, Texas)" label="John Foster Dulles High"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="21641" end="21658" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="21808" end="21818" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378026" start="21912" end="21931" title="Watertown (city), New York" label="Watertown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="21995" end="22014" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297681" start="22096" end="22113" title="Firestone Library" label="Firestone Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="22508" end="22525" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="22735" end="22760" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="22768" end="22783" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Man of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q255565" start="22807" end="22820" title="Carol Burnett" label="Carol Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="22968" end="22982" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="23102" end="23113" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q917519" start="23116" end="23128" title="Brinkmanship" label="Brinkmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982700" start="23131" end="23139" title="New Look (policy)" label="New Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840755" start="23142" end="23167" title="Peaceful Evolution theory" label="Peaceful Evolution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306701" start="24768" end="24783" title="Stephen Kinzer" label="Kinzer, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24791" end="24865" title="The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War" label="The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806522" start="24873" end="24884" title="Times Books" label="Times Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499961" start="25551" end="25565" title="Free Press (publisher)" label="The Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987983" start="25973" end="25988" title="Western Islands (publisher)" label="Western Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818315" start="26123" end="26146" title="Mercer University Press" label="Mercer University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="26775" end="26791" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q303798" start="26873" end="26898" title="Österreichische Mediathek" label="Österreichische Mediathek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80126" wikidata="Q507057" url="?curid=80126" title="Juno Awards">
<text>The Juno Awards (stylized as JUNOS), or simply known as the Junos, are awards presented by the Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences to recognize outstanding achievements in Canada&#x27;s music industry. The Grammy Awards are the United States&#x27; equivalent of the Juno Awards. Alongside the Canadian Screen Awards, they are considered one of the main annual Canadian entertainment award shows. New members of the Canadian Music Hall of Fame are also inducted as part of the awards ceremonies.

==History==
The Juno Awards were originally called the RPM Gold Leaf Awards named after RPM Magazine. The winners would be announced in RPM magazine before awards night. The first ceremony was held on February 23, 1970 to honour the musical accomplishments of performers for the year 1969, and the trophy resembled a metronome. But the name was changed in honour of Pierre Juneau, the first president of the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) and former president of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC). Juneau was an outspoken advocate for Canadian content regulations.

===1970s===
In 1964 &quot;RPM&quot; magazine began polling its readers to determine which artists and groups they considered the best in Canada. &quot;RPM&quot; announced the results of these polls each December. There were no formal award ceremonies.

Record label owner Stan Klees met with &quot;RPM&quot; founder Walt Grealis to plan a formal music industry awards ceremony. Instead of merely publishing the award results in &quot;RPM&quot;, presentations would be made at a physical venue. The first ceremony was the Gold Leaf Awards which took place on 23 February 1970 in Toronto, Ontario.

Later that year &quot;RPM&quot; invited its readers to suggest a new name for these awards. The name &quot;Juneau&quot; was submitted, in honour of Pierre Juneau, the first head of the CRTC. Juneau was instrumental in establishing Canadian content regulations for broadcasters to promote Canadian musicians. That name became shortened to Juno and by 1971, the awards ceremonies were referred to as the &quot;Juno Awards&quot;.

From 1970 to 1973, &quot;RPM&quot; announced the winners before the awards night. From 1974, the award winners were not made public until the Juno ceremonies. Music industry representatives formed an advisory committee for the Junos in 1974 which became the Canadian Music Awards Association the following year. This organisation assumed full management and operation of the Juno Awards from 1977 and became the Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (CARAS).

The Junos were first televised across Canada in 1975 on CBC Television. Primary ceremonies continued to be broadcast on CBC until 2001, moving to CTV Television Network (CTV) from 2002 to 2017 inclusive. The broadcast returned to CBC from 2018 onward.

The Canadian Music Hall of Fame was introduced in 1978. In 1979, the statuette&#x27;s name was officially changed from RPM Annual Gold Leaf Award to the Juno Award, and featured then-Prime Minister of Canada Pierre Trudeau as a presenter.

===1980s===

Joni Mitchell was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame by Pierre Trudeau in 1982.

Initially, the awards were presented during the early part of each year. In 1984, organisers postponed that year&#x27;s awards until December. CARAS maintained a late-year scheduling until January 1988 when it noted the declining viewership of the Juno broadcasts and reverted to an early year awards schedule. CARAS postponed that year&#x27;s Juno Awards until 12 March 1989, so there was no ceremony in the 1988 calendar year.

===1990s===
In 1991, the awards were hosted in Vancouver, the first time the Juno ceremonies were conducted outside Toronto. That year also marked the introduction of a category for rap recordings.

For the first time the 1995 Awards, held in Hamilton&#x27;s Copps Coliseum, were open to the public. This marked the 25th anniversary of the Junos.

In 1996 the four-CD, 77-song box set &quot;Oh What a Feeling: A Vital Collection of Canadian Music&quot; and a book were released to mark the 25th anniversary of the Juno Awards. The box set featured popular songs by Canadian artists from the 1960s to 1990s sold over one million copies and was certified diamond. In 2001, a second four-CD box set was released to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the awards. In 2006, a third box set was released to celebrate the 35th anniversary which was certified platinum in Canada.

===2000s===

CARAS transferred the broadcast rights to the Juno Awards from CBC to CTV for the 2002 ceremonies. 2006 marked the first time the Junos were broadcast internationally through MTV2 in the United States and several affiliated MTV channels in other nations. The telecast of the 2006 Juno Awards was available to approximately 250 million people.

The Allan Waters Humanitarian Award honouring media icon Allan Waters was inaugurated in 2006. The first artist to be given this honour was Bruce Cockburn.

At the 2007 ceremony, host Nelly Furtado made Juno history by being the first nominee with multiple nominations to win every award for which she was nominated. These included the two most prestigious honours, Album of the Year and Artist of the Year.

On 18 April 2017, CARAS president Allan Reid announced that the ceremonies would return to CBC for the first time since 2002, for at least the next six years. He said he wanted to collaborate with the CBC to bolster a year-round presence for the Juno Awards as a platform for promoting Canadian music.

The 2020 event was canceled because of the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, but later replaced by an online ceremony on June 29.

==Trophy==

Stan Klees developed the first Juno trophies for the inaugural presentations in 1970. These were constructed from walnut wood, stood tall and resembled a metronome. When CBC televised the ceremonies in 1975, the award was constructed from acrylic instead of wood while retaining a metronome shape. The trophy was given minor modifications in succeeding years. These included a reduction in size for ease of handling, and changes to the inlay design such as a special 1996 emblem to signify the 25th anniversary.

In 2000 following criticism from producers that the existing award trophy did not have an attractive television appearance, CARAS commissioned a redesigned award from Stoney Creek, Ontario, artist Shirley Elford. After reviewing three designs, two of which were patterned after the existing trophy, a new trophy design was selected featuring a glass human figure surrounded by a nickel-coated spiral symbolic of a musical staff on an aluminum base. A few display statuettes were circulated for presentation during the ceremonies. Within months, winners received their personalized and individually made trophies from Elford.

In October 2010, CARAS unveiled a new award design to be used from 2011 on. Elford had developed cancer and was no longer able to produce individual Juno trophies. The new design, manufactured by Crystal Sensations of Markham, ON, featured a solid crystal tower containing a subsurface laser engraving depicting a spiral-wrapped human figure resembling the previous statuette. Elford died in November 2011.

==Nomination process==

Specific award categories and their descriptions vary from year to year reflecting changes and developments in the music industry. In 1964 there were 16 categories, and in 2017 there were 42. Judging panels change each year. They include people from different areas of the music industry and regions of the country. An advisory committee oversees each category to ensure that all the submissions meet the required criteria.

The nominations for each year&#x27;s Junos are based on an eligibility period which lasts for 13 to 14 months, ending on the mid-November prior to the awards ceremony. For example, the eligibility period of the 2010 Juno Awards was from 1 September 2008 to 13 November 2009. Musicians or their representatives submit music released during the eligibility period to CARAS, designated for the appropriate nomination categories. Nominations other than for the International Album of the Year may only be awarded to Canadians who have lived in Canada during the last six months of the eligibility period, and are deemed Canadian by birth, passport or immigration status.

Following the close of the eligibility period, CARAS conducts an initial vote by its members to establish the list of nominees in most categories. Sales figures determined the nominees for Album of the Year and International Album of the Year. Sales along with a jury vote determine the New Artist of the Year, New Group of the Year, Rock Album of the Year and Pop Album of the Year. Sales and a CARAS member vote determine the nominations for Artist of the Year and Group of the Year.

After the nominees list is published, another voting round is conducted to determine the winners of most categories. Voting for the Juno Fan Choice Award is open to the public and closes after the first hour of the televised ceremony, while voting on general categories is limited to CARAS members. Winners in genre-specific or specialty categories are determined by specially appointed CARAS juries. As of 2010, ballots are audited by the major Big Four accounting firms PricewaterhouseCoopers.

==Ceremonies==
The Juno Awards events were not conducted outside Toronto until 1991. Since then, the ceremonies have been hosted throughout Canada, reaching both coasts. The provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, and the Territories, have yet to play host to the Junos. In recent years, the various locations often host a number of supporting events and festivals surrounding the awards.

== Live performances ==
Beginning in 1975 when the CBC began to televise the Junos live performances were featured throughout the show. The Canadian Music Hall of Fame was introduced in 1978. These are the performers who appeared during the show and those who were inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of fame.
==Award categories==

The &quot;General Field&quot; are awards which are not restricted by music genre.

*The Artist of the Year award is presented to the best individual performer. 
*The Album of the Year award is presented to the performer, featured artists, songwriter(s), and/or production team of a full album if other than the performer.
* The Single of the Year award award is presented to the songwriter(s) of a single song.
* The Breakthrough Artist of the Year and Breakthrough Group of the Year awards are presented to a promising breakthrough performer(s) who in the eligibility year releases the first recording that establishes their public identity (which is not necessarily their first proper release).

Other awards are given for performance and production in specific genres and for other contributions such as artwork and video. Special awards are also given for longer-lasting contributions to the music industry. Award names have changed through the years, most notably the switch in 2003 from the phrase &quot;Best...&quot; to &quot; ... of the year&quot;.

Since 2015, Breakthrough Artist of the Year, Album of the Year, and Fan Choice Award are the only categories that are presented at every broadcast. The awards for Breakthrough Artist of the Year and Breakthrough Group of the Year are customarily presented by the Minister of Canadian Heritage.

Beginning with the 2016 ceremony, two new awards categories—Contemporary Roots Album of the Year and Traditional Roots Album of the Year—were introduced to &quot;ensure two genres of music are not competing against each other in the same category&quot;.

=== Genre-specific fields ===
Pop

* Pop Album of the Year

Dance/Electronic

* Dance Recording of the Year
* Underground Dance Single of the Year
* Electronic Album of the Year

Contemporary Instrumental &amp; Composing

* Instrumental Album of the Year

Rock

* Rock Album of the Year
* Metal/Hard Music Album of the Year

Alternative

* Alternative Album of the Year
* Adult Alternative Album of the Year

R&amp;B

* Traditional R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year
* Contemporary R&amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year

Rap

* Rap Single of the Year
* Rap Album/EP of the Year

Country

* Country Album of the Year

Jazz

* Jazz Album of the Year – Solo
* Jazz Album of the Year – Group
* Vocal Jazz Album of the Year

Gospel/Contemporary Christian Music

* Contemporary Christian/Gospel Album of the Year

Canadian Roots

* Contemporary Roots Album of the Year
* Traditional Roots Album of the Year
* Blues Album of the Year

Reggae

* Reggae Recording of the Year

Global Music

* Global Music Album of the Year

Children&#x27;s

* Children&#x27;s Album of the Year

Comedy

* Comedy Album of the Year

Engineering Field

* Recording Engineer of the Year

Production Field

* Producer of the Year

Songwriting

* Songwriter of the Year

Classical

* Classical Composition of the Year
* Classical Album of the Year – Solo
* Classical Album of the Year — Small Ensemble
* Classical Album of the Year – Large Ensemble

Music Video/Film

* Video of the Year

Francophone

* Francophone Album of the Year

Indigenous

* Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year
* Contemporary Indigenous Artist of the Year

International

* International Album of the Year

Other

* Album Artwork of the Year
* MusiCounts Teacher of the Year

=== Former Categories ===
* Juno International Achievement Award - awarded from 1992 to 2000
* Juno Award for International Entertainer of the Year - awarded from 1989 to 1993
* Juno Award for Best Selling Single - awarded from 1975 to 1993
* Juno Award for Music DVD of the Year - awarded from 2004 to 2013 - discontinued in 2014
* Juno Award for Traditional Jazz Album of the Year - awarded from 1977 to 2014 - discontinued in 2015
* Juno Award for Roots &amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Solo - awarded between 1989 and 2015
* Juno Award for Roots &amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Group - awarded between 1989 and 2015

==Criticism==
The Juno Awards have received criticism from several Canadian artists.

===Rascalz===
In 1998, the Rascalz album &quot;Cash Crop&quot; was nominated for Best Rap Recording. Due to Canadian hip hop&#x27;s limited commercial notability, the rap award had never been presented during the main Juno ceremony, instead being relegated to the non-televised technical awards ceremony during the previous evening.

This fact had previously been criticized for creating a barrier to the commercial visibility of Canadian hip hop. Rascalz, however, alleged that racism was a factor in the award&#x27;s disadvantageous scheduling, and became the first Canadian hip hop group to explicitly &quot;decline&quot; the award on that basis.

Their move sparked considerable media debate about the state of Canadian hip hop. As a result of the controversy, the Juno Awards moved the rap category to the main ceremony the following year.

===Matthew Good===
Matthew Good has won four Juno Awards during his career, but has not attended the ceremonies in any of the years he won. In 2009, he criticized the awards for not promoting Canadian music at the grassroots level, saying, &quot;When it ... isn&#x27;t kind of this weekend when the Canadian music industry pretends that it&#x27;s ... not just marketing warehouses for the United States, then sure, I&#x27;ll be a part of it.&quot;

===Kardinal Offishall===
At the 2006 Juno Awards, Kardinal Offishall stated that he would not attend the Junos anymore. &quot;I&#x27;m not going to be the Juno&#x27;s monkey no more, I&#x27;m not coming back any more.&quot; Offishall cited Canadian hip-hop&#x27;s low profile at that year&#x27;s awards as the catalyst for his decision. Offishall further stated, &quot;Really, to me it&#x27;s really atrocious what they do to hip-hop in this country and what they do for the artists... I just feel like the token hip-hop artist from Canada. For urban music in this country, I mean, not only was hip-hop not televised, but also reggae and R&amp;B; to me, it&#x27;s sickening.&quot; Offishall also criticized the Juno Awards for having the American group The Black Eyed Peas perform at that year&#x27;s ceremony. &quot;I just had enough. They had me perform last night and give away the award — to me it&#x27;s all a farce, I really can&#x27;t put up with it anymore. It&#x27;s not even that it&#x27;s embarrassing, it&#x27;s just disappointing. It doesn&#x27;t matter what you do in this country, for me anyway, they don&#x27;t recognize what I do. It&#x27;s just a bunch of garbage so I won&#x27;t be a part of it anymore.&quot; Despite this, Offishall performed at the 2021 and 2023 Juno Awards.

==Juno Week==
For several days prior to the weekend award presentations, events are held in the host city as part of a &quot;Juno Week&quot;. Local venues host multiple events throughout the week. Events include: Juno Cup, an ice hockey game that pits a team of musicians against a team of National Hockey League players as a fundraiser for MusiCounts, a charitable music education program operated by CARAS, Juno Fan Fare, a meet and greet where fans can meet their favourite Canadian artists, Juno Songwriters&#x27; Circle, a chance for Canada&#x27;s most talented songwriters to tell their stories and play an intimate set in support of MusiCounts, and JUNOfest, a music celebration that showcases local artists at various venues in the host city.

==Juno TV==
Launched in January 2013, Juno TV is a digital channel featuring original and archival content specific to the Juno Awards and its nominated artists and Canadian celebrities such as Alanis Morissette, The Weeknd, Lights, and Rush. Juno TV delivers new content weekly, presenting content on a year-round basis.

==See also==

* Canadian Country Music Association
* Music of Canada
* Canadian hip hop
* Canadian rock
* Canadian content
* :Category:Canadian rock music groups
* :Category:Canadian musical groups
* List of Canadian musicians
* :Category:Music festivals in Canada
* :Category:Canadian record labels

==References==
==External links==
* Juno Awards on CTV.ca
* Juno Awards Coverage on &quot;TheGATE.ca&quot; website
* CBC Digital Archives – And the Juno Went to…</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="4" end="15" title="Juno Awards" label="Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="29" end="34" title="Juno Awards" label="JUNOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="60" end="65" title="Juno Awards" label="Junos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212083" start="91" end="142" title="Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences" label="the Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="198" end="212" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="218" end="231" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459735" start="305" end="327" title="Canadian Screen Awards" label="Canadian Screen Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362499" start="427" end="454" title="Canadian Music Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q156424" start="825" end="834" title="metronome" label="metronome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093576" start="874" end="887" title="Pierre Juneau" label="Pierre Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="916" end="975" title="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission" label="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="1011" end="1044" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="1146" end="1149" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597733" start="1392" end="1402" title="Stan Klees" label="Stan Klees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963975" start="1436" end="1448" title="Walt Grealis" label="Walt Grealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578770" start="1641" end="1657" title="Gold Leaf Awards of 1970" label="Gold Leaf Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1698" end="1714" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212083" start="2557" end="2604" title="Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences" label="Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314121" start="2663" end="2667" title="Juno Awards of 1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2671" end="2685" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314166" start="2745" end="2749" title="Juno Awards of 2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="2761" end="2783" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314168" start="2795" end="2799" title="Juno Awards of 2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191504" start="2803" end="2807" title="Juno Awards of 2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561345" start="2854" end="2858" title="Juno Awards of 2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="3076" end="3090" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="3121" end="3134" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="3825" end="3828" title="Hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131541" start="3902" end="3916" title="FirstOntario Centre" label="Copps Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4034" end="4089" title="Oh What a Feeling: A Vital Collection of Canadian Music" label="Oh What a Feeling: A Vital Collection of Canadian Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="4597" end="4600" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241928" start="4702" end="4706" title="MTV2" label="MTV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824873" start="4875" end="4906" title="Allan Waters Humanitarian Award" label="Allan Waters Humanitarian Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731026" start="4928" end="4940" title="Allan Waters" label="Allan Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q773830" start="5011" end="5025" title="Bruce Cockburn" label="Bruce Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80424" start="5055" end="5068" title="Nelly Furtado" label="Nelly Furtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873580" start="5626" end="5653" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="5835" end="5841" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q156424" start="5875" end="5884" title="metronome" label="metronome"/>
<link wikidata="Q342945" start="5960" end="5967" title="Acrylic resin" label="acrylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192193" start="6648" end="6661" title="Staff (music)" label="musical staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529623" start="7135" end="7161" title="subsurface laser engraving" label="subsurface laser engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314083" start="8174" end="8205" title="Juno Award for International Album of the Year" label="International Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314042" start="8574" end="8591" title="Juno Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314083" start="8596" end="8627" title="Juno Award for International Album of the Year" label="International Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314050" start="8672" end="8694" title="Juno Award for New Artist of the Year" label="New Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314052" start="8696" end="8717" title="Juno Award for New Group of the Year" label="New Group of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141499" start="8719" end="8741" title="Juno Award for Rock Album of the Year" label="Rock Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314089" start="8746" end="8767" title="Juno Award for Pop Album of the Year" label="Pop Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376984" start="8829" end="8847" title="Juno Award for Artist of the Year" label="Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314079" start="8852" end="8869" title="Juno Award for Group of the Year" label="Group of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314207" start="9004" end="9025" title="Juno Fan Choice Award" label="Juno Fan Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q26788" start="9318" end="9343" title="Big Four accounting firms" label="Big Four accounting firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="9344" end="9366" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9434" end="9441" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="9556" end="9569" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="9571" end="9591" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9593" end="9599" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="9609" end="9620" title="Canadian Territories" label="Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376984" start="10199" end="10217" title="Juno Award for Artist of the Year" label="Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314042" start="10277" end="10294" title="Juno Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314103" start="10439" end="10457" title="Juno Award for Single of the Year" label="Single of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314050" start="10528" end="10559" title="Juno Award for Breakthrough Artist of the Year" label="Breakthrough Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314052" start="10564" end="10594" title="Juno Award for Breakthrough Group of the Year" label="Breakthrough Group of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251837" start="11432" end="11461" title="Minister of Canadian Heritage" label="Minister of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000555" start="11524" end="11560" title="Juno Award for Contemporary Roots Album of the Year" label="Contemporary Roots Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000557" start="11565" end="11600" title="Juno Award for Traditional Roots Album of the Year" label="Traditional Roots Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314089" start="11756" end="11777" title="Juno Award for Pop Album of the Year" label="Pop Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314071" start="11799" end="11826" title="Juno Award for Dance Recording of the Year" label="Dance Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298354" start="11829" end="11865" title="Juno Award for Underground Dance Single of the Year" label="Underground Dance Single of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101706" start="11868" end="11896" title="Juno Award for Electronic Album of the Year" label="Electronic Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314081" start="11943" end="11973" title="Juno Award for Instrumental Album of the Year" label="Instrumental Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141499" start="11983" end="12005" title="Juno Award for Rock Album of the Year" label="Rock Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314085" start="12008" end="12042" title="Juno Award for Heavy Metal Album of the Year" label="Metal/Hard Music Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016680" start="12059" end="12088" title="Juno Award for Alternative Album of the Year" label="Alternative Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314039" start="12091" end="12126" title="Juno Award for Adult Alternative Album of the Year" label="Adult Alternative Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q106152904" start="12139" end="12185" title="Juno Award for Traditional R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year" label="Traditional R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q106152903" start="12188" end="12235" title="Juno Award for Contemporary R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year" label="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B/Soul Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298386" start="12244" end="12266" title="Juno Award for Rap Single of the Year" label="Rap Single of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298388" start="12269" end="12293" title="Juno Award for Rap Album/EP of the Year" label="Rap Album/EP of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314069" start="12306" end="12331" title="Juno Award for Country Album of the Year" label="Country Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879226" start="12341" end="12370" title="Juno Award for Jazz Album of the Year – Solo" label="Jazz Album of the Year – Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879224" start="12373" end="12403" title="Juno Award for Jazz Album of the Year – Group" label="Jazz Album of the Year – Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974537" start="12406" end="12434" title="Juno Award for Vocal Jazz Album of the Year" label="Vocal Jazz Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314065" start="12475" end="12522" title="Juno Award for Contemporary Christian/Gospel Album of the Year" label="Contemporary Christian/Gospel Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000555" start="12542" end="12578" title="Juno Award for Contemporary Roots Album of the Year" label="Contemporary Roots Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000557" start="12581" end="12616" title="Juno Award for Traditional Roots Album of the Year" label="Traditional Roots Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314048" start="12619" end="12642" title="Juno Award for Blues Album of the Year" label="Blues Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314098" start="12654" end="12682" title="Juno Award for Reggae Recording of the Year" label="Reggae Recording of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314111" start="12700" end="12730" title="Juno Award for Global Music Album of the Year" label="Global Music Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314054" start="12751" end="12784" title="Juno Award for Children&amp;#x27;s Album of the Year" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314063" start="12796" end="12820" title="Juno Award for Comedy Album of the Year" label="Comedy Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314095" start="12843" end="12873" title="Juno Award for Recording Engineer of the Year" label="Recording Engineer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114830" start="12895" end="12915" title="Jack Richardson Producer of the Year Award" label="Producer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314105" start="12932" end="12954" title="Juno Award for Songwriter of the Year" label="Songwriter of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314061" start="12969" end="13002" title="Juno Award for Classical Composition of the Year" label="Classical Composition of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314058" start="13005" end="13039" title="Juno Award for Classical Album of the Year – Solo or Chamber Ensemble" label="Classical Album of the Year – Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389016" start="13042" end="13086" title="Juno Award for Classical Album of the Year – Small Ensemble" label="Classical Album of the Year — Small Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314056" start="13089" end="13133" title="Juno Award for Classical Album of the Year – Large Ensemble or Soloist(s) with Large Ensemble Accompaniment" label="Classical Album of the Year – Large Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314109" start="13155" end="13172" title="Juno Award for Video of the Year" label="Video of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314077" start="13189" end="13218" title="Juno Award for Francophone Album of the Year" label="Francophone Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298380" start="13234" end="13275" title="Juno Award for Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year" label="Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298382" start="13278" end="13320" title="Juno Award for Contemporary Indigenous Artist of the Year" label="Contemporary Indigenous Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314083" start="13339" end="13370" title="Juno Award for International Album of the Year" label="International Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314096" start="13381" end="13406" title="Juno Award for Recording Package of the Year" label="Album Artwork of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314213" start="13469" end="13505" title="Juno International Achievement Award" label="Juno International Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963163" start="13536" end="13588" title="Juno Award for International Entertainer of the Year" label="Juno Award for International Entertainer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314046" start="13619" end="13653" title="Juno Award for Best Selling Single" label="Juno Award for Best Selling Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314087" start="13684" end="13720" title="Juno Award for Music DVD of the Year" label="Juno Award for Music DVD of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314107" start="13774" end="13823" title="Juno Award for Traditional Jazz Album of the Year" label="Juno Award for Traditional Jazz Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314102" start="13877" end="13940" title="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Solo" label="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314101" start="13975" end="14039" title="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Group" label="Juno Award for Roots &amp;amp; Traditional Album of the Year – Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930370" start="14186" end="14193" title="Rascalz" label="Rascalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048650" start="14206" end="14215" title="Cash Crop (album)" label="Cash Crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010391" start="14240" end="14258" title="Juno Award for Rap Recording of the Year" label="Best Rap Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q469630" start="14267" end="14283" title="Canadian hip hop" label="Canadian hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="14638" end="14644" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q359521" start="15024" end="15036" title="Matthew Good" label="Matthew Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314184" start="15486" end="15502" title="Juno Awards of 2006" label="2006 Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q371238" start="15504" end="15522" title="Kardinal Offishall" label="Kardinal Offishall"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="16207" end="16226" title="The Black Eyed Peas" label="The Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85772546" start="16724" end="16728" title="Juno Awards of 2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802052" start="16733" end="16749" title="Juno Awards of 2023" label="2023 Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="17042" end="17064" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17093" end="17103" title="Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences#MusiCounts" label="MusiCounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="17741" end="17745" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032080" start="17843" end="17877" title="Canadian Country Music Association" label="Canadian Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="17880" end="17895" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q469630" start="17898" end="17914" title="Canadian hip hop" label="Canadian hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437821" start="17917" end="17930" title="Canadian rock" label="Canadian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="17933" end="17949" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17952" end="17988" title=":Category:Canadian rock music groups" label=":Category:Canadian rock music groups"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17991" end="18024" title=":Category:Canadian musical groups" label=":Category:Canadian musical groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565887" start="18027" end="18053" title="List of Canadian musicians" label="List of Canadian musicians"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18056" end="18091" title=":Category:Music festivals in Canada" label=":Category:Music festivals in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18094" end="18126" title=":Category:Canadian record labels" label=":Category:Canadian record labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711639" start="18218" end="18228" title="TheGATE.ca" label="TheGATE.ca"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80128" wikidata="Q431085" url="?curid=80128" title="Daniel Ellsberg">
<text>Daniel Ellsberg (April 7, 1931June 16, 2023) was an American political activist, economist, and United States military analyst. While employed by the RAND Corporation, he precipitated a national political controversy in 1971 when he released the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;, a top-secret Pentagon study of U.S. government decision-making in relation to the Vietnam War, to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, and other newspapers.

In January 1973, Ellsberg was charged under the Espionage Act of 1917 along with other charges of theft and conspiracy, carrying a maximum sentence of 115 years. Because of governmental misconduct and illegal evidence-gathering (committed by the same people who would later be involved in the Watergate scandal), and his defense by Leonard Boudin and Harvard Law School professor Charles Nesson, Judge William Matthew Byrne Jr. dismissed all charges against Ellsberg in May 1973.

Ellsberg was awarded the Right Livelihood Award in 2006. He was also known for having formulated an important example in decision theory, the Ellsberg paradox; for his extensive studies on nuclear weapons and nuclear policy; and for voicing support for WikiLeaks, Chelsea Manning, and Edward Snowden. Ellsberg was awarded the 2018 Olof Palme Prize for his &quot;profound humanism and exceptional moral courage&quot;.

==Early life and career==
Ellsberg was born in Chicago, Illinois, on April 7, 1931, the son of Harry and Adele (Charsky) Ellsberg. His parents were Ashkenazi Jews who had converted to Christian Science, and he was raised as a Christian Scientist. In 2008, Ellsberg told a journalist that his parents considered the family Jewish, &quot;but not in religion.&quot;

Ellsberg grew up in Detroit and attended the Cranbrook School in nearby Bloomfield Hills. His mother wanted him to be a concert pianist, but he stopped playing in July 1948, two years after both his mother and sister were killed when his father fell asleep at the wheel and crashed the family car into a bridge abutment.

Ellsberg entered Harvard College on a scholarship, graduating &quot;summa cum laude&quot; with an A.B. in economics in 1952. He studied at King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, for a year through funding from the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, initially for a diploma in economics and then changed his credits toward a PhD in the subject, before returning to Harvard. In 1954, he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps and earned a commission. He served as a platoon leader and company commander in the 2nd Marine Division, and was discharged in 1957 as a first lieutenant. Ellsberg returned to Harvard as a Junior Fellow in the Society of Fellows for two years.

==RAND Corporation and PhD==
Ellsberg began working as a strategic analyst at the RAND Corporation for the summer of 1958 and then permanently in 1959. He concentrated on nuclear strategy, working with leading strategists such as Herman Kahn and challenging the existing plans of the United States National Security Council and Strategic Air Command.

Ellsberg completed a PhD in economics from Harvard in 1962. His dissertation on decision theory was based on a set of thought experiments that showed that decisions under conditions of uncertainty or ambiguity generally may not be consistent with well-defined subjective probabilities. Now known as the Ellsberg paradox, it formed the basis of a large literature that has developed since the 1980s, including approaches such as Choquet expected utility and info-gap decision theory.

Ellsberg worked in the Pentagon from August 1964 under Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara as special assistant to Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs John McNaughton. He then went to South Vietnam for two years, working for General Edward Lansdale as a member of the State Department.

On his return from South Vietnam, Ellsberg resumed working at RAND. In 1967, he contributed with 33 other analysts to a top-secret 47-volume study of classified documents on the conduct of the Vietnam War, commissioned by Defense Secretary McNamara and supervised by Leslie H. Gelb and Morton Halperin. These 7,000 pages of documents, completed in late 1968 and presented to McNamara and Clark Clifford early in the following year, later became known collectively as the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;.

==Disaffection with Vietnam War==
By 1969, Ellsberg began attending anti-war events while still remaining in his position at RAND. In April 1968, Ellsberg attended a Princeton University conference on &quot;Revolution in a Changing World&quot;, where he met Gandhian peace activist Janaki Natarajan Tschannerl from India, who had a profound influence on him, and Eqbal Ahmed, a Pakistani fellow at the Adlai Stevenson Institute later to be indicted with Rev. Philip Berrigan for anti-war activism. Ellsberg particularly recalled Tschannerl saying &quot;In my world, there are no enemies&quot;, and that &quot;she gave me a vision, as a Gandhian, of a different way of living and resistance, of exercising power nonviolently.&quot;

Ellsberg experienced an epiphany attending a War Resisters International conference at Haverford College in August 1969, listening to a talk given by Randy Kehler, a draft resister, who said he was &quot;very excited&quot; that he would soon be able to join his friends in prison.
Decades later, Ellsberg described his reaction to hearing Kehler speak:

Reflecting on Kehler&#x27;s decision, Ellsberg added:

After leaving RAND, Ellsberg was employed as a senior research associate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology&#x27;s Center for International Studies from 1970 to 1972.

In a 2002 memoir, Ellsberg wrote about the Vietnam War, stating that:
It was no more a &quot;civil war&quot; after 1955 or 1960 than it had been during the U.S.–supported French attempt at colonial reconquest. A war in which one side was equipped and paid by a foreign powerwhich dictated the nature of the local regime in its own interestwas not a civil war. To say that we had &quot;interfered&quot; in what is &quot;really a civil war,&quot; as most American academic writers and even liberal critics of the war do to this day, simply screened a more painful reality and was as much a myth as the earlier official one of &quot;aggression from the North.&quot; In terms of the UN Charter and of our own avowed ideals, it was a war of foreign aggression, American aggression.
==The &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;==
In late 1969, with the assistance of his former RAND Corporation colleague Anthony Russo, Ellsberg secretly made several sets of photocopies of the classified documents to which he had access; these later became known as the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;. They revealed that, early on, the government had knowledge that the war as then resourced could most likely not be won. Further, as an editor of &quot;The New York Times&quot; was to write much later, these documents &quot;demonstrated, among other things, that the Johnson Administration had systematically lied, not only to the public but also to Congress, about a subject of transcendent national interest and significance&quot;.

Shortly after Ellsberg copied the documents, he resolved to meet some of the people who had influenced both his change of heart on the war and his decision to act. One of them was Randy Kehler. Another was the poet Gary Snyder, whom he had met in Kyoto in 1960, and with whom he had argued about U.S. foreign policy; Ellsberg was finally prepared to concede that Snyder had been right, about both the situation and the need for action against it.

===Release and publication===
Throughout 1970, Ellsberg covertly attempted to persuade a few sympathetic U.S. Senatorsamong them J. William Fulbright, chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and George McGovern, a leading opponent of the warto release the papers on the Senate floor, because a Senator could not be prosecuted for anything he said on the record before the Senate.

Ellsberg allowed some copies of the documents to circulate privately, including among scholars at the Institute for Policy Studies (IPS), Marcus Raskin and Ralph Stavins. Ellsberg also shared the documents with &quot;The New York Times&quot; correspondent and former Vietnam-era acquaintance Neil Sheehan, who wrote a story based on what he had received both directly from Ellsberg and from contacts at IPS. While Ellsberg had asked him to only take notes of the documents in his apartment, Sheehan defied Ellsberg&#x27;s wishes on March 2, by frantically copying them in various Boston-area shops while Ellsberg was vacationing in the West Indies. Sheehan then flew the copies to his home in Washington and then New York.

On Sunday, June 13, 1971, &quot;The New York Times&quot; published the first of nine excerpts from, and commentaries on, the 7,000-page collection. For 15 days, &quot;The New York Times&quot; was prevented from publishing its articles by court order requested by the Nixon administration. Meanwhile, while eluding an FBI manhunt for thirteen days, Ellsberg gave the documents to Ben Bagdikian, then-national editor of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and former RAND Corporation colleague, in a Boston-area motel. On June 30, the U.S. Supreme Court allowed the resumption of publication by &quot;The New York Times&quot; (&quot;New York Times Co. v. United States&quot;). Two days prior to the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision, Ellsberg publicly admitted his role in releasing the Pentagon Papers to the press, and surrendered to federal authorities at the U.S. Attorney&#x27;s office in Boston.

On June 29, 1971, U.S. Senator Mike Gravel of Alaska entered 4,100 pages of the Papers into the record of his Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Groundspages which he had received from Ellsberg via Ben Bagdikian on June 26.

===Fallout===
The release of these papers was politically embarrassing not only to those involved in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, but also to the incumbent Nixon administration. Nixon&#x27;s Oval Office tape from June 14, 1971, shows H. R. Haldeman describing the situation to Nixon:


John Mitchell, Nixon&#x27;s Attorney General, almost immediately issued a telegram to &quot;The New York Times&quot; ordering that it halt publication. &quot;The New York Times&quot; refused, and the government brought suit against it.

Although &quot;The New York Times&quot; eventually won the case before the Supreme Court, prior to that, an appellate court ordered that the &quot;New York Times&quot; temporarily halt further publication. This was the first time the federal government was able to restrain the publication of a major newspaper since the presidency of Abraham Lincoln during the U.S. Civil War. Ellsberg released the Pentagon Papers to seventeen other newspapers in rapid succession. The right of the press to publish the papers was upheld in &quot;New York Times Co. v. United States&quot;. The Supreme Court ruling has been called one of the &quot;modern pillars&quot; of First Amendment rights with respect to freedom of the press.

In response to the leaks, Nixon White House staffers began a campaign against further leaks and against Ellsberg personally. Aides Egil Krogh and David Young, under the supervision of John Ehrlichman, created the &quot;White House Plumbers&quot;, which would later lead to the Watergate burglaries. Richard Holbrooke, a friend of Ellsberg, came to see him as &quot;one of those accidental characters of history who show the pattern of a whole era&quot; and thought that he was the &quot;triggering mechanism for events which would link Vietnam and Watergate in one continuous 1961-to-1975 story.&quot;

==Fielding break-in==

In August 1971, Krogh and Young met with G. Gordon Liddy and E. Howard Hunt in a basement office in the Old Executive Office Building. Hunt and Liddy recommended a &quot;covert operation&quot; to get a &quot;mother lode&quot; of information about Ellsberg&#x27;s mental state to discredit him. Krogh and Young sent a memo to Ehrlichman seeking his approval for a &quot;covert operation [to] be undertaken to examine all of the medical files still held by Ellsberg&#x27;s psychiatrist&quot;, Lewis Fielding. Ehrlichman approved under the condition that it be &quot;done under your assurance that it is not traceable.&quot;

On September 3, 1971, the burglary of Fielding&#x27;s officetitled &quot;Hunt/Liddy Special Project No. 1&quot; in Ehrlichman&#x27;s noteswas carried out by White House Plumbers Hunt, Liddy, Eugenio Martínez, Felipe de Diego, and Bernard Barker (the latter three were, or had been, recruited CIA agents). The Plumbers found Ellsberg&#x27;s file, but it apparently did not contain the potentially embarrassing information they sought, as they left it discarded on the floor of Fielding&#x27;s office. Hunt and Liddy subsequently planned to break into Fielding&#x27;s home, but Ehrlichman did not approve the second burglary. The break-in was not known to Ellsberg or to the public until it came to light during Ellsberg&#x27;s and Russo&#x27;s trial in April 1973.

==Trial and dismissal==
On June 28, 1971, two days before a Supreme Court ruling saying that a federal judge had ruled incorrectly about the right of &quot;The New York Times&quot; to publish the Pentagon Papers, Ellsberg publicly surrendered to the United States Attorney&#x27;s Office for the District of Massachusetts in Boston. In admitting to giving the documents to the press, Ellsberg said:

He and Russo faced charges under the Espionage Act of 1917 and other charges including theft and conspiracy, carrying a total maximum sentence of 115 years for Ellsberg and 35 years for Russo. Their trial commenced in Los Angeles on January 3, 1973, presided over by U.S. District Judge William Matthew Byrne Jr. Ellsberg tried to claim that the documents were &quot;illegally&quot; classified to keep them not from an enemy, but from the American public. However, that argument was ruled &quot;irrelevant&quot;, and Ellsberg was silenced before he could begin. In a 2014 interview, Ellsberg stated that his &quot;lawyer, exasperated, said he &#x27;had never heard of a case where a defendant was not permitted to tell the jury why he did what he did.&#x27; The judge responded: &#x27;Well, you&#x27;re hearing one now&#x27;. And so it has been with every subsequent whistleblower under indictment&quot;.

In spite of being effectively denied a defense, Ellsberg began to see events turn in his favor when the break-in of Fielding&#x27;s office was revealed to Judge Byrne in a memo on April 26; Byrne ordered that it be shared with the defense.

On May 9, further evidence of illegal wiretapping against Ellsberg was revealed in court. The FBI had recorded numerous conversations between Morton Halperin and Ellsberg without a court order, and furthermore the prosecution had failed to share this evidence with the defense. During the trial, Byrne also revealed that he personally met twice with John Ehrlichman, who offered him directorship of the FBI. Byrne said he refused to consider the offer while the Ellsberg case was pending, though he was criticized for even agreeing to meet with Ehrlichman during the case.

Because of the gross governmental misconduct and illegal evidence gathering, and the defense by Leonard Boudin and Harvard Law School professor Charles Nesson, Judge Byrne dismissed all charges against Ellsberg and Russo on May 11, 1973, after the government claimed it had lost records of wiretapping against Ellsberg. Byrne ruled: &quot;The totality of the circumstances of this case which I have only briefly sketched offend a sense of justice. The bizarre events have incurably infected the prosecution of this case.&quot;

As a result of the revelations involving the Watergate scandal, John Ehrlichman, H. R. Haldeman, Richard Kleindienst, and John Dean were forced out of office on April 30, and all would later be convicted of crimes related to Watergate. Egil Krogh later pleaded guilty to conspiracy, and White House counsel Charles Colson pleaded no contest for obstruction of justice in the burglary.

===Halperin case===
It was also revealed in 1973, during Ellsberg&#x27;s trial, that the telephone calls of Morton Halperin, a member of the U.S. National Security Council staff suspected of leaking information about the secret U.S. bombing of Cambodia to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, were being recorded by the FBI at the request of Henry Kissinger to J. Edgar Hoover.

Halperin and his family sued several federal officials, claiming the wiretap violated their Fourth Amendment rights and Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. The court agreed that Richard Nixon, John Mitchell, and H. R. Haldeman had violated the Halperins&#x27; Fourth Amendment rights and awarded them $1 in nominal damages.

===Plumbers&#x27; Ellsberg neutralization proposal===
Ellsberg later claimed that after his trial ended, Watergate prosecutor William H. Merrill informed him of an aborted plot by Liddy and the &quot;Plumbers&quot; to have 12 Cuban Americans who had previously worked for the CIA &quot;totally incapacitate&quot; Ellsberg when he appeared at a public rally. It is unclear whether they were meant to assassinate Ellsberg or merely to hospitalize him. In his autobiography, Liddy describes an &quot;Ellsberg neutralization proposal&quot; originating from Howard Hunt, which involved drugging Ellsberg with LSD, by dissolving it in his soup, at a fund-raising dinner in Washington to &quot;have Ellsberg incoherent by the time he was to speak&quot; and thus &quot;make him appear a near burnt-out drug case&quot; and &quot;discredit him&quot;. The plot involved waiters from the Miami Cuban community. According to Liddy, when the plan was finally approved, &quot;there was no longer enough lead time to get the Cuban waiters up from their Miami hotels and into place in the Washington Hotel where the dinner was to take place&quot; and the plan was &quot;put into abeyance pending another opportunity.&quot;

==Activism and views==
Ellsberg&#x27;s first published book was &quot;Papers on the War&quot; (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1972). The book included a revised version of Ellsberg&#x27;s earlier award-winning &quot;The Quagmire Myth and the Stalemate Machine&quot;, originally published in &quot;Public Policy&quot;, and ends with &quot;The Responsibility of Officials in a Criminal War&quot;.

After the Vietnam War, Ellsberg continued his political activism, giving lecture tours and speaking out about current events. Reflecting on his time in government, Ellsberg said the following, based on his extensive access to classified material:

=== Release of classified documents proposing 1958 nuclear attack on China ===
On May 22, 2021, during the Biden administration, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported Ellsberg had released classified documents revealing the Pentagon in 1958 drew up plans to launch a nuclear attack on China amid tensions over the Taiwan Strait. According to the documents, US military leaders supported a first-use nuclear strike even though they believed China&#x27;s ally, the Soviet Union, would retaliate and millions of people would perish. Ellsberg told &quot;The New York Times&quot; he copied the classified documents about the Taiwan Strait crisis fifty years earlier when he copied the Pentagon Papers, but chose not to release the documents then. Instead, Ellsberg released the documents in the spring of 2021 because he said he was concerned about mounting tensions between the U.S. and China over the fate of Taiwan. He assumed the Pentagon was involved again in contingency planning for a nuclear strike on China should a military conflict with conventional weapons fail to deliver a decisive victory. &quot;I do not believe the participants were more stupid or thoughtless than those in between or in the current cabinet&quot;, said Ellsberg, who urged President Biden, Congress and the public to take notice.

In releasing the classified documents, Ellsberg offered himself as a defendant in a test case challenging the U.S. Justice Department&#x27;s use of the Espionage Act of 1917 to punish whistleblowers. Ellsberg noted the Act applies to everyone, not just spies, and prohibits a defendant from explaining the reasons for revealing classified information in the public interest.

===Anti-war activism===
In an interview with &quot;Democracy Now&quot; on May 18, 2018, Ellsberg was critical of U.S. intervention overseas especially in the Middle East, stating, &quot;I think, in Iraq, America has never faced up to the number of people who have died because of our invasion, our aggression against Iraq, and Afghanistan over the last 30 years, since we first inspired a CIA-sponsored jihad against the Soviets there, and led to the invasion by the Soviets. What we&#x27;ve done to the Middle East has been hell.&quot;

====Activism against US-led war against Iraq====

During the runup to the 2003 invasion of Iraq he warned of a possible &quot;Tonkin Gulf scenario&quot; that could be used to justify going to war, and called on government &quot;insiders&quot; to go public with information to counter the Bush administration&#x27;s pro-war propaganda campaign, praising Scott Ritter for his efforts in that regard. He later supported the whistleblowing efforts of British GCHQ translator Katharine Gun and called on others to leak any papers that reveal government deception about the invasion. Ellsberg also testified at the 2004 conscientious objector hearing of Camilo Mejia at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.

Ellsberg was arrested, in November 2005, for violating a county ordinance for trespassing while protesting against George W. Bush&#x27;s conduct of the Iraq War.

Ellsberg criticized the arrest of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who had exposed U.S. war crimes in Iraq.

====Activism against US military action against Iran====
In September 2006, Ellsberg wrote in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; that he hoped someone would leak information about a potential U.S. invasion of Iran before the invasion happened, to stop the war.
In a speech on March 30, 2008, in San Francisco&#x27;s Unitarian Universalist church, Ellsberg observed that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi does not have the authority to declare impeachment &quot;off the table&quot;, as she had done with respect to George W. Bush. The oath of office taken by members of congress requires them to &quot;defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic&quot;. He also pointed out that under Article VI of the U.S. Constitution, treaties, including the United Nations Charter and international labor rights accords that the United States has signed, become the supreme law of the land that neither the states, the president, nor the congress have the power to break. For example, if the Congress votes to authorize an unprovoked attack on a sovereign nation, that authorization would not make the attack legal. A president citing the authorization as just cause could be prosecuted in the International Criminal Court for war crimes.

====Russian invasion of Ukraine====
In April 2022, Ellsberg said that Russian President Vladimir Putin &quot;is a bad guy, very clearly. His aggression is murderous and as illegitimate as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Or the US invasion of Afghanistan or Iraq. Or Hitler&#x27;s invasion of Poland.&quot; He compared Putin&#x27;s nuclear threats to Richard Nixon&#x27;s self-proclaimed &quot;madman strategy&quot;. He expressed concern that global cooperation among major powers on climate change and nuclear arms reduction would be impossible.

In April 2022, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Ellsberg appeared on Al Jazeera&#x27;s &quot;Upfront&quot; and stated that major arms manufacturers, such as Boeing, Lockheed Martin or General Electric, were profiting from the war in Ukraine and from the Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen, saying that &quot;A failing war is just as profitable as a winning one,&quot; &quot;It&#x27;s the old Latin slogan, &quot;Cui Bono&quot;, who benefits?&quot;, &quot;We&#x27;re not after all a European nation and we have no particular role in the European Union. But in NATOthat&#x27;s as the Mafia says Cosa Nostra, our thingwe control NATO pretty much and NATO gives us an excuse and a reason to sell enormous amounts of arms to now to the formerly Warsaw Pact nations,&quot; and, &quot;Russia is an indispensable enemy.&quot; He said both the United States and Russia have their military-industrial complexes.

In June 2022, he said that &quot;The Russian invasion of Ukraine has made the world far more dangerous, not only in the short run, but in ways that may be irreversible. It is a tragic and criminal attack. We are seeing humanity at its almost worst, but not quite the worstso far, since 1945 we haven&#x27;t seen nuclear war.&quot;

===Support for American whistleblowers===
Ellsberg said that in regard to former FBI translator turned whistleblower Sibel Edmonds, what she has is &quot;far more explosive than the Pentagon Papers&quot;. He also participated in the National Security Whistleblowers Coalition founded by Edmonds, and in 2008, he condemned many U.S. media outlets for purportedly ignoring articles about Edmonds&#x27;s allegations regarding nuclear proliferation published in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;.

On December 9, 2010, Ellsberg appeared on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; where he commented that the existence of WikiLeaks helps to build a better government.

On March 21, 2011, Ellsberg, along with 35 other demonstrators, was arrested during a demonstration outside the Marine Corps Base Quantico, in protest of Chelsea Manning&#x27;s current detention at Marine Corps Brig, Quantico.

On June 10, 2013, Ellsberg published an editorial in &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper praising the actions of former Booz Allen worker Edward Snowden in revealing top-secret surveillance programs of the NSA. Ellsberg believed that the United States had fallen into an &quot;abyss&quot; of total tyranny, but said that because of Snowden&#x27;s revelations, &quot;I see the unexpected possibility of a way up and out of the abyss.&quot;

In June 2013, Ellsberg and numerous celebrities appeared in a video showing support for Chelsea Manning.

In June 2010, Ellsberg was interviewed regarding the parallels between his actions in releasing the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; and those of Manning, who was arrested by the U.S. military in Iraq after allegedly providing to WikiLeaks a classified video showing U.S. military helicopter gunships strafing and killing Iraqis alleged to be civilians. Ellsberg said that he fears for Manning and for Julian Assange, as he feared for himself after the initial publication of the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;. WikiLeaks initially said it had not received the cables, but did plan to post the video of an attack that killed 86 to 145 Afghan civilians in the village of Garani. Ellsberg expressed hope that either Assange or President Obama would post the video, and expressed his strong support for Assange and Manning, whom he called &quot;two new heroes of mine&quot;.

&quot;Democracy Now!&quot; devoted a substantial portion of its July 4, 2013, program to &quot;How the Pentagon Papers Came to be Published By the Beacon Press Told by Daniel Ellsberg &amp; Others.&quot; Ellsberg said there are hundreds of public officials right now who know that the public is being lied to about Iran. If they follow orders, they may become complicit in starting an unnecessary war. If they are faithful to their oath to protect the Constitution of the United States, they could prevent that war. Exposing official lies could however carry a heavy personal cost as they could be imprisoned for unlawful disclosure of classified information.

In 2012, Ellsberg co-founded the Freedom of the Press Foundation. In September 2015, Ellsberg and 27 members of the Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity steering group wrote a letter to the president challenging a recently published book that claimed to rebut the report of the United States Senate Intelligence Committee on the Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s use of torture.

In 2020, Ellsberg testified in defense of Assange during Assange&#x27;s extradition hearings. Ellsberg spoke out vociferously against the threats to press freedom from such whistleblower prosecution.

In a December 2022 interview with BBC News, Ellsberg said that he was given all of the Manning information before it came out in the press by Assange.

===Support for Occupy Movement===
On November 16, 2011, Ellsberg camped on the UC Berkeley Sproul Plaza as part of an effort to support the Occupy Cal movement.

===&quot;The Doomsday Machine&quot;===

In December 2017, Ellsberg published &quot;The Doomsday Machine: Confessions of a Nuclear War Planner&quot;. He said that his primary job from 1958 until releasing the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; in 1971 was as a nuclear war planner for United States presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon. He concluded that United States nuclear war policy was completely crazy and he could no longer live with himself without doing what he could to expose it, even if it meant he would spend the rest of his life in prison. However, he also felt that as long as the U.S. was still involved in the Vietnam War, the United States electorate would not likely listen to a discussion of nuclear war policy. He therefore copied two sets of documents, planning to release first the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot; and later documentation of nuclear war plans. However, the nuclear planning materials were hidden in a landfill and then lost because of the tropical storm Doria.

His overriding concerns were as follows: 
# As long as the world maintains large nuclear arsenals, it is not a matter of if, but when, a nuclear war will occur. 
# The vast majority of the population of an initiator state would likely starve to death during a &quot;nuclear autumn&quot; or &quot;nuclear winter&quot; if they did not die earlier from retaliation or fallout. If the nuclear war dropped only roughly 100 nuclear weapons on cities, as in a war between India and Pakistan, the effect would be similar to the &quot;Year Without a Summer&quot; that followed the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora, except that it would last more like a decade, because soot would not settle out of the stratosphere as quickly as the volcanic debris, and roughly a third of the people worldwide not killed by the nuclear exchange would starve to death, because of the resulting crop failures. However, if more than roughly 2 percent of the U.S. nuclear arsenal were used, the results would more likely be a nuclear winter, leading to the deaths from starvation of 98 percent of people worldwide not killed by the nuclear exchange. 
# To preserve the ability of a nuclear-weapon state to retaliate from a &quot;decapitation&quot; attack, every country with nuclear weapons seems to have delegated broadly the authority to respond to an apparent nuclear attack.

As an example of the third concern, Ellsberg discussed an interview he had in 1958 with a major, who commanded a squadron of 12 F-100 fighter-bombers at Kunsan Air Base, South Korea. His aircraft were equipped with Mark 28 thermonuclear weapons with a yield of 1.1 megatons each, roughly half the explosive power of all the bombs dropped by the U.S. in World War II both in Europe and the Pacific. The major said his official orders were to wait for orders from his superiors in Osan Air Base, South Korea, or in Japan before ordering his F-100s into the air. However, the major also said that standard military doctrine required him to protect his forces. That meant that if he had reason to believe that a war had already begun when his communications with Osan and Japan were broken, he was required to launch his dozen F-100s with their thermonuclear weapons. They never practiced that launch, because the risk of an accident was too great. Ellsberg then asked what might happen if he gave such launch orders and the sixth plane succumbed to a thermonuclear accident on the runway. After some thought, the major agreed that the five planes already in the air would likely conclude that a nuclear war had begun, and they would likely deliver their warheads to their preassigned targets.

According to Ellsberg the &quot;nuclear football&quot; carried by an aide near the U.S. president at all times is primarily a piece of political theater, a hoax, to keep the public ignorant of the real problems of nuclear command and control.

In Russia, this included a semi-automatic &quot;Dead Hand&quot; system, whereby a nuclear explosion in Moscow, whether accidental or by a foreign state or terrorists, would induce low-level officers to launch ICBMs toward targets in the U.S., presumed to be the origin of such attacks. The first ICBMs launched in this way &quot;would beep a Go signal to any ICBM sites they passed over&quot;, which would launch those other ICBMs without further human intervention.

==== Nuclear threats by the United States ====
Ellsberg wrote in his 1981 essay &quot;Call to Mutiny&quot; that, &quot;every president from Truman to Reagan, with the possible exception of Ford, has felt compelled to consider or direct serious preparations for possible imminent U.S. initiation of tactical or strategic nuclear warfare&quot;. Some of these threats were implicit; many were explicit. Many governmental officials and authors claimed that those threats made major contributions to achieving important policy objectives. Ellsberg&#x27;s examples are summarized in the following table:

==Ellsberg Papers==
The University of Massachusetts Amherst acquired Ellsberg&#x27;s papers.

==Personal life and death==

Ellsberg was married twice. His first marriage was in 1952 to Carol Cummings, a graduate of Radcliffe (now Harvard College) whose father was a Marine Corps brigadier general. It lasted 13 years before ending in divorce (at her request, as he stated in his memoir &quot;Secrets&quot;). They have two children, Robert Ellsberg and Mary Ellsberg. In 1970, he married Patricia Marx, daughter of toy maker Louis Marx. They lived for some time afterward in Mill Valley, California. They have a son, Michael Ellsberg, who is an author and journalist.

In February 2023, Ellsberg was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and given three to six months to live; he publicly disclosed his diagnosis the following month. Ellsberg died at his home in Kensington, California, on June 16, 2023, at the age of 92.

==Awards and honors==
Ellsberg was the recipient of the inaugural Ron Ridenhour Courage Prize, a prize established in 2004 by The Nation Institute and the Fertel Foundation. In 1978, he accepted the Gandhi Peace Award from Promoting Enduring Peace. On September 28, 2006, he was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for &quot;putting peace and truth first, at considerable personal risk, and dedicating his life to inspiring others to follow his example&quot;. He received the Dresden Peace Prize in 2016. He received the 2018 Olof Palme Prize and the 2022 Sam Adams Award.

==Works==
* 
* 

==Films==
* &quot;The Pentagon Papers&quot; (2003) is a historical film directed by Rod Holcomb about the Pentagon Papers and Ellsberg&#x27;s involvement in their publication. The movie, in which he is portrayed by James Spader, documents Ellsberg&#x27;s life, starting with his work for RAND Corp and ending with the day on which the judge declared his espionage trial a mistrial.
* &quot;The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers&quot; (2009) a feature-length documentary by Judith Ehrlich and Rick Goldsmith traced the decision-making processes by which Ellsberg came to leak the Pentagon Papers to the press, &quot;The New York Times&quot; decision to publish, the fallout in the media after publication, and the Nixon Administration&#x27;s legal and extra-legal campaign to discredit and incarcerate Ellsberg. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature and won a Peabody Award after its 2010 POV broadcast on PBS.
* &quot;Hearts and Minds&quot;, a 1974 Academy Award winning documentary film about the Vietnam War with extensive interviews with Ellsberg.
* &quot;The Post&quot; is a 2017 historical drama film directed and co-produced by Steven Spielberg from a script written by Liz Hannah and Josh Singer about &quot;The Washington Post&quot;&#x27;s battle with the federal government over its right to publish the Pentagon Papers. In the movie, Ellsberg is portrayed by Matthew Rhys. The film also stars Tom Hanks as Ben Bradlee and Meryl Streep as Katharine Graham.
* &quot;The Boys Who Said NO!&quot;, a 2020 documentary film about the draft resistance movement during the Vietnam War, including interviews with Ellsberg where he talks about the impact resisters had on his decision to risk life in prison for releasing the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;. Directed by Oscar-nominated filmmaker Judith Ehrlich.
* &quot;The Movement and the &#x27;Madman&#x27;, a 2023 PBS &quot;American Experience&quot; documentary film reports how two enormous antiwar protests in the fall of 1969 pressured President Nixon to cancel his secret &quot;madman&quot; plans for a major escalation of the war in Vietnam, including threats to use nuclear weapons. The film was directed and produced by Stephen Talbot and features a key interview with Ellsberg.
* “Turning Point: The Bomb and The Cold War” Episode 3, Netflix: “With firsthand accounts and access to prominent figures around the world, this comprehensive docuseries explores the Cold War and its aftermath. Episode 3 includes an inspiring, recent interview with Ellsberg and his self-sacrificing choice to release information to the public that would enlighten the world’s understanding of Nuclear Weapons forever and hopefully eventually put an end to the insane development of real life “Doomsday Machines” that still threaten the existence of civilization.

==See also==

* Jack Anderson
* Thomas Andrews Drake
* List of peace activists
* Tran Ngoc Chau
* Reality Winner

==References==
==Further reading==
===Pentagon Papers editions===
* Official name of the Pentagon Papers: &quot;History of United States Decision-Making Process on Vietnam Policy, 1945–1967&quot;.
* &quot;The Pentagon Papers as published by the New York Times&quot;. New York: Bantam Books, 1971.
* &quot;United States-Vietnam Relations 1945–67, Department of Defense Study&quot;, 12 vols., Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1971. This is the official and complete edition of the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;, published by the Government after the release by the press

===Other===
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* The Daniel Ellsberg Papers at the UMass Amherst Libraries
* 
* The Pentagon Papers
* Espionage Act 1917 
* The Truth-Telling Project – Project formed by Ellsberg for whistleblowers
* 2006 Right Livelihood Award Recipient Daniel Ellsberg 
* Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="0" end="15" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="96" end="118" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="150" end="166" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="252" end="267" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="288" end="296" title="The Pentagon" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="306" end="321" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="357" end="368" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="379" end="397" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="411" end="430" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="509" end="530" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="754" end="771" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525142" start="793" end="807" title="Leonard Boudin" label="Leonard Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065629" start="841" end="855" title="Charles Nesson" label="Charles Nesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14597161" start="863" end="888" title="William Matthew Byrne Jr." label="William Matthew Byrne Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q152770" start="967" end="989" title="Right Livelihood Award" label="Right Livelihood Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="1063" end="1078" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332562" start="1084" end="1100" title="Ellsberg paradox" label="Ellsberg paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1131" end="1145" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q578399" start="1151" end="1165" title="Nuclear weapons of the United States" label="nuclear policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="1195" end="1204" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q298423" start="1206" end="1221" title="Chelsea Manning" label="Chelsea Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="1227" end="1241" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324648" start="1273" end="1289" title="Olof Palme Prize" label="Olof Palme Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="1508" end="1522" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="1544" end="1561" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181958" start="1769" end="1785" title="Cranbrook Schools" label="Cranbrook School"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="1796" end="1812" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1844" end="1859" title="Pianist#Classical pianists" label="concert pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452175" start="2035" end="2043" title="abutment" label="abutment"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="2063" end="2078" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2129" title="Latin honors#Distinctions" label="summa cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2144" end="2148" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="2185" end="2215" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033214" start="2253" end="2298" title="The Institute for Citizens &amp;amp; Scholars" label="Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2452" end="2478" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q210606" start="2563" end="2582" title="2nd Marine Division" label="2nd Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="2616" end="2632" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676568" start="2689" end="2707" title="Harvard Society of Fellows" label="Society of Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="2806" end="2822" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="2895" end="2911" title="nuclear strategy" label="nuclear strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q267605" start="2954" end="2965" title="Herman Kahn" label="Herman Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="3008" end="3047" title="United States National Security Council" label="United States National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="3052" end="3073" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="3156" end="3171" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="3261" end="3272" title="uncertainty" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="3276" end="3285" title="ambiguity" label="ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332562" start="3379" end="3395" title="Ellsberg paradox" label="Ellsberg paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104911" start="3504" end="3528" title="Choquet expected utility" label="Choquet expected utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030341" start="3533" end="3557" title="info-gap decision theory" label="info-gap decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="3579" end="3591" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="3615" end="3635" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="3636" end="3651" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248212" start="3742" end="3757" title="John McNaughton (government official)" label="John McNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3775" end="3788" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q558992" start="3824" end="3839" title="Edward Lansdale" label="Edward Lansdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="3859" end="3875" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="4028" end="4038" title="Classified information" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236702" start="4145" end="4159" title="Leslie H. Gelb" label="Leslie H. Gelb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914873" start="4164" end="4179" title="Morton Halperin" label="Morton Halperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q386798" start="4266" end="4280" title="Clark Clifford" label="Clark Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="4447" end="4455" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="4545" end="4565" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="4637" end="4645" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Gandhian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4661" end="4688" title="Janaki Natarajan Tschannerl" label="Janaki Natarajan Tschannerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051951" start="4742" end="4753" title="Eqbal Ahmed" label="Eqbal Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934260" start="4838" end="4853" title="Philip Berrigan" label="Philip Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312056" start="5135" end="5143" title="epiphany (feeling)" label="epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890441" start="5156" end="5183" title="War Resisters International" label="War Resisters International"/>
<link wikidata="Q579611" start="5198" end="5215" title="Haverford College" label="Haverford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292275" start="5261" end="5273" title="Randy Kehler" label="Randy Kehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="5277" end="5291" title="draft resister" label="draft resister"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5600" end="5637" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="6377" end="6387" title="Charter of the United Nations" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773397" start="6586" end="6599" title="Anthony Russo (whistleblower)" label="Anthony Russo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7031" end="7053" title="Lyndon B. Johnson#Presidency (1963–1969)" label="Johnson Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7114" end="7122" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q315963" start="7414" end="7425" title="Gary Snyder" label="Gary Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7752" end="7765" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q550255" start="7776" end="7796" title="J. William Fulbright" label="J. William Fulbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="7811" end="7845" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="7851" end="7866" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152799" start="8139" end="8167" title="Institute for Policy Studies" label="Institute for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758404" start="8175" end="8188" title="Marcus Raskin" label="Marcus Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8193" end="8206" title="Ralph Stavins" label="Ralph Stavins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238740" start="8329" end="8341" title="Neil Sheehan" label="Neil Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8793" end="8811" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="9028" end="9048" title="Nixon administration" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9078" end="9081" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4074761" start="9140" end="9153" title="Ben Bagdikian" label="Ben Bagdikian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="9185" end="9204" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="9290" end="9308" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="9388" end="9423" title="New York Times Co. v. United States" label="New York Times Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="9685" end="9696" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="9986" end="9993" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="9998" end="10005" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="10084" end="10100" title="Watergate tapes" label="Oval Office tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="10127" end="10141" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="10179" end="10192" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="10207" end="10223" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="10491" end="10504" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="10524" end="10539" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="10751" end="10766" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="10778" end="10792" title="U.S. Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="10948" end="10983" title="New York Times Co. v. United States" label="New York Times Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="11073" end="11088" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347992" start="11266" end="11276" title="Egil Krogh" label="Egil Krogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241371" start="11281" end="11292" title="David Young (Watergate)" label="David Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699957" start="11319" end="11334" title="John Ehrlichman" label="John Ehrlichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994906" start="11354" end="11374" title="White House Plumbers" label="White House Plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155649" start="11434" end="11451" title="Richard Holbrooke" label="Richard Holbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="11683" end="11692" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952688" start="11802" end="11817" title="G. Gordon Liddy" label="G. Gordon Liddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q712791" start="11822" end="11836" title="E. Howard Hunt" label="E. Howard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312965" start="11865" end="11894" title="Old Executive Office Building" label="Old Executive Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994906" start="12541" end="12561" title="White House Plumbers" label="White House Plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373316" start="12575" end="12591" title="Eugenio Martínez" label="Eugenio Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q822284" start="12614" end="12628" title="Bernard Barker" label="Bernard Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889776" start="13399" end="13469" title="United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts" label="United States Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office for the District of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="13473" end="13479" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="13585" end="13606" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q14597161" start="13835" end="13860" title="William Matthew Byrne Jr." label="William Matthew Byrne Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="14733" end="14744" title="wiretapping" label="wiretapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="14789" end="14792" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914873" start="14837" end="14852" title="Morton Halperin" label="Morton Halperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="14876" end="14887" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525142" start="15365" end="15379" title="Leonard Boudin" label="Leonard Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="15384" end="15402" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065629" start="15413" end="15427" title="Charles Nesson" label="Charles Nesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699957" start="15861" end="15876" title="John Ehrlichman" label="John Ehrlichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="15878" end="15892" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q521427" start="15894" end="15913" title="Richard Kleindienst" label="Richard Kleindienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630448" start="15919" end="15928" title="John Dean" label="John Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="16022" end="16031" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347992" start="16033" end="16043" title="Egil Krogh" label="Egil Krogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296423" start="16084" end="16103" title="White House counsel" label="White House counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q451808" start="16104" end="16118" title="Charles Colson" label="Charles Colson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914873" start="16291" end="16306" title="Morton Halperin" label="Morton Halperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="16324" end="16354" title="U.S. National Security Council" label="U.S. National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054184" start="16427" end="16435" title="Khmer Republic" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="16520" end="16535" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="16539" end="16554" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="16649" end="16665" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352077" start="16694" end="16744" title="Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968" label="Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17041" end="17059" title="William H. Merrill" label="William H. Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994906" start="17115" end="17123" title="White House Plumbers" label="Plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="17141" end="17155" title="Cuban American" label="Cuban American"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="17191" end="17194" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="17519" end="17522" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192088" start="17791" end="17802" title="Cuban migration to Miami" label="Miami Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="18227" end="18245" title="Simon and Schuster" label="Simon and Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="18872" end="18892" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="19081" end="19094" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q700442" start="19387" end="19407" title="Taiwan Strait crisis of 1958" label="Taiwan Strait crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="19673" end="19679" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="20229" end="20250" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="20504" end="20517" title="Democracy Now" label="Democracy Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="20733" end="20745" title="United States invasion of Iraq" label="our invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="20842" end="20855" title="Operation Cyclone" label="CIA-sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="20856" end="20861" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="20904" end="20927" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="invasion by the Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="21065" end="21086" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q482402" start="21117" end="21137" title="Gulf of Tonkin incident" label="Tonkin Gulf scenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="21279" end="21305" title="George W. Bush administration" label="Bush administration&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805604" start="21306" end="21333" title="Public relations preparations for 2003 invasion of Iraq" label="pro-war propaganda campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q713752" start="21344" end="21356" title="Scott Ritter" label="Scott Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="21446" end="21450" title="Government Communications Headquarters" label="GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376196" start="21462" end="21475" title="Katharine Gun" label="Katharine Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="21605" end="21627" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292177" start="21639" end="21651" title="Camilo Mejia" label="Camilo Mejia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="21655" end="21674" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="21792" end="21806" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="21829" end="21837" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="21874" end="21883" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q360" start="21892" end="21906" title="Julian Assange" label="Julian Assange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="22050" end="22072" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="22266" end="22288" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="22320" end="22333" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="House Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="22334" end="22346" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="22386" end="22397" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48436" start="22669" end="22679" title="Article Six of the United States Constitution" label="Article VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="22687" end="22704" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="22730" end="22752" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="23166" end="23194" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="23199" end="23208" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="23300" end="23314" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="23404" end="23434" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="23443" end="23469" title="US invasion of Afghanistan" label="US invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="23473" end="23477" title="U.S. Invasion of Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="23482" end="23488" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="23496" end="23514" title="German Invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113897588" start="23547" end="23562" title="Nuclear threats during the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="nuclear threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="23566" end="23579" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q493127" start="23609" end="23624" title="Madman theory" label="madman strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="23699" end="23713" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="23718" end="23740" title="Nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear arms reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="23789" end="23816" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296040" start="23839" end="23849" title="Al Jazeera English" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="23899" end="23917" title="Arms industry" label="arms manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="23927" end="23933" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="23935" end="23950" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="23954" end="23970" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23977" end="24010" title="War profiteering#War in Ukraine" label="profiting from the war in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="24024" end="24063" title="Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen" label="Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="24311" end="24325" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="24334" end="24338" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="24357" end="24362" title="Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="24368" end="24379" title="Cosa Nostra" label="Cosa Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="24515" end="24526" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="24646" end="24675" title="Military–industrial complex" label="military-industrial complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="24990" end="25001" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q536712" start="25127" end="25140" title="Sibel Edmonds" label="Sibel Edmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978376" start="25243" end="25285" title="National Security Whistleblowers Coalition" label="National Security Whistleblowers Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="25433" end="25454" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="25474" end="25490" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="25547" end="25565" title="The Colbert Report" label="The Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="25613" end="25622" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="25772" end="25798" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Marine Corps Base Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q298423" start="25814" end="25829" title="Chelsea Manning" label="Chelsea Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764080" start="25858" end="25885" title="Marine Corps Brig, Quantico" label="Marine Corps Brig, Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25947" end="25959" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q893221" start="26007" end="26017" title="Booz Allen Hamilton" label="Booz Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="26025" end="26039" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="26093" end="26096" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="26658" end="26667" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788040" start="26695" end="26756" title="July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike" label="U.S. military helicopter gunships strafing and killing Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136783" start="27031" end="27076" title="Garani airstrike" label="attack that killed 86 to 145 Afghan civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="27304" end="27318" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="27750" end="27783" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500827" start="27992" end="28023" title="Freedom of the Press Foundation" label="Freedom of the Press Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923572" start="28075" end="28120" title="Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity" label="Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q502239" start="28246" end="28289" title="United States Senate Intelligence Committee" label="United States Senate Intelligence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="28297" end="28324" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="28584" end="28592" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="28781" end="28792" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581354" start="28793" end="28805" title="Sproul Plaza" label="Sproul Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075839" start="28842" end="28852" title="Occupy Cal" label="Occupy Cal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="29078" end="29093" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="29117" end="29128" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="29166" end="29176" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="29178" end="29185" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="29187" end="29194" title="Lyndon Baines Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="29200" end="29205" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="29808" end="29816" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382012" start="29846" end="29866" title="Tropical Storm Doria" label="tropical storm Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921" start="30165" end="30179" title="nuclear winter" label="nuclear winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119132" start="30322" end="30352" title="war between India and Pakistan" label="war between India and Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="30395" end="30416" title="Year Without a Summer" label="Year Without a Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591483" start="30441" end="30471" title="1815 eruption of Mount Tambora" label="1815 eruption of Mount Tambora"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="30560" end="30572" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921" start="30864" end="30878" title="nuclear winter" label="nuclear winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="31020" end="31040" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear-weapon state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344887" start="31061" end="31092" title="Decapitation strike" label="&amp;quot;decapitation&amp;quot; attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="31346" end="31351" title="North American F-100 Super Sabre" label="F-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966282" start="31371" end="31386" title="Kunsan Air Base" label="Kunsan Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q795277" start="31433" end="31440" title="B28 nuclear bomb" label="Mark 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="31441" end="31462" title="thermonuclear weapons" label="thermonuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="31483" end="31491" title="TNT equivalent" label="megatons"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31571" end="31583" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q492965" start="31697" end="31710" title="Osan Air Base" label="Osan Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="32469" end="32476" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535056" start="32541" end="32557" title="nuclear football" label="nuclear football"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960575" start="32644" end="32661" title="Political drama" label="political theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q907393" start="32801" end="32810" title="Dead Hand" label="Dead Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="32962" end="32966" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="33844" end="33879" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49124" start="34035" end="34044" title="Radcliffe College" label="Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="34050" end="34065" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344048" start="34252" end="34267" title="Robert Ellsberg" label="Robert Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61892444" start="34272" end="34285" title="Mary Ellsberg" label="Mary Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687785" start="34344" end="34354" title="Louis Marx" label="Louis Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q846413" start="34394" end="34417" title="Mill Valley, California" label="Mill Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830111" start="34436" end="34452" title="Michael Ellsberg" label="Michael Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="34534" end="34551" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296036" start="34677" end="34699" title="Kensington, California" label="Kensington, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413859" start="34804" end="34831" title="The Ridenhour Prizes" label="Ron Ridenhour Courage Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085785" start="34864" end="34884" title="The Nation Institute" label="The Nation Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382981" start="34893" end="34910" title="Fertel Foundation" label="Fertel Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404636" start="34937" end="34955" title="Gandhi Peace Award" label="Gandhi Peace Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249871" start="34961" end="34985" title="Promoting Enduring Peace" label="Promoting Enduring Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q152770" start="35029" end="35051" title="Right Livelihood Award" label="Right Livelihood Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324648" start="35263" end="35279" title="Olof Palme Prize" label="Olof Palme Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407078" start="35293" end="35308" title="Sam Adams Award" label="Sam Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759002" start="35346" end="35365" title="Pentagon Papers (Film)" label="The Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="35384" end="35399" title="Historical drama film" label="historical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394578" start="35412" end="35423" title="Rod Holcomb" label="Rod Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q296928" start="35543" end="35555" title="James Spader" label="James Spader"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35718" end="35792" title="The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers" label="The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115232" start="35838" end="35852" title="Judith Ehrlich" label="Judith Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280602" start="36312" end="36340" title="Hearts and Minds (film)" label="&amp;quot;Hearts and Minds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30203425" start="36459" end="36467" title="The Post (film)" label="The Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="36534" end="36550" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42099156" start="36576" end="36586" title="Liz Hannah" label="Liz Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289383" start="36591" end="36602" title="Josh Singer" label="Josh Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="36615" end="36634" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q342784" start="36769" end="36781" title="Matthew Rhys" label="Matthew Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="36803" end="36812" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q706007" start="36816" end="36827" title="Ben Bradlee" label="Ben Bradlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="36832" end="36844" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q435203" start="36848" end="36864" title="Katharine Graham" label="Katharine Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115232" start="36868" end="36901" title="The Boys Who Said NO! (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Boys Who Said NO!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q116730056" start="37216" end="37255" title="American Experience (season 35)" label="The Movement and the &amp;#x27;Madman&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="37274" end="37293" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q142567" start="38217" end="38230" title="Jack Anderson (columnist)" label="Jack Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422025" start="38233" end="38253" title="Thomas Andrews Drake" label="Thomas Andrews Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="38256" end="38279" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034981" start="38282" end="38296" title="Tran Ngoc Chau" label="Tran Ngoc Chau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30145314" start="38299" end="38313" title="Reality Winner" label="Reality Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="39106" end="39119" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80129" wikidata="Q312997" url="?curid=80129" title="Felix Yusupov">
<text>Knyaz Felix Felixovich Yusupov, Count Sumarokov-Elston (; – 27 September 1967) was a Russian aristocrat from the House of Yusupov who is best known for participating in the assassination of Grigori Rasputin and for marrying Princess Irina Alexandrovna, a niece of Emperor Nicholas II.

==Early life==
He was born in the Moika Palace in Saint Petersburg, the capital of the Russian Empire. His father was Count Felix Felixovich Sumarokov-Elston, the son of Count Felix Nikolaievich Sumarokov-Elston. Zinaida Yusupova, his mother, was the last of the Yusupov line, of Tatar origin, and very wealthy. For the Yusupov name not to die out, his father (1856, Saint Petersburg – 1928, Rome, Italy) was granted the title and the surname of his wife, Princess Zinaida Yusupova, on 11 June 1885, a year after their marriage, but effective after the death of his father-in-law in 1891.

The Yusupov family, one of the richest families in Imperial Russia, had acquired their wealth generations earlier. It included four palaces in Saint Petersburg, three palaces in Moscow, 37 estates in different parts of Russia, in the Crimea (at Koreiz, Kökköz and Balaklava), coal and iron-ore mines, plants and factories, flour mills and oil fields on the Caspian Sea. His father served between 1886 and 1904 as an adjutant to Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich the General-Governor of Moscow (with the support of Grand Duke Nikolas Nikolaevich).

Felix led a flamboyant life. As a young man, he cross-dressed, which he later recalled to get into cabarets, which denied entrance to those in school uniforms. His brother&#x27;s mistress Polya had helped him out by giving him her clothes which were a perfect fit. He had ceased doing that one night when he impersonated a singer at a club when a member of the audience spotted the family jewelry. Yusupov made a quick exit by smashing a champagne bottle over the nightclub&#x27;s power box to cause a temporary blackout and ran off into the winter&#x27;s night. From 1909 to 1913, he studied Forestry and later English at University College, Oxford, where he was a member of the Bullingdon Club, and established the Oxford Russian Club. Yusupov was living on 14 King Edward Street, had a Russian cook, a French driver, an English valet, and a housekeeper, and spent much of his time partying. He owned three horses, a macaw, and a bulldog called Punch. He smoked hashish, danced the tango, and became friendly with Luigi Franchetti, a piano player, and Jacques de Beistegui, who both moved in. At some time, Yusupov became acquainted with Albert Stopford and Oswald Rayner, a classmate. He rented an apartment in Curzon Street, Mayfair, and met several times with the ballerina Anna Pavlova, who lived in Hampstead.

==Marriage==
The engagement took place in the fall of 1913 in the Yusupov Palace in Koreiz. He married Princess Irina of Russia, the tsar&#x27;s only biological niece, in the Anichkov Palace in St. Petersburg on 22 February 1914. The bride wore a veil that had belonged to Marie Antoinette. The Yusupovs went on honeymoon to the Crimea, Italy, Egypt, Jerusalem, London, and Bad Kissingen in Germany, where his parents were staying.

==World War I==
When World War I broke out in August 1914, both he and his wife were briefly detained in Berlin. Irina asked her relative, Crown Princess Cecilie of Prussia, to intervene with Kaiser Wilhelm II. The Kaiser refused to permit the Yusupov family to leave but offered them a choice of three country estates to live in for the duration of the war. Felix&#x27;s father appealed to the Spanish ambassador in Germany and won permission for them to return to Russia via neutral Denmark to the Grand Duchy of Finland and from there to Saint Petersburg.

The Yusupovs&#x27; only daughter, Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova, nicknamed Bébé, was born on 21 March 1915. She was largely raised by her paternal grandparents until she was nine. Felix and Irina, raised mainly by nannies themselves, were ill-suited to take on the day-to-day burdens of child-rearing. Bébé adored her father but had a more distant relationship with her mother.

After the death of his brother Nicholas in a duel in 1908, Felix was the heir to an immense fortune. Consulting with family members about how best to administer the money and property, he decided to devote time and money to charitable activities and converted a wing/floor of the Liteyny House into a hospital for wounded soldiers.

Felix was able to avoid entering military service himself by taking advantage of a law exempting only sons from serving. Irina&#x27;s first cousin, Grand Duchess Olga, to whom she had been close when they were children, was disdainful of Felix: &quot;Felix is a &#x27;downright civilian,&#x27; dressed all in brown, walked to and fro about the room, searching in some bookcases with magazines and virtually doing nothing; an utterly unpleasant impression he makes – a man idling in such times,&quot; Olga wrote to Nicholas on 5 March 1915 after paying a visit to the Yusupovs.

&quot;Yusupov&#x27;s plan, as he described it in his book, was to seek closer acquaintance with the healer Grigori Rasputin, and win his confidence. He asked Rasputin to cure a slight malady from which he suffered.&quot; These sessions stopped early January 1915 when, according to Maurice Paléologue, the most absurd stories were spread about Alexandra Feodorovna being the Starets&#x27; lover, Rasputin was also accused of espionage for Imperial Germany, and the tsarina was called nothing but &quot;the German woman&quot; (her birth nationality). The men did not meet again for almost two years. In February 1916 Felix began studies at the elite Page Corps military academy and tried joining an Imperial Russian Army regiment in August.

The heavy losses by the Russian military gave rise to a lot of rumors that Yusupov’s family was involved in misprision of treason, according to Alexander Spiridovich:
On 19 June 1915, after anti-German pogroms in Moscow, he was dismissed from the post of chief of the Moscow Military District, and on September 3, 1915 from the post of commander-in-chief over Moscow.

==Assassination of Grigori Rasputin==
Early November 1916, Felix Yusupov approached the lawyer Vasily Maklakov for advice. Yusopov then asked Sergei Mikhailovich Sukhotin, a Preobrazhensky Regiment officer recovering from war injuries, who was also a friend of his mother. Grand Duke Dmitri welcomed Yusupov&#x27;s suggestion as an indication that killing Rasputin would not be a demonstration against the [Romanov] dynasty. On 20 November, Felix visited Vladimir Purishkevich, who had delivered an angry anti-Rasputin speech in the Duma on the day before, and who quickly agreed to participate in the assassination.

On the night of 29/30 December (NS) 1916, Felix, Dmitri, Vladimir Purishkevich, assistant Stanislas de Lazovert, and Sukhotin killed Rasputin in the Moika Palace under the pretense of a housewarming party. A major reconstruction of the palace had almost been finished, with a small room in the basement carefully furnished. Perhaps some women were invited but Yusupov did not mention their names; Radzinsky suggested Dimitri&#x27;s step-sister Marianne Pistohlkors and film star Vera Karalli. Smith came up with Princess Olga Paley and Anna von Drenteln. Somewhere in the building were a major-domo and a valet, waiting for orders.

According to both Yusupov and Purishkevich, a gramophone in the study played interminably the Yankee Doodle when Rasputin came in. Yusupov mentions in his unreliable memoirs, that he then offered Rasputin tea and petit fours laced with a large amount of potassium cyanide. According to the diplomat, Maurice Paléologue—who in later years rewrote his diary—they discussed spirituality and occultism; the antique dealer Albert Stopford wrote that politics was the issue. After an hour or so, Rasputin was fairly drunk. Still waiting for Rasputin to collapse, Yusupov became anxious that Rasputin might live until the morning, leaving the conspirators no time to conceal his body. Yusupov went upstairs came back with a revolver.

Rasputin was hit at close range by a bullet that entered his left chest and penetrated the stomach and the liver. The wounds were serious, and Rasputin would have died in 10–20 min, but he succeeded in escaping outside. A second bullet from a distance with a firearm lodged into his spine after penetrating the right kidney. Rasputin fell into the snow-clad courtyard and his body was taken inside. It is not clear whether or not Yusupov beat Rasputin with a sort of dumbbell. It is also not clear if it was Purishkevich who shot him point-blank into the forehead. A curious policeman on duty on the other side of the Moika had heard the shots, rang at the door, and was sent away. Half an hour later, another policeman arrived, and Purishkevich invited him into the palace. Purishkevich told him that he had shot Rasputin and asked him to keep it quiet for the sake of the tsar. The conspirators finally threw the corpse from Bolshoy Petrovsky Bridge into an ice hole in the Little Nevka.

On the empress&#x27;s orders, a police investigation commenced and traces of blood were discovered on the steps to the back door of the Yusupov Palace. Prince Felix attempted to explain the blood with a story that one of his favorite dogs was shot accidentally by Grand Duke Dmitri. Yusupov and Dmitri were placed under house arrest in the Sergei Palace. (The upper levels of the palace were occupied by the British embassy and the Anglo-Russian Hospital.)

Empress Alexandra had refused to meet the two but said that they could explain what had happened in a letter to her. She wanted both shot immediately, but she was persuaded to back off from the idea. Without a trial, the tsar ordered the Grand Duke Dmitri to active service on the Persian front; Purishkevich was already on his way to the Romanian Front. The last Tsar also sentenced Yusupov to house arrest upon his estate in Rakitnoye.
Yusupov published several accounts of the night and the events surrounding the murder. Recent historians have cast considerable doubt, however, upon Prince Yusupov&#x27;s account (see Grigori Rasputin).

According to Maklakov, Yusupov was not the mastermind. Fuhrmann thinks that Yusupov was the man who hatched the plot and who carried it out. &quot;The clumsy way the assassination was carried out shows it was the work of an amateur.&quot; Fuhrmann also thinks Yusupov&#x27;s &quot;...candid Memoirs were corroborated by the other conspirators.&quot;

==Exile==

On 2 March, one week after the February Revolution, Nicholas abdicated the throne. Following the abdication, the Yusupovs returned to the Moika Palace before they went to Crimea. They later returned to the palace to retrieve jewels (including the blue Sultan of Morocco Diamond, the Polar Star Diamond, and the Marie Antoinette Diamond Earrings) and two paintings by Rembrandt, &quot;&quot;Portrait of a Gentleman with Tall Hat and Gloves&quot; and &quot;Portrait of a Lady with an Ostrich-Feather Fan&quot;.&quot; The sale proceeds of the paintings helped sustain the family in exile. The paintings were bought by Joseph E. Widener in 1921 and are now in the National Gallery in Washington, DC.

In Crimea, the family, along with other relatives (Irina&#x27;s mother Xenia Alexandrovna, her grandmother Maria Feodorovna, her five uncles and their spouses, her grand-uncles Nicholas Nikolayevich Romanov and Peter Nikolaevich with their spouses and children) boarded a British warship, HMS &quot;Marlborough&quot;, which took them from Yalta to Malta. On the ship, Felix enjoyed boasting about the murder of Rasputin. One of the British officers noted that Irina &quot;appeared shy and retiring at first, but it was only necessary to take a little notice of her pretty, small daughter to break through her reserve and discover that she was also very charming and spoke fluent English.&quot;

From Malta, they travelled to Italy and then to Paris. In Italy, lacking a visa, he bribed the officials with diamonds. In Paris, they stayed a few days in the Hôtel de Vendôme before they went on to London. In 1920, they returned to Paris.

The Yusupovs lived in the following places in France:
* 1920–1939: 37, Rue Gutenberg then 19 rue de La Tourelle in Boulogne-sur-Seine
* 1939–1940: they rented a mansion in rue Victor-Hugo, Sarcelles
* 1940–1943: they moved to rue Agar and 65 rue La Fontaine (16th arrondissement of Paris)
* from 1943 until their deaths: 38 rue Pierre-Guérin (Auteuil)

The Yusupovs founded a short-lived couture house, IRFĒ, named after the first two letters of their first names.

Irina modeled some of the dresses the pair and other designers at the firm created. Yusupov became renowned in the Russian émigré community for his financial generosity. Their philanthropy, their continued high living, and poor financial management extinguished what remained of the family fortune. Felix&#x27;s bad business sense and the Wall Street crash of 1929 eventually forced the company to shut down. (A new business under the same name was started by others in Paris in 2008.)

==Lawsuits==

In 1932, he and his wife successfully sued American film company MGM, in the English courts, for libel and invasion of privacy in connection with the film &quot;Rasputin and the Empress&quot;. The alleged libel was not that the character based on Felix had committed murder but that the character based on Irina, called &quot;Princess Natasha&quot; in the film, was portrayed as having been seduced by the lecherous Rasputin. In 1934, the Yusupovs were awarded £25,000 damages, an enormous sum at the time, which was attributed to the successful arguments of their barrister, Patrick Hastings. The disclaimer that now appears at the end of many American films, &quot;The preceding was a work of fiction, any similarity to a living person ...&quot;, first appeared as a result of the legal precedent set by the Yusupov case.

In 1965, Felix Yusupov also sued CBS in a New York court for televising a play based upon the Rasputin assassination. The claim was that some events were fictionalized, and under a New York state statute, his commercial rights in his story had been misappropriated. The last reported judicial opinion in the case was a ruling by New York&#x27;s second-highest court that the case could not be resolved upon briefs and affidavits but must go to trial. According to an obituary of CBS&#x27;s lawyer, Carleton G. Eldridge Jr., CBS eventually won the case.

In 1928, after Yusupov published his memoir detailing the killing of Rasputin, Rasputin&#x27;s daughter, Maria, sued Yusupov and Dmitri in a Paris court for damages of $800,000. She condemned both men as murderers and said any decent person would be disgusted by the ferocity of Rasputin&#x27;s killing. Maria&#x27;s claim was dismissed. The French court ruled that it had no jurisdiction over a political killing that had occurred in Russia.

==Final years and death==
Irina and Felix were married for more than 50 years. When Felix died in 1967, Irina was stricken by grief and she died three years later, on 26 February 1970. He was buried in Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Russian Cemetery, in the southern suburbs of Paris. Yusupov&#x27;s private papers and several family artifacts and paintings are now owned by , a Mexican sculptor who, as a young art student in the 1960s, met Yusupov and lived with the family for five years in Paris.

==Ancestors==
==Descendants==
Descendants of Felix and Irina are:

* Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova, (21 March 1915, Saint Petersburg, Russia – 30 August 1983, Cormeilles-en-Parisis, France), married Count Nikolai Dmitrievich Sheremetev (28 October 1904, Moscow, Russia – 5 February 1979, Paris, France), son of Count Dmitry Sergeevich Sheremetev and wife Countess Irina Ilarionovna Vorontsova-Dashkova and a descendant of Boris Petrovich Sheremetev; had issue:
** Countess Xenia Nikolaevna Sheremeteva (born 1 March 1942, Rome, Italy), married on 20 June 1965 in Athens, Greece, to Ilias Sfiris (born 20 August 1932, Athens, Greece); had issue:
*** Tatiana Sfiris (born 28 August 1968, Athens, Greece), married in May 1996 in Athens to Alexis Giannakoupoulos (born 1963), divorced, no issue; married Anthony Vamvakidis and has issue:
*** Marilia Vamvakidis (born 7 July 2004)
*** Yasmine Xenia Vamvakidis (born 17 May 2006)

==Works==
** 
*
*

==Bibliography==

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Greg King (1994) &quot;The Last Empress. The Life &amp; Times of Alexandra Feodorovna, tsarina of Russia&quot;. A Birch Lane Press Book.
* Margarita Nelipa (2010) &quot;The Murder of Grigorii Rasputin. A Conspiracy That Brought Down the Russian Empire&quot;, Gilbert&#x27;s Books. .
* Bernard Pares (1939) &quot;The Fall of the Russian Monarchy. A Study of the Evidence&quot;. Jonathan Cape. London.
* Vladimir Pourichkevitch (1924) &quot;Comment j&#x27;ai tué Raspoutine. Pages de Journal&quot;. J. Povolozky &amp; Cie. Paris

==External links==
*&quot;The Yusupovs&#x27; Palace on Moika, Saint Petersburg&quot; – Family nest until 1919 
*&quot;Lost Splendour&quot; – Yusupov&#x27;s self-biography until 1919 (online). Printed in 1952, .
* Читать онлайн &quot;The Last Tsar: Emperor Michael II&quot; автора Crawford Donald - RuLIT.Net - Страница 26</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273613" start="0" end="5" title="Knyaz" label="Knyaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q312997" start="6" end="54" title="Felix Yusupov" label="Felix Felixovich Yusupov, Count Sumarokov-Elston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535463" start="113" end="129" title="House of Yusupov" label="House of Yusupov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="190" end="206" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234230" start="224" end="251" title="Princess Irina Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Princess Irina Alexandrovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="264" end="283" title="Nicholas II" label="Emperor Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991838" start="320" end="332" title="Moika Palace" label="Moika Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="336" end="352" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="373" end="387" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068156" start="404" end="443" title="Count Felix Sumarokov-Elston" label="Count Felix Felixovich Sumarokov-Elston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068168" start="462" end="497" title="Felix Sumarokov-Elston" label="Felix Nikolaievich Sumarokov-Elston"/>
<link wikidata="Q899088" start="499" end="515" title="Zinaida Yusupova" label="Zinaida Yusupova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535463" start="549" end="561" title="House of Yusupov" label="Yusupov line"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="566" end="571" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206189" start="1121" end="1127" title="Koreiz" label="Koreiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107226" start="1129" end="1135" title="Sokolyne" label="Kökköz"/>
<link wikidata="Q748363" start="1140" end="1149" title="Balaklava" label="Balaklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="1199" end="1210" title="flour mills" label="flour mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="1233" end="1244" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q248900" start="1304" end="1335" title="Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich" label="Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625589" start="1340" end="1366" title="Moscow Military District" label="General-Governor of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q160869" start="1399" end="1418" title="Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich of Russia (1856–1929)" label="Nikolas Nikolaevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="1470" end="1483" title="Cross-dressing" label="cross-dressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q66901154" start="1582" end="1593" title="Nicholas Yusupov" label="His brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="2045" end="2071" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q469039" start="2102" end="2117" title="Bullingdon Club" label="Bullingdon Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411484" start="2185" end="2203" title="King Edward Street" label="King Edward Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q219035" start="2341" end="2346" title="macaw" label="macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="2386" end="2393" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975280" start="2562" end="2577" title="Albert Stopford" label="Albert Stopford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393344" start="2582" end="2595" title="Oswald Rayner" label="Oswald Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196144" start="2636" end="2649" title="Curzon Street" label="Curzon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="2651" end="2658" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="2701" end="2713" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="2728" end="2737" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4535415" start="2806" end="2820" title="Yusupov Palace (Crimea)" label="Yusupov Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q206189" start="2824" end="2830" title="Koreiz" label="Koreiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q234230" start="2852" end="2867" title="Princess Irina Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Irina of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187333" start="2915" end="2930" title="Anichkov Palace" label="Anichkov Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497446" start="2987" end="2991" title="veil" label="veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="3013" end="3029" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="3077" end="3082" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="3084" end="3089" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3091" end="3100" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3102" end="3108" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q488346" start="3114" end="3127" title="Bad Kissingen" label="Bad Kissingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3131" end="3138" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q235812" start="3327" end="3345" title="Duchess Cecilie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Cecilie of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="3372" end="3382" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876506" start="3564" end="3597" title="Luis Polo de Bernabé" label="the Spanish ambassador in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3658" end="3665" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="3673" end="3695" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154370" start="3776" end="3800" title="Irina Felixovna Yusupova" label="Irina Felixovna Yusupova"/>
<link wikidata="Q66901154" start="4147" end="4155" title="Nicholas Yusupov" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007468" start="4396" end="4409" title="Liteyny Avenue" label="Liteyny House"/>
<link wikidata="Q113584" start="4611" end="4615" title="Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia" label="Olga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="5134" end="5150" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164102" start="5309" end="5327" title="Maurice Paléologue" label="Maurice Paléologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="5371" end="5391" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="5452" end="5461" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624043" start="5676" end="5686" title="Page Corps" label="Page Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="5687" end="5703" title="military academy" label="military academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="5725" end="5746" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875908" start="5876" end="5897" title="misprision of treason" label="misprision of treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431256" start="5912" end="5933" title="Alexander Spiridovich" label="Alexander Spiridovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275807" start="6232" end="6247" title="Vasily Maklakov" label="Vasily Maklakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471440" start="6311" end="6334" title="Preobrazhensky Regiment" label="Preobrazhensky Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q372954" start="6421" end="6427" title="Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich of Russia" label="Dmitri"/>
<link wikidata="Q545353" start="6592" end="6613" title="Vladimir Purishkevich" label="Vladimir Purishkevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="6787" end="6789" title="New Style" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641832" start="6941" end="6959" title="housewarming party" label="housewarming party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008091" start="7199" end="7219" title="Marianne Pistohlkors" label="Marianne Pistohlkors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974463" start="7234" end="7246" title="Vera Karalli" label="Vera Karalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q265478" start="7267" end="7286" title="Princess Olga Paley" label="Princess Olga Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918995" start="7343" end="7353" title="major-domo" label="major-domo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472752" start="7360" end="7365" title="valet" label="valet"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="7434" end="7444" title="phonograph" label="gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q733940" start="7482" end="7495" title="Yankee Doodle" label="Yankee Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q940757" start="7601" end="7611" title="petit four" label="petit four"/>
<link wikidata="Q192470" start="7642" end="7659" title="potassium cyanide" label="potassium cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164102" start="7688" end="7706" title="Maurice Paléologue" label="Maurice Paléologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975280" start="7806" end="7821" title="Albert Stopford" label="Albert Stopford"/>
<link wikidata="Q465453" start="8583" end="8591" title="dumbbell" label="dumbbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563124" start="9043" end="9067" title="Bolshoy Petrovsky Bridge" label="Bolshoy Petrovsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277131" start="9092" end="9104" title="Little Nevka" label="Little Nevka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477653" start="9447" end="9460" title="Beloselsky-Belozersky Palace" label="Sergei Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18755186" start="9539" end="9561" title="Anglo-Russian Hospital" label="Anglo-Russian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="9573" end="9582" title="Alexandra Fyodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="9686" end="9714" title="Summary execution" label="wanted both shot immediately"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677555" start="9824" end="9838" title="active service" label="active service"/>
<link wikidata="Q372822" start="9846" end="9859" title="Persian campaign (World War I)" label="Persian front"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545205" start="9904" end="9918" title="Romanian campaign (1916)" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="9960" end="9972" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q674976" start="9992" end="10001" title="Rakitnoye, Belgorod Oblast" label="Rakitnoye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10187" end="10203" title="Grigori Rasputin#Assassination" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="10600" end="10619" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="10740" end="10746" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q106492933" start="10852" end="10870" title="Polar Star Diamond" label="Polar Star Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982565" start="10880" end="10913" title="Marie Antoinette Diamond Earrings" label="Marie Antoinette Diamond Earrings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="10936" end="10945" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468398" start="11184" end="11201" title="Joseph E. Widener" label="Joseph E. Widener"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="11229" end="11245" title="National Gallery, Washington" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11249" end="11263" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165113" start="11337" end="11355" title="Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Xenia Alexandrovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="11373" end="11389" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Maria Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q160869" start="11443" end="11472" title="Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich of Russia (1856–1929)" label="Nicholas Nikolayevich Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q446676" start="11477" end="11494" title="Grand Duke Peter Nikolaevich of Russia" label="Peter Nikolaevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q432251" start="11555" end="11582" title="HMS Marlborough (1912)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Marlborough&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="11605" end="11610" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="11614" end="11619" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145996" start="12121" end="12137" title="Hôtel de Vendôme (place Vendôme, Paris)" label="Hôtel de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q172455" start="12318" end="12336" title="Boulogne-sur-Seine" label="Boulogne-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107501" start="12392" end="12401" title="Sarcelles" label="Sarcelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q194420" start="12462" end="12490" title="16th arrondissement of Paris" label="16th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q784536" start="12546" end="12553" title="Auteuil, Paris" label="Auteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="12591" end="12598" title="Haute couture" label="couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263093" start="12606" end="12610" title="IRFĒ" label="IRFĒ"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="13008" end="13033" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="Wall Street crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="13235" end="13238" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="13247" end="13261" title="English courts" label="English courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="13267" end="13272" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="13277" end="13296" title="invasion of privacy" label="invasion of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827064" start="13331" end="13355" title="Rasputin and the Empress" label="Rasputin and the Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146673" start="13746" end="13762" title="Patrick Hastings" label="Patrick Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730087" start="13768" end="13778" title="All persons fictitious disclaimer" label="disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="13953" end="13968" title="legal precedent" label="legal precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="14028" end="14031" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="14413" end="14422" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q439787" start="14654" end="14659" title="Maria Rasputin" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001001" start="14891" end="14903" title="French court" label="French court"/>
<link wikidata="Q631270" start="15195" end="15237" title="Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Russian Cemetery" label="Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Russian Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154370" start="15559" end="15592" title="Irina Yusupova" label="Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova"/>
<link wikidata="Q841957" start="15653" end="15674" title="Cormeilles-en-Parisis" label="Cormeilles-en-Parisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462796" start="15719" end="15729" title="Sheremetev" label="Sheremetev"/>
<link wikidata="Q971558" start="15829" end="15839" title="Russian nobility" label="Sheremetev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4125835" start="15876" end="15895" title="Vorontsov" label="Vorontsova-Dashkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q312536" start="15916" end="15942" title="Boris Sheremetev" label="Boris Petrovich Sheremetev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605830" start="16495" end="16504" title="Greg King (author)" label="Greg King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385609" start="16780" end="16793" title="Bernard Pares" label="Bernard Pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q545353" start="16897" end="16920" title="Vladimir Purishkevich" label="Vladimir Pourichkevitch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80130" wikidata="Q3009" url="?curid=80130" title="3 Juno">
<text>Juno (minor-planet designation: 3 Juno) is a large asteroid in the asteroid belt. Juno was the third asteroid discovered, in 1804, by German astronomer Karl Harding. It is tied with three other asteroids as the thirteenth largest asteroid, and it is one of the two largest stony (S-type) asteroids, along with 15 Eunomia. (Ceres is the largest asteroid.) It is estimated to contain 1% of the total mass of the asteroid belt.

== History ==
=== Discovery ===

Juno was discovered on 1 September 1804, by Karl Ludwig Harding. It was the third asteroid found, but was initially considered to be a planet; it was reclassified as an asteroid and minor planet during the 1850s.

=== Name and symbol ===

Juno is named after the mythological Juno, the highest Roman goddess. The adjectival form is Junonian (from Latin &quot;jūnōnius&quot;), with the historical final &quot;n&quot; of the name (still seen in the French form, &quot;Junon&quot;) reappearing, analogous to Pluto ~ Plutonian.
&#x27;Juno&#x27; is the international name for the asteroid, subject to local variation: Italian &quot;Giunone&quot;, French &quot;Junon&quot;, Russian &quot;Юнона&quot; (&quot;Yunona&quot;), etc.

The old astronomical symbol of Juno, still used in astrology, is a scepter topped by a star, . There were many graphic variants with a more elaborated scepter, such as , sometimes tilted at an angle to provide more room for decoration.
The generic asteroid symbol of a disk with its discovery number, , was introduced in 1852 and quickly became the norm. The scepter symbol was resurrected for astrological use in 1973.

==Characteristics==
Juno is one of the larger asteroids, perhaps tenth by size and containing approximately 1% the mass of the entire asteroid belt. It is the second-most-massive S-type asteroid after 15 Eunomia. Even so, Juno has only 3% the mass of Ceres. The orbital period of Juno is 4.36578 years.

Amongst S-type asteroids, Juno is unusually reflective, which may be indicative of distinct surface properties. This high albedo explains its relatively high apparent magnitude for a small object not near the inner edge of the asteroid belt. Juno can reach +7.5 at a favourable opposition, which is brighter than Neptune or Titan, and is the reason for it being discovered before the larger asteroids Hygiea, Europa, Davida, and Interamnia. At most oppositions, however, Juno only reaches a magnitude of around +8.7—only just visible with binoculars—and at smaller elongations a telescope will be required to resolve it. It is the main body in the Juno family.

Juno was originally considered a planet, along with 1 Ceres, 2 Pallas, and 4 Vesta. In 1811, Schröter estimated Juno to be as large as 2290 km in diameter. All four were reclassified as asteroids as additional asteroids were discovered. Juno&#x27;s small size and irregular shape preclude it from being designated a dwarf planet.

Juno orbits at a slightly closer mean distance to the Sun than Ceres or Pallas. Its orbit is moderately inclined at around 12° to the ecliptic, but has an extreme eccentricity, greater than that of Pluto. This high eccentricity brings Juno closer to the Sun at perihelion than Vesta and further out at aphelion than Ceres. Juno had the most eccentric orbit of any known body until 33 Polyhymnia was discovered in 1854, and of asteroids over 200 km in diameter only 324 Bamberga has a more eccentric orbit.

Juno rotates in a prograde direction with an axial tilt of approximately 50°. The maximum temperature on the surface, directly facing the Sun, was measured at about 293 K on 2 October 2001. Taking into account the heliocentric distance at the time, this gives an estimated maximum temperature of 301 K (+28 °C) at perihelion.

Spectroscopic studies of the Junonian surface permit the conclusion that Juno could be the progenitor of chondrites, a common type of stony meteorite composed of iron-bearing silicates such as olivine and pyroxene. Infrared images reveal that Juno possesses an approximately 100 km-wide crater or ejecta feature, the result of a geologically young impact.

Based on MIDAS infrared data using the Hale Telescope, an average radius of 135.7±11 was reported in 2004.

== Observations ==

Juno was the first asteroid for which an occultation was observed. It passed in front of a dim star (SAO 112328) on 19 February 1958. Since then, several occultations by Juno have been observed, the most fruitful being the occultation of SAO 115946 on 11 December 1979, which was registered by 18 observers.
Juno occulted the magnitude 11.3 star PPMX 9823370 on 29 July 2013, and 2UCAC 30446947 on 30 July 2013.

Radio signals from spacecraft in orbit around Mars and on its surface have been used to estimate the mass of Juno from the tiny perturbations induced by it onto the motion of Mars. Juno&#x27;s orbit appears to have changed slightly around 1839, very likely due to perturbations from a passing asteroid, whose identity has not been determined.

In 1996, Juno was imaged by the Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory at visible and near-IR wavelengths, using adaptive optics. The images spanned a whole rotation period and revealed an irregular shape and a dark albedo feature, interpreted as a fresh impact site.
== Oppositions ==
Juno reaches opposition from the Sun every 15.5 months or so, with its minimum distance varying greatly depending on whether it is near perihelion or aphelion. Sequences of favorable oppositions occur every 10th opposition, i.e. just over every 13 years. The last favorable oppositions were on 1 December 2005, at a distance of 1.063 AU, magnitude 7.55, and on 17 November 2018, at a minimum distance of 1.036 AU, magnitude 7.45. The next favorable opposition will be 30 October 2031, at a distance of 1.044 AU, magnitude 7.42.

==See also==
* Juno clump
* List of former planets

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==

* JPL Ephemeris
* Well resolved images from four angles taken at Mount Wilson observatory
* Shape model deduced from light curve
* Asteroid Juno Grabs the Spotlight
* (displays Elong from Sun and V mag for 2011)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="0" end="4" title="3 Juno" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q817125" start="6" end="30" title="minor-planet designation" label="minor-planet designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="32" end="38" title="3 Juno" label="3 Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="51" end="59" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="67" end="80" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="152" end="164" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Karl Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193851" start="172" end="238" title="List of exceptional asteroids" label="tied with three other asteroids as the thirteenth largest asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="280" end="286" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q107528" start="310" end="320" title="15 Eunomia" label="15 Eunomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="323" end="328" title="1 Ceres" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="503" end="522" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Karl Ludwig Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="541" end="549" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="594" end="600" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="641" end="653" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="735" end="739" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q645745" start="1189" end="1208" title="astronomical symbol" label="astronomical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1736" end="1749" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="1853" end="1858" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="2064" end="2082" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2219" end="2226" title="Neptune#Observation" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="2230" end="2235" title="Exploration of Titan" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640" start="2307" end="2313" title="10 Hygiea" label="Hygiea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155100" start="2315" end="2321" title="52 Europa" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155017" start="2323" end="2329" title="511 Davida" label="Davida"/>
<link wikidata="Q156655" start="2335" end="2345" title="704 Interamnia" label="Interamnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="2445" end="2455" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q271439" start="2471" end="2481" title="Elongation (astronomy)" label="elongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="2485" end="2494" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583868" start="2554" end="2565" title="Juno family" label="Juno family"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="2620" end="2627" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="1 Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="2629" end="2637" title="2 Pallas" label="2 Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="2643" end="2650" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q77232" start="2661" end="2669" title="Johann Hieronymus Schröter" label="Schröter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="2884" end="2896" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2953" end="2956" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="3033" end="3041" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="3062" end="3074" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="3097" end="3102" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="3160" end="3170" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="3201" end="3209" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151273" start="3280" end="3293" title="33 Polyhymnia" label="33 Polyhymnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151102" start="3364" end="3376" title="324 Bamberga" label="324 Bamberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="3424" end="3432" title="direct motion" label="prograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="3451" end="3461" title="axial tilt" label="axial tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3575" end="3576" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="3620" end="3632" title="heliocentric" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q48361" start="3838" end="3847" title="chondrite" label="chondrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="3873" end="3882" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="3908" end="3916" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="3926" end="3933" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="3938" end="3946" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3948" end="3956" title="Infrared" label="Infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471197" start="4129" end="4143" title="Hale Telescope" label="Hale Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="4259" end="4270" title="occultation" label="occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="4313" end="4317" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4319" end="4329" title="SAO 112328" label="SAO 112328"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4456" end="4466" title="SAO 115946" label="SAO 115946"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4564" end="4576" title="PPMX 9823370" label="PPMX 9823370"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4598" end="4612" title="2UCAC 30446947" label="2UCAC 30446947"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="4677" end="4681" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="4824" end="4829" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="5007" end="5023" title="Hooker Telescope" label="Hooker Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="5027" end="5051" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q506922" start="5094" end="5109" title="adaptive optics" label="adaptive optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="5280" end="5290" title="Opposition (astronomy)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583868" start="5811" end="5821" title="Juno clump" label="Juno clump"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593148" start="5824" end="5846" title="List of former planets" label="List of former planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="5965" end="5989" title="Mount Wilson observatory" label="Mount Wilson observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q271439" start="6077" end="6082" title="Elongation (astronomy)" label="Elong"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="6096" end="6101" title="apparent magnitude" label="V mag"/>
</links>
</doc>
