<doc id="82991" wikidata="Q189201" url="?curid=82991" title="Chamber music">
<text>Chamber music is a form of classical music that is composed for a small group of instruments—traditionally a group that could fit in a palace chamber or a large room. Most broadly, it includes any art music that is performed by a small number of performers, with one performer to a part (in contrast to orchestral music, in which each string part is played by a number of performers). However, by convention, it usually does not include solo instrument performances.

Because of its intimate nature, chamber music has been described as &quot;the music of friends&quot;. For more than 100 years, chamber music was played primarily by amateur musicians in their homes, and even today, when chamber music performance has migrated from the home to the concert hall, many musicians, amateur and professional, still play chamber music for their own pleasure. Playing chamber music requires special skills, both musical and social, that differ from the skills required for playing solo or symphonic works.

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe described chamber music (specifically, string quartet music) as &quot;four rational people conversing&quot;. This conversational paradigm – which refers to the way one instrument introduces a melody or motif and then other instruments subsequently &quot;respond&quot; with a similar motif – has been a thread woven through the history of chamber music composition from the end of the 18th century to the present. The analogy to conversation recurs in descriptions and analyses of chamber music compositions.

==History==
From its earliest beginnings in the Medieval period to the present, chamber music has been a reflection of the changes in the technology and the society that produced it.

===Early beginnings===
During the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, instruments were used primarily as accompaniment for singers. String players would play along with the melody line sung by the singer. There were also purely instrumental ensembles, often of stringed precursors of the violin family, called consorts.

Some analysts consider the origin of classical instrumental ensembles to be the sonata da camera (chamber sonata) and the sonata da chiesa (church sonata). These were compositions for one to five or more instruments. The sonata da camera was a suite of slow and fast movements, interspersed with dance tunes; the sonata da chiesa was the same, but the dances were omitted. These forms gradually developed into the trio sonata of the Baroque – two treble instruments and a bass instrument, often with a keyboard or other chording instrument (harpsichord, organ, harp or lute, for example) filling in the harmony. Both the bass instrument and the chordal instrument would play the basso continuo part.

During the Baroque period, chamber music as a genre was not clearly defined. Often, works could be played on any variety of instruments, in orchestral or chamber ensembles. &quot;The Art of Fugue&quot; by Johann Sebastian Bach, for example, can be played on a keyboard instrument (harpsichord or organ) or by a string quartet or a string orchestra. The instrumentation of trio sonatas was also often flexibly specified; some of Handel&#x27;s sonatas are scored for &quot;German flute, Hoboy [oboe] or Violin&quot; Bass lines could be played by violone, cello, theorbo, or bassoon, and sometimes three or four instruments would join in the bass line in unison. Sometimes composers mixed movements for chamber ensembles with orchestral movements. Telemann&#x27;s &#x27;Tafelmusik&#x27; (1733), for example, has five sets of movements for various combinations of instruments, ending with a full orchestral section.
Baroque chamber music was often contrapuntal; that is, each instrument played the same melodic materials at different times, creating a complex, interwoven fabric of sound. Because each instrument was playing essentially the same melodies, all the instruments were equal. In the trio sonata, there is often no ascendent or solo instrument, but all three instruments share equal importance.
The harmonic role played by the keyboard or other chording instrument was subsidiary, and usually the keyboard part was not even written out; rather, the chordal structure of the piece was specified by numeric codes over the bass line, called figured bass.

In the second half of the 18th century, tastes began to change: many composers preferred a new, lighter Galant style, with &quot;thinner texture, ... and clearly defined melody and bass&quot; to the complexities of counterpoint. Now a new custom arose that gave birth to a new form of chamber music: the serenade. Patrons invited street musicians to play evening concerts below the balconies of their homes, their friends and their lovers. Patrons and musicians commissioned composers to write suitable suites of dances and tunes, for groups of two to five or six players. These works were called serenades, nocturnes, divertimenti, or cassations (from gasse=street). The young Joseph Haydn was commissioned to write several of these.

===Haydn, Mozart, and the classical style===

Joseph Haydn is generally credited with creating the modern form of chamber music as we know it, although scholars today such as Roger Hickman argue &quot;the idea that Haydn invented the string quartet and single-handedly advanced the genre is based on only a vague notion of the true history of the eighteenth-century genre.&quot; A typical string quartet of the period would consist of
*&quot;An opening movement in sonata form&quot;, usually with two contrasting themes, followed by a development section where the thematic material is transformed and transposed, and ending with a recapitulation of the initial two themes.
*&quot;A lyrical movement&quot; in a slow or moderate tempo, sometimes built out of three sections that repeat themselves in the order A–B–C–A–B–C, and sometimes a set of variations.
*&quot;A minuet or scherzo&quot;, a light movement in three quarter time, with a main section, a contrasting trio section, and a repeat of the main section.
*&quot;A fast finale section&quot; in rondo form, a series of contrasting sections with a main refrain section opening and closing the movement, and repeating between each section.

Haydn was by no means the only composer developing new modes of chamber music. Even before Haydn, many composers were already experimenting with new forms. Giovanni Battista Sammartini, Ignaz Holzbauer, and Franz Xaver Richter wrote precursors of the string quartet. Franz Ignaz von Beecke (1733-1803), with his Piano Quintet in A minor (1770) and 17 string quartets was also one of the pioneers of chamber music of the Classical period.

Another renowned composer of chamber music of the period was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Mozart&#x27;s seven piano trios and two piano quartets were the first to apply the conversational principle to chamber music with piano. Haydn&#x27;s piano trios are essentially piano sonatas with the violin and cello playing mostly supporting roles, doubling the treble and bass lines of the piano score. But Mozart gives the strings an independent role, using them as a counter to the piano, and adding their individual voices to the chamber music conversation.
Mozart introduced the newly invented clarinet into the chamber music arsenal, with the Kegelstatt Trio for viola, clarinet and piano, K. 498, and the Quintet for Clarinet and String Quartet, K. 581. He also tried other innovative ensembles, including the quintet for violin, two violas, cello, and horn, K. 407, quartets for flute and strings, and various wind instrument combinations. He wrote six string quintets for two violins, two violas and cello, which explore the rich tenor tones of the violas, adding a new dimension to the string quartet conversation.

Mozart&#x27;s string quartets are considered the pinnacle of the classical art. The six string quartets that he dedicated to Haydn, his friend and mentor, inspired the elder composer to say to Mozart&#x27;s father, &quot;I tell you before God as an honest man that your son is the greatest composer known to me either in person or by reputation. He has taste, and, what is more, the most profound knowledge of composition.&quot;

Many other composers wrote chamber compositions during this period that were popular at the time and are still played today. Luigi Boccherini, Italian composer and cellist, wrote nearly a hundred string quartets, and more than one hundred quintets for two violins, viola and two cellos. In this innovative ensemble, later used by Schubert, Boccherini gives flashy, virtuosic solos to the principal cello, as a showcase for his own playing. Violinist Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf and cellist Johann Baptist Wanhal, who both played pickup quartets with Haydn on second violin and Mozart on viola, were popular chamber music composers of the period.

===From home to hall===
The turn of the 19th century saw dramatic changes in society and in music technology which had far-reaching effects on the way chamber music was composed and played.

====Collapse of the aristocratic system====

Throughout the 18th century, the composer was normally an employee of an aristocrat, and the chamber music he or she composed was for the pleasure of aristocratic players and listeners. Haydn, for example, was an employee of Nikolaus I, Prince Esterházy, a music lover and amateur baryton player, for whom Haydn wrote many of his string trios. Mozart wrote three string quartets for the King of Prussia, Frederick William II, a cellist. Many of Beethoven&#x27;s quartets were first performed with patron Count Andrey Razumovsky on second violin. Boccherini composed for the king of Spain.

With the decline of the aristocracy and the rise of new social orders throughout Europe, composers increasingly had to make money by selling their compositions and performing concerts. They often gave subscription concerts, which involved renting a hall and collecting the receipts from the performance. Increasingly, they wrote chamber music not only for rich patrons, but for professional musicians playing for a paying audience.

====Changes in the structure of stringed instruments====
At the beginning of the 19th century, luthiers developed new methods of constructing the violin, viola and cello that gave these instruments a richer tone, more volume, and more carrying power. Also at this time, bowmakers made the violin bow longer, with a thicker ribbon of hair under higher tension. This improved projection, and also made possible new bowing techniques. In 1820, Louis Spohr invented the chinrest, which gave violinists more freedom of movement in their left hands, for a more nimble technique. These changes contributed to the effectiveness of public performances in large halls, and expanded the repertoire of techniques available to chamber music composers.

====Invention of the pianoforte====
Throughout the Baroque era, the harpsichord was one of the main instruments used in chamber music. The harpsichord used quills to pluck strings, and it had a delicate sound. Due to the design of the harpsichord, the attack or weight with which the performer played the keyboard did not change the volume or tone. Between about 1750 and the late 1700s, the harpsichord gradually fell out of use. By the late 1700s, the pianoforte became more popular as an instrument for performance. Even though the pianoforte was invented by Bartolomeo Cristofori at the beginning of the 1700s, it did not become widely used until the end of that century, when technical improvements in its construction made it a more effective instrument. Unlike the harpsichord, the pianoforte could play soft or loud dynamics and sharp sforzando attacks depending on how hard or soft the performer played the keys. The improved pianoforte was adopted by Mozart and other composers, who began composing chamber ensembles with the piano playing a leading role. The piano was to become more and more dominant through the 19th century, so much so that many composers, such as Franz Liszt and Frédéric Chopin, wrote almost exclusively for solo piano (or solo piano with orchestra).

===Beethoven===

Ludwig van Beethoven straddled this period of change as a giant of Western music. Beethoven transformed chamber music, raising it to a new plane, both in terms of content and in terms of the technical demands on performers and audiences. His works, in the words of Maynard Solomon, were &quot;...the models against which nineteenth-century romanticism measured its achievements and failures.&quot; His late quartets, in particular, were considered so daunting an accomplishment that many composers after him were afraid to try composing quartets; Johannes Brahms composed and tore up 20 string quartets before he dared publish a work that he felt was worthy of the &quot;giant marching behind&quot;.
Beethoven made his formal debut as a composer with three Piano Trios, Op. 1. Even these early works, written when Beethoven was only 22, while adhering to a strictly classical mold, showed signs of the new paths that Beethoven was to forge in the coming years. When he showed the manuscript of the trios to Haydn, his teacher, prior to publication, Haydn approved of the first two, but warned against publishing the third trio, in C minor, as too radical, warning it would not &quot;...be understood and favorably received by the public.&quot;

Haydn was wrong—the third trio was the most popular of the set, and Haydn&#x27;s criticisms caused a falling-out between him and the sensitive Beethoven. The trio is, indeed, a departure from the mold that Haydn and Mozart had formed. Beethoven makes dramatic deviations of tempo within phrases and within movements. He greatly increases the independence of the strings, especially the cello, allowing it to range above the piano and occasionally even the violin.

If his Op. 1 trios introduced Beethoven&#x27;s works to the public, his Septet, Op. 20, established him as one of Europe&#x27;s most popular composers. The septet, scored for violin, viola, cello, contrabass, clarinet, horn, and bassoon, was a huge hit. It was played in concerts again and again. It appeared in transcriptions for many combinations – one of which, for clarinet, cello and piano, was written by Beethoven himself – and was so popular that Beethoven feared it would eclipse his other works. So much so that by 1815, Carl Czerny wrote that Beethoven &quot;could not endure his septet and grew angry because of the universal applause which it has received.&quot; The septet is written as a classical divertimento in six movements, including two minuets, and a set of variations. It is full of catchy tunes, with solos for everyone, including the contrabass.
In his 17 string quartets, composed over the course of 37 of his 56 years, Beethoven goes from classical composer par excellence to creator of musical Romanticism, and finally, with his late string quartets, he transcends classicism and romanticism to create a genre that defies categorization. Stravinsky referred to the Große Fuge, of the late quartets, as, &quot;...this absolutely contemporary piece of music that will be contemporary forever.&quot;

The string quartets 1–6, Op. 18, were written in the classical style, in the same year that Haydn wrote his Op. 76 string quartets. Even here, Beethoven stretched the formal structures pioneered by Haydn and Mozart. In the quartet Op. 18, No. 1, in F major, for example, there is a long, lyrical solo for cello in the second movement, giving the cello a new type of voice in the quartet conversation. And the last movement of Op. 18, No. 6, &quot;La Malincolia&quot;, creates a new type of formal structure, interleaving a slow, melancholic section with a manic dance. Beethoven was to use this form in later quartets, and Brahms and others adopted it as well.

In the years 1805 to 1806, Beethoven composed the three Op. 59 quartets on a commission from Count Razumovsky, who played second violin in their first performance. These quartets, from Beethoven&#x27;s middle period, were pioneers in the romantic style. Besides introducing many structural and stylistic innovations, these quartets were much more difficult technically to perform – so much so that they were, and remain, beyond the reach of many amateur string players. When first violinist Ignaz Schuppanzigh complained of their difficulty, Beethoven retorted, &quot;Do you think I care about your wretched violin when the spirit moves me?&quot; Among the difficulties are complex syncopations and cross-rhythms; synchronized runs of sixteenth, thirty-second, and sixty-fourth notes; and sudden modulations requiring special attention to intonation. In addition to the Op. 59 quartets, Beethoven wrote two more quartets during his middle period – Op. 74, the &quot;Harp&quot; quartet, named for the unusual harp-like effect Beethoven creates with pizzicato passages in the first movement, and Op. 95, the &quot;Serioso&quot;.
The Serioso is a transitional work that ushers in Beethoven&#x27;s late period – a period of compositions of great introspection. &quot;The particular kind of inwardness of Beethoven&#x27;s last style period&quot;, writes Joseph Kerman, gives one the feeling that &quot;the music is sounding only for the composer and for one other auditor, an awestruck eavesdropper: you.&quot; In the late quartets, the quartet conversation is often disjointed, proceeding like a stream of consciousness. Melodies are broken off, or passed in the middle of the melodic line from instrument to instrument. Beethoven uses new effects, never before essayed in the string quartet literature: the ethereal, dreamlike effect of open intervals between the high E string and the open A string in the second movement of quartet Op. 132; the use of &quot;sul ponticello&quot; (playing on the bridge of the violin) for a brittle, scratchy sound in the Presto movement of Op. 131; the use of the Lydian mode, rarely heard in Western music for 200 years, in Op. 132; a cello melody played high above all the other strings in the finale of Op. 132. Yet for all this disjointedness, each quartet is tightly designed, with an overarching structure that ties the work together.

Beethoven wrote eight piano trios, five string trios, two string quintets, and numerous pieces for wind ensemble. He also wrote ten sonatas for violin and piano and five sonatas for cello and piano.

===Franz Schubert===

As Beethoven, in his last quartets, went off in his own direction, Franz Schubert carried on and established the emerging romantic style. In his 31 years, Schubert devoted much of his life to chamber music, composing 15 string quartets, two piano trios, string trios, a piano quintet commonly known as the &quot;Trout Quintet&quot;, an octet for strings and winds, and his famous quintet for two violins, viola, and two cellos.

Schubert&#x27;s music, as his life, exemplified the contrasts and contradictions of his time. On the one hand, he was the darling of Viennese society: he starred in soirées that became known as &quot;Schubertiaden&quot;, where he played his light, mannered compositions that expressed the gemütlichkeit of Vienna of the 1820s. On the other hand, his own short life was shrouded in tragedy, wracked by poverty and ill health. Chamber music was the ideal medium to express this conflict, &quot;to reconcile his essentially lyric themes with his feeling for dramatic utterance within a form that provided the possibility of extreme color contrasts.&quot; The String Quintet in C, D.956, is an example of how this conflict is expressed in music. After a slow introduction, the first theme of the first movement, fiery and dramatic, leads to a bridge of rising tension, peaking suddenly and breaking into the second theme, a lilting duet in the lower voices. The alternating Sturm und Drang and relaxation continue throughout the movement.

These contending forces are expressed in some of Schubert&#x27;s other works: in the quartet Death and the Maiden, the Rosamunde quartet and in the stormy, one-movement Quartettsatz, D. 703.

===Felix Mendelssohn===
Unlike Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn had a life of peace and prosperity. Born into a wealthy Jewish family in Hamburg, Mendelssohn proved himself a child prodigy. By the age of 16, he had written his first major chamber work, the String Octet, Op. 20. Already in this work, Mendelssohn showed some of the unique style that was to characterize his later works; notably, the gossamer light texture of his scherzo movements, exemplified also by the &quot;Canzonetta&quot; movement of the String Quartet, Op. 12, and the scherzo of the Piano Trio No. 1 in D minor, Op. 49.

Another characteristic that Mendelssohn pioneered is the cyclic form in overall structure. This means the reuse of thematic material from one movement to the next, to give the total piece coherence. In his second string quartet, he opens the piece with a peaceful adagio section in A major, that contrasts with the stormy first movement in A minor. After the final, vigorous Presto movement, he returns to the opening adagio to conclude the piece. This string quartet is also Mendelssohn&#x27;s homage to Beethoven; the work is studded with quotes from Beethoven&#x27;s middle and late quartets.
During his adult life, Mendelssohn wrote two piano trios, seven works for string quartet, two string quintets, the octet, a sextet for piano and strings, and numerous sonatas for piano with violin, cello, and clarinet.

===Robert Schumann===
Robert Schumann continued the development of cyclic structure. In his Piano Quintet in E flat, Op. 44, Schumann wrote a double fugue in the finale, using the theme of the first movement and the theme of the last movement. Both Schumann and Mendelssohn, following the example set by Beethoven, revived the fugue, which had fallen out of favor since the Baroque period. However, rather than writing strict, full-length fugues, they used counterpoint as another mode of conversation between the chamber music instruments. Many of Schumann&#x27;s chamber works, including all three of his string quartets and his piano quartet have contrapuntal sections interwoven seamlessly into the overall compositional texture.

The composers of the first half of the 19th century were acutely aware of the conversational paradigm established by Haydn and Mozart. Schumann wrote that in a true quartet &quot;everyone has something to say ... a conversation, often truly beautiful, often oddly and turbidly woven, among four people.&quot; Their awareness is exemplified by composer and virtuoso violinist Louis Spohr. Spohr divided his 36 string quartets into two types: the &quot;quatuor brillant&quot;, essentially a violin concerto with string trio accompaniment; and &quot;quatuor dialogue&quot;, in the conversational tradition.

===Chamber music and society in the 19th century===

During the 19th century, with the rise of new technology driven by the Industrial Revolution, printed music became cheaper and thus more accessible while domestic music making gained widespread popularity. Composers began to incorporate new elements and techniques into their works to appeal to this open market, since there was an increased consumer desire for chamber music. While improvements in instruments led to more public performances of chamber music, it remained very much a type of music to be played as much as performed. Amateur quartet societies sprang up throughout Europe, and no middling-sized city in Germany or France was without one. These societies sponsored house concerts, compiled music libraries, and encouraged the playing of quartets and other ensembles. In European countries, in particular Germany and France, like minded musicians were brought together and started to develop a strong connection with the community. Composers were in high favor with orchestral works and solo virtuosi works, which made up the largest part of the public concert repertoire. Early French composers including Camille Saint-Saëns and César Franck.

Apart from the &quot;central&quot; Austro-Germanic countries, there was an occurrence of the subculture of chamber music in other regions such as Britain. There chamber music was often performed by upper- and middle-class men with less advanced musical skills in an unexpected setting such as informal ensembles in private residence with few audience members. In Britain, the most common form of chamber music compositions are the string quartets, sentimental songs and piano chamber works like the piano trio, in a way depicts the standard conception of the conventional &quot;Victorian music making&quot;. In the middle of the 19th century, with the rise of the feminist movement, women also started to receive acceptability to be participated in chamber music.

Thousands of quartets were published by hundreds of composers; between 1770 and 1800, more than 2000 quartets were published, and the pace did not decline in the next century. Throughout the 19th century, composers published string quartets now long neglected: George Onslow wrote 36 quartets and 35 quintets; Gaetano Donizetti wrote dozens of quartets, Antonio Bazzini, Anton Reicha, Carl Reissiger, Joseph Suk and others wrote to fill an insatiable demand for quartets. In addition, there was a lively market for string quartet arrangements of popular and folk tunes, piano works, symphonies, and opera arias.

But opposing forces were at work. The middle of the 19th century saw the rise of superstar virtuosi, who drew attention away from chamber music toward solo performance. The piano, which could be mass-produced, became an instrument of preference, and many composers, like Chopin and Liszt, composed primarily if not exclusively for piano.
The ascendance of the piano, and of symphonic composition, was not merely a matter of preference; it was also a matter of ideology. In the 1860s, a schism grew among romantic musicians over the direction of music. Many composers tend to express their romantic persona through their works. By the time, these chamber works are not necessarily dedicated for any specific dedicatee. Famous chamber works such as Fanny Mendelssohn D minor Piano Trio, Ludwig van Beethoven&#x27;s Trio in E-flat major, and Franz Schubert&#x27;s Piano Quintet in A major are all highly personal. Liszt and Richard Wagner led a movement that contended that &quot;pure music&quot; had run its course with Beethoven, and that new, programmatic forms of music–in which music created &quot;images&quot; with its melodies–were the future of the art. The composers of this school had no use for chamber music. Opposing this view was Johannes Brahms and his associates, especially the powerful music critic Eduard Hanslick. This War of the Romantics shook the artistic world of the period, with vituperative exchanges between the two camps, concert boycotts, and petitions.

Although amateur playing thrived throughout the 19th century, this was also a period of increasing professionalization of chamber music performance. Professional quartets began to dominate the chamber music concert stage. The Hellmesberger Quartet, led by Joseph Hellmesberger, and the Joachim Quartet, led by Joseph Joachim, debuted many of the new string quartets by Brahms and other composers. Another famous quartet player was Vilemina Norman Neruda, also known as Lady Hallé. Indeed, during the last third of the century, women performers began taking their place on the concert stage: an all-women string quartet led by Emily Shinner, and the Lucas quartet, also all women, were two notable examples.

===Toward the 20th century===
It was Johannes Brahms who carried the torch of Romantic music toward the 20th century. Heralded by Robert Schumann as the forger of &quot;new paths&quot; in music, Brahms&#x27;s music is a bridge from the classical to the modern. On the one hand, Brahms was a traditionalist, conserving the musical traditions of Bach and Mozart. Throughout his chamber music, he uses traditional techniques of counterpoint, incorporating fugues and canons into rich conversational and harmonic textures. On the other hand, Brahms expanded the structure and the harmonic vocabulary of chamber music, challenging traditional notions of tonality. An example of this is in the Brahms second string sextet, Op. 36.

Traditionally, composers wrote the first theme of a piece in the key of the piece, firmly establishing that key as the tonic, or home, key of the piece. The opening theme of Op. 36 starts in the tonic (G major), but already by the third measure has modulated to the unrelated key of E-flat major. As the theme develops, it ranges through various keys before coming back to the tonic G major. This &quot;harmonic audacity&quot;, as Swafford describes it, opened the way for bolder experiments to come.

Not only in harmony, but also in overall musical structure, Brahms was an innovator. He developed a technique that Arnold Schoenberg described as &quot;developing variation&quot;. Rather than discretely defined phrases, Brahms often runs phrase into phrase, and mixes melodic motives to create a fabric of continuous melody. Schoenberg, the creator of the 12-tone system of composition, traced the roots of his modernism to Brahms, in his essay &quot;Brahms the Progressive&quot;.

All told, Brahms published 24 works of chamber music, including three string quartets, five piano trios, the quintet for piano and strings, Op. 34, and other works. Among his last works were the clarinet quintet, Op. 115, and a trio for clarinet, cello and piano. He wrote a trio for the unusual combination of piano, violin and horn, Op. 40. He also wrote two songs for alto singer, viola and piano, Op. 91, reviving the form of voice with string obbligato that had been virtually abandoned since the Baroque.
The exploration of tonality and of structure begun by Brahms was continued by composers of the French school. César Franck&#x27;s piano quintet in F minor, composed in 1879, further established the cyclic form first explored by Schumann and Mendelssohn, reusing the same thematic material in each of the three movements. Claude Debussy&#x27;s string quartet, Op. 10, is considered a watershed in the history of chamber music. The quartet uses the cyclic structure, and constitutes a final divorce from the rules of classical harmony. &quot;Any sounds in any combination and in any succession are henceforth free to be used in a musical continuity&quot;, Debussy wrote. Pierre Boulez said that Debussy freed chamber music from &quot;rigid structure, frozen rhetoric and rigid aesthetics&quot;.
Debussy&#x27;s quartet, like the string quartets of Maurice Ravel and of Gabriel Fauré, created a new tone color for chamber music, a color and texture associated with the Impressionist movement. Violist James Dunham, of the Cleveland and Sequoia Quartets, writes of the Ravel quartet, &quot;I was simply overwhelmed by the sweep of sonority, the sensation of colors constantly changing ...&quot; For these composers, chamber ensembles were the ideal vehicle for transmitting this atmospheric sense, and chamber works constituted much of their oeuvre.

===Nationalism in chamber music===
Parallel with the trend to seek new modes of tonality and texture was another new development in chamber music: the rise of nationalism. Composers turned more and more to the rhythms and tonalities of their native lands for inspiration and material. &quot;Europe was impelled by the Romantic tendency to establish in musical matters the national boundaries more and more sharply&quot;, wrote Alfred Einstein. &quot;The collecting and sifting of old traditional melodic treasures ... formed the basis for a creative art-music.&quot; For many of these composers, chamber music was the natural vehicle for expressing their national characters.
Czech composer Antonín Dvořák created in his chamber music a new voice for the music of his native Bohemia. In 14 string quartets, three string quintets, two piano quartets, a string sextet, four piano trios, and numerous other chamber compositions, Dvořák incorporates folk music and modes as an integral part of his compositions. For example, in the piano quintet in A major, Op. 81, the slow movement is a Dumka, a Slavic folk ballad that alternates between a slow expressive song and a fast dance. Dvořák&#x27;s fame in establishing a national art music was so great that the New York philanthropist and music connoisseur Jeannette Thurber invited him to America, to head a conservatory that would establish an American style of music. There, Dvořák wrote his string quartet in F major, Op. 96, nicknamed &quot;The American&quot;. While composing the work, Dvořák was entertained by a group of Kickapoo Indians who performed native dances and songs, and these songs may have been incorporated in the quartet.

Bedřich Smetana, another Czech, wrote a piano trio and string quartet, both of which incorporate native Czech rhythms and melodies. In Russia, Russian folk music permeated the works of the late 19th-century composers. Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky uses a typical Russian folk dance in the final movement of his string sextet, &quot;Souvenir de Florence&quot;, Op. 70. Alexander Borodin&#x27;s second string quartet contains references to folk music, and the slow Nocturne movement of that quartet recalls Middle Eastern modes that were current in the Muslim sections of southern Russia. Edvard Grieg used the musical style of his native Norway in his string quartet in G minor, Op. 27 and his violin sonatas.

In Hungary, composers Zoltán Kodály and Béla Bartók pioneered the science of ethnomusicology by performing one of the first comprehensive studies of folk music. Ranging across the Magyar provinces, they transcribed, recorded, and classified tens of thousands of folk melodies. They used these tunes in their compositions, which are characterized by the asymmetrical rhythms and modal harmonies of that music. Their chamber music compositions, and those of the Czech composer Leoš Janáček, combined the nationalist trend with the 20th century search for new tonalities. Janáček&#x27;s string quartets not only incorporate the tonalities of Czech folk music, they also reflect the rhythms of speech in Czech.

===New sounds for a new world===

The end of western tonality, begun subtly by Brahms and made explicit by Debussy, posed a crisis for composers of the 20th century. It was not merely an issue of finding new types of harmonies and melodic systems to replace the diatonic scale that was the basis of western harmony; the whole structure of western music – the relationships between movements and between structural elements within movements – was based on the relationships between different keys. So composers were challenged with building a whole new structure for music.

This was coupled with the feeling that the era that saw the invention of automobiles, the telephone, electric lighting, and world war needed new modes of expression. &quot;The century of the aeroplane deserves its music&quot;, wrote Debussy.

====Inspiration from folk music====
The search for a new music took several directions. The first, led by Bartók, was toward the tonal and rhythmic constructs of folk music. Bartók&#x27;s research into Hungarian and other eastern European and Middle Eastern folk music revealed to him a musical world built of musical scales that were neither major nor minor, and complex rhythms that were alien to the concert hall. In his fifth quartet, for example, Bartók uses a time signature of , &quot;startling to the classically-trained musician, but second-nature to the folk musician.&quot; Structurally, also, Bartók often invents or borrows from folk modes. In the sixth string quartet, for example, Bartók begins each movement with a slow, elegiac melody, followed by the main melodic material of the movement, and concludes the quartet with a slow movement that is built entirely on this elegy. This is a form common in many folk music cultures.
Bartók&#x27;s six string quartets are often compared with Beethoven&#x27;s late quartets. In them, Bartók builds new musical structures, explores sonorities never previously produced in classical music (for example, the snap pizzicato, where the player lifts the string and lets it snap back on the fingerboard with an audible buzz), and creates modes of expression that set these works apart from all others. &quot;Bartók&#x27;s last two quartets proclaim the sanctity of life, progress and the victory of humanity despite the anti-humanistic dangers of the time&quot;, writes analyst John Herschel Baron. The last quartet, written when Bartók was preparing to flee the Nazi invasion of Hungary for a new and uncertain life in the U.S., is often seen as an autobiographical statement of the tragedy of his times.

Bartók was not alone in his explorations of folk music. Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Three Pieces for String Quartet&quot; is structured as three Russian folksongs, rather than as a classical string quartet. Stravinsky, like Bartók, used asymmetrical rhythms throughout his chamber music; the Histoire du soldat, in Stravinsky&#x27;s own arrangement for clarinet, violin and piano, constantly shifts time signatures between two, three, four and five beats to the bar. In Britain, composers Ralph Vaughan Williams, William Walton and Benjamin Britten drew on English folk music for much of their chamber music: Vaughan Williams incorporates folksongs and country fiddling in his first string quartet. American composer Charles Ives wrote music that was distinctly American. Ives gave programmatic titles to much of his chamber music; his first string quartet, for example, is called &quot;From the Salvation Army&quot;, and quotes American Protestant hymns in several places.

====Serialism, polytonality and polyrhythms====
A second direction in the search for a new tonality was twelve-tone serialism. Arnold Schoenberg developed the twelve-tone method of composition as an alternative to the structure provided by the diatonic system. His method entails building a piece using a series of the twelve notes of the chromatic scale, permuting it and superimposing it on itself to create the composition.
Schoenberg did not arrive immediately at the serial method. His first chamber work, the string sextet Verklärte Nacht, was mostly a late German romantic work, though it was bold in its use of modulations. The first work that was frankly atonal was the second string quartet; the last movement of this quartet, which includes a soprano, has no key signature. Schoenberg further explored atonality with &quot;Pierrot Lunaire&quot;, for singer, flute or piccolo, clarinet, violin, cello and piano. The singer uses a technique called Sprechstimme, halfway between speech and song.

After developing the twelve-tone technique, Schoenberg wrote a number of chamber works, including two more string quartets, a string trio, and a wind quintet. He was followed by a number of other twelve-tone composers, the most prominent of whom were his students Alban Berg, who wrote the &quot;Lyric Suite&quot; for string quartet, and Anton Webern, who wrote &quot;Five Movements for String Quartet&quot;, op. 5.

Twelve-tone technique was not the only new experiment in tonality. Darius Milhaud developed the use of polytonality, that is, music where different instruments play in different keys at the same time. Milhaud wrote 18 string quartets; quartets number 14 and 15 are written so that each can be played by itself, or the two can be played at the same time as an octet. Milhaud also used jazz idioms, as in his &quot;Suite&quot; for clarinet, violin and piano.

The American composer Charles Ives used not only polytonality in his chamber works, but also polymeter. In his first string quartet he writes a section where the first violin and viola play in formula_1 time while the second violin and cello play in formula_2.

====Neoclassicism====

The plethora of directions that music took in the first quarter of the 20th century led to a reaction by many composers. Led by Stravinsky, these composers looked to the music of preclassical Europe for inspiration and stability. While Stravinsky&#x27;s neoclassical works – such as the &quot;Double Canon for String Quartet&quot; – sound contemporary, they are modeled on Baroque and early classical forms – the canon, the fugue, and the Baroque sonata form.
Paul Hindemith was another neoclassicist. His many chamber works are essentially tonal, though they use many dissonant harmonies. Hindemith wrote seven string quartets and two string trios, among other chamber works. At a time when composers were writing works of increasing complexity, beyond the reach of amateur musicians, Hindemith explicitly recognized the importance of amateur music-making, and intentionally wrote pieces that were within the abilities of nonprofessional players.

The works that the composer summarised as &quot;Kammermusik&quot;, a collection of eight extended compositions, consists mostly of concertante works, comparable to Bach&#x27;s &quot;Brandenburg Concertos&quot;.
Dmitri Shostakovich was one of the most prolific of chamber music composers of the 20th century, writing 15 string quartets, two piano trios, the piano quintet, and numerous other chamber works. Shostakovich&#x27;s music was for a long time banned in the Soviet Union and Shostakovich himself was in personal danger of deportation to Siberia. His eighth quartet is an autobiographical work, that expresses his deep depression from his ostracization, bordering on suicide: it quotes from previous compositions, and uses the four-note motif DSCH, the composer&#x27;s initials.

===Stretching the limits===

As the century progressed, many composers created works for small ensembles that, while they formally might be considered chamber music, challenged many of the fundamental characteristics that had defined the genre over the last 150 years.

====Music of friends====
The idea of composing music that could be played at home has been largely abandoned. Bartók was among the first to part with this idea. &quot;Bartók never conceived these quartets for private performance but rather for large, public concerts.&quot; Aside from the many almost insurmountable technical difficulties of many modern pieces, some of them are hardly suitable for performance in a small room. For example, &quot;Different Trains&quot; by Steve Reich is scored for live string quartet and recorded tape, which layers together a carefully orchestrated sound collage of speech, recorded train sounds, and three string quartets.

====Relation of composer and performer====
Traditionally, the composer wrote the notes, and the performer interpreted them. But this is no longer the case in much modern music. In &quot;Für kommende Zeiten&quot; (For Times to Come), Stockhausen writes verbal instructions describing what the performers are to play. &quot;Star constellations/with common points/and falling stars ... Abrupt end&quot; is a sample.

Composer Terry Riley describes how he works with the Kronos Quartet, an ensemble devoted to contemporary music: &quot;When I write a score for them, it&#x27;s an unedited score. I put in just a minimal amount of dynamics and phrasing marks ...we spend a lot of time trying out different ideas in order to shape the music, to form it. At the end of the process, it makes the performers actually &quot;own&quot; the music. That to me is the best way for composers and musicians to interact.&quot;

====New sounds====
Composers seek new timbres, remote from the traditional blend of strings, piano and woodwinds that characterized chamber music in the 19th century. This search led to the incorporation of new instruments in the 20th century, such as the theremin and the synthesizer in chamber music compositions.

Many composers sought new timbres within the framework of traditional instruments. &quot;Composers begin to hear new timbres and new timbral combinations, which are as important to the new music of the twentieth century as the so-called breakdown of functional tonality,&quot; writes music historian James McCalla. Examples are numerous: Bartók&#x27;s Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion (1937), Schoenberg&#x27;s &quot;Pierrot lunaire&quot;, Charles Ives&#x27;s &quot;Quartertone Pieces&quot; for two pianos tuned a quartertone apart. Other composers used electronics and extended techniques to create new sonorities. An example is George Crumb&#x27;s &quot;Black Angels&quot;, for electric string quartet (1970). The players not only bow their amplified instruments, they also beat on them with thimbles, pluck them with paper clips and play on the wrong side of the bridge or between the fingers and the nut. Still other composers have sought to explore the timbres created by including instruments which are not often associated with a typical orchestral ensemble. For example, Robert Davine explores the orchestral timbres of the accordion when it is included in a traditional wind trio in his Divertimento for accordion, flute, clarinet and bassoon. and Karlheinz Stockhausen wrote a &quot;Helicopter String Quartet&quot;.

What do these changes mean for the future of chamber music? &quot;With the technological advances have come questions of aesthetics and sociological changes in music&quot;, writes analyst Baron. &quot;These changes have often resulted in accusations that technology has destroyed chamber music and that technological advance is in inverse proportion to musical worth. The ferocity of these attacks only underscores how fundamental these changes are, and only time will tell if humankind will benefit from them.&quot;

===In contemporary society===

Analysts agree that the role of chamber music in society has changed profoundly in the last 50 years; yet there is little agreement as to what that change is. On the one hand, Baron contends that &quot;chamber music in the home ... remained very important in Europe and America until the Second World War, after which the increasing invasion of radio and recording reduced its scope considerably.&quot; This view is supported by subjective impressions. &quot;Today there are so many more millions of people listening to music, but far fewer playing chamber music just for the pleasure of it&quot;, says conductor and pianist Daniel Barenboim.

However, recent surveys suggest there is, on the contrary, a resurgence of home music making. In the radio program &quot;Amateurs Help Keep Chamber Music Alive&quot; from 2005, reporter Theresa Schiavone cites a Gallup poll showing an increase in the sale of stringed instruments in America. Joe Lamond, president of the National Association of Music Manufacturers (NAMM) attributes the increase to a growth of home music-making by adults approaching retirement. &quot;I would really look to the demographics of the [baby] boomers&quot;, he said in an interview. These people &quot;are starting to look for something that matters to them ... nothing makes them feel good more than playing music.&quot;

A study by the European Music Office in 1996 suggests that not only older people are playing music. &quot;The number of adolescents today to have done music has almost doubled by comparison with those born before 1960&quot;, the study shows. While most of this growth is in popular music, some is in chamber music and art music, according to the study.

While there is no agreement about the number of chamber music players, the opportunities for amateurs to play have certainly grown. The number of chamber music camps and retreats, where amateurs can meet for a weekend or a month to play together, has burgeoned. &quot;Music for the Love of It&quot;, an organization to promote amateur playing, publishes a directory of music workshops that lists more than 500 workshops in 24 countries for amateurs in 2008 The Associated Chamber Music Players (ACMP) offers a directory of over 5,000 amateur players worldwide who welcome partners for chamber music sessions.

Regardless of whether the number of amateur players has grown or shrunk, the number of chamber music concerts in the west has increased greatly in the last 20 years. Concert halls have largely replaced the home as the venue for concerts. Baron suggests that one of the reasons for this surge is &quot;the spiraling costs of orchestral concerts and the astronomical fees demanded by famous soloists, which have priced both out of the range of most audiences.&quot; The repertoire at these concerts is almost universally the classics of the 19th century. However, modern works are increasingly included in programs, and some groups, like the Kronos Quartet, devote themselves almost exclusively to contemporary music and new compositions; and ensembles like the Turtle Island String Quartet, that combine classical, jazz, rock and other styles to create crossover music. Cello Fury and Project Trio offer a new spin to the standard chamber ensemble. Cello Fury consists of three cellists and a drummer and Project Trio includes a flutist, bassist, and cellist.
Several groups such as Classical Revolution and Simple Measures have taken classical chamber music out of the concert hall and into the streets. Simple Measures, a group of chamber musicians in Seattle (Washington, US), gives concerts in shopping centers, coffee shops, and streetcars. The Providence (Rhode Island, US) String Quartet has started the &quot;Storefront Strings&quot; program, offering impromptu concerts and lessons out of a storefront in one of Providence&#x27;s poorer neighborhoods. &quot;What really makes this for me&quot;, said Rajan Krishnaswami, cellist and founder of Simple Measures, &quot;is the audience reaction ... you really get that audience feedback.&quot;

==Performance==

Chamber music performance is a specialized field, and requires a number of skills not normally required for the performance of symphonic or solo music. Many performers and authors have written about the specialized techniques required for a successful chamber musician. Chamber music playing, writes M. D. Herter Norton, requires that &quot;individuals ... make a unified whole yet remain individuals. The soloist is a whole unto himself, and in the orchestra individuality is lost in numbers ...&quot;.

===&quot;Music of friends&quot;===
Many performers contend that the intimate nature of chamber music playing requires certain personality traits.

David Waterman, cellist of the Endellion Quartet, writes that the chamber musician &quot;needs to balance assertiveness and flexibility.&quot; Good rapport is essential. Arnold Steinhardt, first violinist of the Guarneri Quartet, notes that many professional quartets suffer from frequent turnover of players. &quot;Many musicians cannot take the strain of going &quot;mano a mano&quot; with the same three people year after year.&quot;

Mary Norton, a violinist who studied quartet playing with the Kneisel Quartet at the beginning of the last century, goes so far that players of different parts in a quartet have different personality traits. &quot;By tradition the first violin is the leader&quot; but &quot;this does not mean a relentless predominance.&quot; The second violinist &quot;is a little everybody&#x27;s servant.&quot; &quot;The artistic contribution of each member will be measured by his skill in asserting or subduing that individuality which he must possess to be at all interesting.&quot;

===Interpretation===

&quot;For an individual, the problems of interpretation are challenging enough&quot;, writes Waterman, &quot;but for a quartet grappling with some of the most profound, intimate and heartfelt compositions in the music literature, the communal nature of decision-making is often more testing than the decisions themselves.&quot;
The problem of finding agreement on musical issues is complicated by the fact that each player is playing a different part, that may appear to demand dynamics or gestures contrary to those of other parts in the same passage. Sometimes these differences are even specified in the score – for example, where cross-dynamics are indicated, with one instrument crescendoing while another is getting softer.

One of the issues that must be settled in rehearsal is who leads the ensemble at each point of the piece. Normally, the first violin leads the ensemble. By leading, this means that the violinist indicates the start of each movement and their tempos by a gesture with her head or bowing hand. However, there are passages that require other instruments to lead. For example, John Dalley, second violinist of the Guarneri Quartet, says, &quot;We&#x27;ll often ask [the cellist] to lead in pizzicato passages. A cellist&#x27;s preparatory motion for pizzicato is larger and slower than that of a violinist.&quot;

Players discuss issues of interpretation in rehearsal; but often, in mid-performance, players do things spontaneously, requiring the other players to respond in real time. &quot;After twenty years in the [Guarneri] Quartet, I&#x27;m happily surprised on occasion to find myself totally wrong about what I think a player will do, or how he&#x27;ll react in a particular passage&quot;, says violist Michael Tree.

===Ensemble, blend, and balance===
Playing together constitutes a major challenge to chamber music players. Many compositions pose difficulties in coordination, with figures such as hemiolas, syncopation, fast unison passages and simultaneously sounded notes that form chords that are challenging to play in tune. But beyond the challenge of merely playing together from a rhythmic or intonation perspective is the greater challenge of sounding good together.

To create a unified chamber music sound – to blend – the players must coordinate the details of their technique. They must decide when to use vibrato and how much. They often need to coordinate their bowing and &quot;breathing&quot; between phrases, to ensure a unified sound. They need to agree on special techniques, such as spiccato, sul tasto, sul ponticello, and so on.

Balance refers to the relative volume of each of the instruments. Because chamber music is a conversation, sometimes one instrument must stand out, sometimes another. It is not always a simple matter for members of an ensemble to determine the proper balance while playing; frequently, they require an outside listener, or a recording of their rehearsal, to tell them that the relations between the instruments are correct.

===Intonation===

Chamber music playing presents special problems of intonation. The piano is tuned using equal temperament, that is, the 12 notes of the scale are spaced exactly equally. This method makes it possible for the piano to play in any key; however, all the intervals except the octave sound very slightly out of tune. String players can play with just intonation, that is, they can play specific intervals (such as fifths) exactly in tune. Moreover, string and wind players can use &quot;expressive intonation&quot;, changing the pitch of a note to create a musical or dramatic effect. &quot;String intonation is more expressive and sensitive than equal-tempered piano intonation.&quot;

However, using true and expressive intonation requires careful coordination with the other players, especially when a piece is going through harmonic modulations. &quot;The difficulty in string quartet intonation is to determine the degree of freedom you have at any given moment&quot;, says Steinhardt.

==The chamber music experience==

Players of chamber music, both amateur and professional, attest to a unique enchantment with playing in ensemble. &quot;It is not an exaggeration to say that there opened out before me an enchanted world&quot;, writes Walter Willson Cobbett, instigator of the Cobbett Competition, Cobbett Medal and editor of &quot;Cobbett&#x27;s Cyclopedic Survey of Chamber Music&quot;.

Ensembles develop a close intimacy of shared musical experience. &quot;It is on the concert stage where the moments of true intimacy occur&quot;, writes Steinhardt. &quot;When a performance is in progress, all four of us together enter a zone of magic somewhere between our music stands and become a conduit, messenger, and missionary ... It is an experience too personal to talk about and yet it colors every aspect of our relationship, every good-natured musical confrontation, all the professional gossip, the latest viola joke.&quot;

The playing of chamber music has been the inspiration for numerous books, both fiction and nonfiction. &quot;An Equal Music&quot; by Vikram Seth, explores the life and love of the second violinist of a fictional quartet, the Maggiore. Central to the story is the tensions and the intimacy developed between the four members of the quartet. &quot;A strange composite being we are [in performance], not ourselves any more, but the Maggiore, composed of so many disjunct parts: chairs, stands, music, bows, instruments, musicians ...&quot; &quot;The Rosendorf Quartet&quot;, by Nathan Shaham, describes the trials of a string quartet in Palestine, before the establishment of the state of Israel. &quot;For the Love of It&quot; by Wayne Booth is a nonfictional account of the author&#x27;s romance with cello playing and chamber music.

==Chamber music societies==

Numerous societies are dedicated to the encouragement and performance of chamber music. Some of these are:
* the Associated Chamber Music Players, or ACMP – The Chamber Music Network, an international organization that encourages amateur and professional chamber music playing. ACMP has a fund to support chamber music projects, and publishes a directory of chamber musicians worldwide.
* Chamber Music America supports professional chamber music groups through grants for residencies and commissions, through award programs, and through professional development programs.
* the Cobbett Association for Chamber Music Research is an organization dedicated to the rediscovery of works of forgotten chamber music.
* Music for the Love of It publishes a newsletter on amateur chamber music activities worldwide, as well as a guide to music workshops for amateurs.
* the Ottawa Chamber Music Society, a non-profit organization that encourages public involvement and appreciation of chamber music. The OCMS has organized Ottawa Chamber Music Festival, the largest chamber music festival in the world, since 1994.
* Musica Viva Australia, a large non-profit chamber music promoter working across Australia that tours local and international chamber music artists, as well as managing chamber music festivals and young artist development programs.

In addition to these national and international organizations, there are also numerous regional and local organizations that support chamber music. Some of the most prominent professional American chamber music ensembles and organizations are:
* Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center based in New York City
* Southwest Chamber Music based in Los Angeles
* Chicago Chamber Music based in Chicago
* Canadian Brass based in New York and Toronto
* Juilliard String Quartet in New York
* Kronos String Quartet in San Francisco
* Emerson String Quartet in New York

==Festivals==
==Ensembles==
This is a partial list of the types of ensembles found in chamber music. The standard repertoire for chamber ensembles is rich, and the totality of chamber music in print in sheet music form is nearly boundless. See the articles on each instrument combination for examples of repertoire.

==Notes==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* and .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot; (ed. Stanley Sadie, 1980)
*
* 

==External links==
*Chamber Music America
*earsense chamberbase, an online database of over 50,000 chamber works
*Fischoff National Chamber Music Association, sponsor of the chamber music competitions and a supporter of chamber music education.
*Associated Chamber Music Players (ACMP), New York City
*Annotated bibliography of double wind quintet music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="0" end="13" title="Chamber music" label="Chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="27" end="42" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="81" end="92" title="Musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600334" start="135" end="149" title="Great chamber" label="palace chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="197" end="206" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="303" end="312" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="1000" end="1026" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1584" end="1599" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="1780" end="1791" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="2011" end="2024" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095279" start="2033" end="2041" title="Consort of instruments" label="consorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q778907" start="2124" end="2140" title="sonata da camera" label="sonata da camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q543020" start="2166" end="2182" title="sonata da chiesa" label="sonata da chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q903425" start="2458" end="2469" title="trio sonata" label="trio sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="2477" end="2484" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="2516" end="2531" title="Bass (sound)" label="bass instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="2585" end="2596" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="2598" end="2603" title="Pipe organ" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="2613" end="2617" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="2723" end="2737" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465878" start="2924" end="2940" title="The Art of Fugue" label="The Art of Fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="2950" end="2971" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090674" start="3076" end="3092" title="string orchestra" label="string orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="3216" end="3228" title="German flute" label="German flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="3289" end="3296" title="violone" label="violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="3298" end="3303" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q840920" start="3305" end="3312" title="theorbo" label="theorbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="3317" end="3324" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="3689" end="3701" title="counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="4290" end="4302" title="figured bass" label="figured bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978825" start="4409" end="4415" title="Galant" label="Galant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215911" start="4609" end="4617" title="serenade" label="serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="4983" end="4995" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="5087" end="5099" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="5506" end="5517" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q205734" start="5907" end="5913" title="minuet" label="minuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q209534" start="5917" end="5924" title="scherzo" label="scherzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13323" start="6093" end="6098" title="rondo" label="rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217435" start="6393" end="6421" title="Giovanni Battista Sammartini" label="Giovanni Battista Sammartini"/>
<link wikidata="Q697238" start="6423" end="6438" title="Ignaz Holzbauer" label="Ignaz Holzbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113911" start="6444" end="6463" title="Franz Xaver Richter" label="Franz Xaver Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q882123" start="6504" end="6526" title="Franz Ignaz von Beecke" label="Franz Ignaz von Beecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="6737" end="6760" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q600378" start="7313" end="7328" title="Kegelstatt Trio" label="Kegelstatt Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097994" start="7376" end="7415" title="Clarinet Quintet (Mozart)" label="Quintet for Clarinet and String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058169" start="7874" end="7920" title="Haydn Quartets (Mozart)" label="six string quartets that he dedicated to Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189766" start="8345" end="8361" title="Luigi Boccherini" label="Luigi Boccherini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="8550" end="8558" title="Franz Schubert" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q78522" start="8670" end="8698" title="Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf" label="Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q450670" start="8711" end="8732" title="Johann Baptist Wanhal" label="Johann Baptist Wanhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q694686" start="9329" end="9357" title="Nikolaus I, Prince Esterházy" label="Nikolaus I, Prince Esterházy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521151" start="9385" end="9392" title="baryton" label="baryton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="9508" end="9528" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q502943" start="9614" end="9631" title="Andrey Razumovsky" label="Andrey Razumovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="10222" end="10229" title="luthier" label="luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="10273" end="10279" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="10281" end="10286" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="10291" end="10296" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q57226" start="10568" end="10579" title="Louis Spohr" label="Louis Spohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="10918" end="10929" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque era"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="10935" end="10946" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="11321" end="11331" title="pianoforte" label="pianoforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q301597" start="11429" end="11450" title="Bartolomeo Cristofori" label="Bartolomeo Cristofori"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="11710" end="11719" title="sforzando (musical direction)" label="sforzando"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="12046" end="12057" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="12062" end="12077" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="12139" end="12148" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="12169" end="12189" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q594751" start="12434" end="12449" title="Maynard Solomon" label="Maynard Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067898" start="12571" end="12584" title="Late string quartets (Beethoven)" label="late quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="12716" end="12731" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547987" start="12920" end="12944" title="Piano Trios, Op. 1 (Beethoven)" label="three Piano Trios, Op. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632146" start="13951" end="13965" title="Septet (Beethoven)" label="Septet, Op. 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q215333" start="14410" end="14421" title="Carl Czerny" label="Carl Czerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231680" start="14738" end="14748" title="contrabass" label="contrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q613618" start="15072" end="15082" title="Große Fuge" label="Große Fuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927115" start="15209" end="15236" title="String Quartets Nos. 1–6, Op. 18 (Beethoven)" label="string quartets 1–6, Op. 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919526" start="15313" end="15335" title="String Quartets, Op. 76 (Haydn)" label="Op. 76 string quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927118" start="15923" end="15929" title="String Quartets Nos. 7–9, Op. 59 – Rasumovsky (Beethoven)" label="Op. 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q522907" start="16358" end="16376" title="Ignaz Schuppanzigh" label="Ignaz Schuppanzigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="16549" end="16560" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="16663" end="16673" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343038" start="16706" end="16716" title="intonation (music)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q164658" start="16815" end="16821" title="String Quartet No. 10 (Beethoven)" label="Op. 74"/>
<link wikidata="Q169969" start="16961" end="16967" title="String Quartet No. 11 (Beethoven)" label="Op. 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q686115" start="17963" end="17974" title="Lydian mode" label="Lydian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="18530" end="18544" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18655" end="18668" title="List of compositions by Franz Schubert#Music for chamber ensemble" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349941" start="18775" end="18788" title="Trout Quintet" label="Trout Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q118442" start="18799" end="18826" title="Octet (Schubert)" label="octet for strings and winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q355057" start="19181" end="19194" title="gemütlichkeit" label="gemütlichkeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779432" start="19548" end="19574" title="String Quintet (Schubert)" label="String Quintet in C, D.956"/>
<link wikidata="Q207741" start="19862" end="19877" title="Sturm und Drang" label="Sturm und Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q605107" start="20021" end="20041" title="Death and the Maiden Quartet" label="Death and the Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331223" start="20047" end="20064" title="String Quartet No. 13 (Schubert)" label="Rosamunde quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413020" start="20097" end="20117" title="Quartettsatz, D. 703 (Schubert)" label="Quartettsatz, D. 703"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="20161" end="20178" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349011" start="20372" end="20392" title="Octet (Mendelssohn)" label="String Octet, Op. 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413716" start="20627" end="20649" title="String Quartet No. 1 (Mendelssohn)" label="String Quartet, Op. 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539350" start="20674" end="20709" title="Piano Trio No. 1 (Mendelssohn)" label="Piano Trio No. 1 in D minor, Op. 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198137" start="20769" end="20775" title="Cycle (music)" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413722" start="20918" end="20939" title="String Quartet No. 2 (Mendelssohn)" label="second string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="21550" end="21565" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620665" start="21620" end="21651" title="Piano Quintet (Schumann)" label="Piano Quintet in E flat, Op. 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="21967" end="21972" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372629" start="22131" end="22150" title="String Quartets (Schumann)" label="his string quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190135" start="22155" end="22172" title="Piano Quartet (Schumann)" label="his piano quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q57226" start="22638" end="22649" title="Louis Spohr" label="Louis Spohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="22992" end="23013" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q362925" start="23601" end="23614" title="house concert" label="house concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="24041" end="24060" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="24065" end="24077" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="24511" end="24525" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414262" start="24579" end="24589" title="piano trio" label="piano trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q380935" start="25106" end="25119" title="George Onslow (composer)" label="George Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q101698" start="25155" end="25172" title="Gaetano Donizetti" label="Gaetano Donizetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q461296" start="25199" end="25214" title="Antonio Bazzini" label="Antonio Bazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q311387" start="25216" end="25228" title="Anton Reicha" label="Anton Reicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q213894" start="25230" end="25244" title="Carl Gottlieb Reissiger" label="Carl Reissiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q312700" start="25246" end="25256" title="Josef Suk (composer)" label="Joseph Suk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="25403" end="25412" title="folk tune" label="folk tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="25444" end="25454" title="opera aria" label="opera aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="25918" end="25926" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q57286" start="26205" end="26222" title="Fanny Mendelssohn" label="Fanny Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="26243" end="26270" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="26297" end="26318" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="26379" end="26393" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q209741" start="26501" end="26528" title="Program music" label="programmatic forms of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="26759" end="26771" title="music critic" label="music critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="26772" end="26787" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968707" start="26794" end="26814" title="War of the Romantics" label="War of the Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q696988" start="27166" end="27187" title="Hellmesberger Quartet" label="Hellmesberger Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q698074" start="27196" end="27216" title="Joseph Hellmesberger, Sr." label="Joseph Hellmesberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="27226" end="27241" title="Joachim Quartet" label="Joachim Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="27250" end="27264" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q78938" start="27371" end="27393" title="Wilma Neruda" label="Vilemina Norman Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095122" start="27467" end="27483" title="Women in music" label="women performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20101812" start="27566" end="27579" title="Emily Shinner" label="Emily Shinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="27685" end="27700" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="27778" end="27793" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="28073" end="28085" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="28297" end="28305" title="tonality" label="tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482539" start="28336" end="28371" title="String Sextet No. 2 (Brahms)" label="Brahms second string sextet, Op. 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048482" start="28805" end="28813" title="Jan Swafford" label="Swafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="28991" end="29008" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="29232" end="29246" title="12-tone system" label="12-tone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719356" start="29467" end="29504" title="Piano Quintet (Brahms)" label="quintet for piano and strings, Op. 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098064" start="29553" end="29578" title="Clarinet Quintet (Brahms)" label="clarinet quintet, Op. 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613456" start="29669" end="29691" title="Horn Trio (Brahms)" label="piano, violin and horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813732" start="29715" end="29757" title="Two Songs for Voice, Viola and Piano" label="two songs for alto singer, viola and piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012827" start="29806" end="29815" title="obbligato" label="obbligato"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="29979" end="29991" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="30190" end="30204" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346508" start="30212" end="30234" title="String Quartet (Debussy)" label="string quartet, Op. 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="30538" end="30551" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="30714" end="30727" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="30735" end="30748" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q837182" start="30834" end="30856" title="Impressionist music" label="Impressionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635257" start="30933" end="30946" title="String Quartet (Ravel)" label="Ravel quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="31374" end="31385" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60197" start="31642" end="31657" title="Alfred Einstein" label="Alfred Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="31906" end="31920" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q210227" start="32243" end="32275" title="Piano Quintet No. 2 (Dvořák)" label="piano quintet in A major, Op. 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265067" start="32300" end="32305" title="Dumka (musical form)" label="Dumka"/>
<link wikidata="Q537293" start="32517" end="32534" title="Jeannette Thurber" label="Jeannette Thurber"/>
<link wikidata="Q172092" start="32655" end="32688" title="String Quartet No. 12 (Dvořák)" label="string quartet in F major, Op. 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="32905" end="32920" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="33123" end="33147" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q591094" start="33232" end="33252" title="Souvenir de Florence" label="Souvenir de Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q164004" start="33268" end="33285" title="Alexander Borodin" label="Alexander Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q403351" start="33293" end="33314" title="String Quartet No. 2 (Borodin)" label="second string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="33487" end="33499" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q745514" start="33551" end="33584" title="String Quartet No. 1 (Grieg)" label="string quartet in G minor, Op. 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q54412929" start="33593" end="33607" title="Violin Sonatas (Grieg)" label="violin sonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153008" start="33632" end="33645" title="Zoltán Kodály" label="Zoltán Kodály"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="33650" end="33661" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="33687" end="33702" title="ethnomusicology" label="ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="33790" end="33796" title="Hungarian people" label="Magyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="34085" end="34097" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702413" start="34580" end="34594" title="diatonic scale" label="diatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q174864" start="36021" end="36026" title="elegy" label="elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="36750" end="36754" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="36950" end="36965" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786924" start="36979" end="37010" title="Three Pieces for String Quartet (Stravinsky)" label="Three Pieces for String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620751" start="37187" end="37205" title="Histoire du soldat" label="Histoire du soldat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="37384" end="37406" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="37408" end="37422" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="37427" end="37443" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="37612" end="37624" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="37986" end="37995" title="serialism" label="serialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="37997" end="38014" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="38029" end="38062" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone method of composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q534032" start="38399" end="38414" title="Verklärte Nacht" label="Verklärte Nacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="38534" end="38540" title="atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38549" end="38570" title="String quartets (Schoenberg)#String Quartet No. 2" label="second string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q965040" start="38704" end="38719" title="Pierrot Lunaire" label="Pierrot Lunaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500983" start="38827" end="38839" title="Sprechgesang" label="Sprechstimme"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="39139" end="39149" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355101" start="39171" end="39182" title="Lyric Suite (Berg)" label="Lyric Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="39213" end="39225" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="39359" end="39373" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358845" start="39395" end="39407" title="polytonality" label="polytonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="39676" end="39680" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="39772" end="39784" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358845" start="39799" end="39811" title="polytonality" label="polytonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="39843" end="39852" title="polymeter" label="polymeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413883" start="39861" end="39881" title="String Quartet No. 1 (Ives)" label="first string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="40163" end="40173" title="Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="40495" end="40509" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q963679" start="41032" end="41043" title="Kammermusik (Hindemith)" label="Kammermusik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="41115" end="41132" title="Concerto" label="concertante works"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="41166" end="41187" title="Brandenburg Concertos" label="Brandenburg Concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="41195" end="41214" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965644" start="41542" end="41556" title="String Quartet No. 8 (Shostakovich)" label="eighth quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q972176" start="41734" end="41738" title="DSCH motif" label="DSCH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027644" start="42488" end="42504" title="Different Trains" label="Different Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q262791" start="42514" end="42525" title="Steve Reich" label="Steve Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005904" start="42888" end="42907" title="Für kommende Zeiten" label="Für kommende Zeiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="42935" end="42946" title="Stockhausen" label="Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q365243" start="43125" end="43136" title="Terry Riley" label="Terry Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="43169" end="43183" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="43868" end="43876" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="43885" end="43896" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q831870" start="44281" end="44317" title="Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion" label="Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q356804" start="44563" end="44575" title="George Crumb" label="George Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q963793" start="44589" end="44601" title="Black Angels (Crumb)" label="Black Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q47471515" start="45012" end="45025" title="Robert Davine" label="Robert Davine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="45065" end="45074" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="45190" end="45211" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502684" start="45226" end="45251" title="Helikopter-Streichquartett" label="Helicopter String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152768" start="46434" end="46450" title="Daniel Barenboim" label="Daniel Barenboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="46665" end="46676" title="Gallup poll" label="Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="48760" end="48774" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461662" start="48880" end="48908" title="Turtle Island String Quartet" label="Turtle Island String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="48972" end="48987" title="Crossover (music)" label="crossover music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058308" start="48989" end="48999" title="Cello Fury" label="Cello Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249352" start="49004" end="49016" title="Project Trio" label="Project Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827058" start="49202" end="49222" title="Classical Revolution" label="Classical Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899813" start="50708" end="50725" title="Arnold Steinhardt" label="Arnold Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="52556" end="52592" title="Conducting" label="gesture with her head or bowing hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="52788" end="52797" title="pizzicato" label="pizzicato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430673" start="53506" end="53513" title="hemiola" label="hemiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="53516" end="53527" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617171" start="54112" end="54120" title="spiccato" label="spiccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="54122" end="54131" title="sul tasto" label="sul tasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="54133" end="54147" title="sul ponticello" label="sul ponticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343038" start="54655" end="54665" title="intonation (music)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="54692" end="54709" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="54945" end="54960" title="just intonation" label="just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565921" start="55843" end="55865" title="Walter Willson Cobbett" label="Walter Willson Cobbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790858" start="55906" end="55919" title="Walter Willson Cobbett Medal" label="Cobbett Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749927" start="56646" end="56660" title="An Equal Music" label="An Equal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q379762" start="56670" end="56681" title="Vikram Seth" label="Vikram Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910365" start="57112" end="57125" title="Nathan Shaham" label="Nathan Shaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013599" start="57550" end="57554" title="Associated Chamber Music Players (ACMP)" label="ACMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138791" start="57979" end="57998" title="Cobbett Association" label="Cobbett Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109156" start="58415" end="58444" title="Ottawa Chamber Music Festival" label="Ottawa Chamber Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942483" start="58509" end="58530" title="Musica Viva Australia" label="Musica Viva Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681006" start="59267" end="59289" title="Emerson String Quartet" label="Emerson String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="59370" end="59379" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensembles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="59505" end="59516" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="59724" end="59771" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="59783" end="59796" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="82998" wikidata="Q7547769" url="?curid=82998" title="Sniglet">
<text>A sniglet () is an often humorous word made up to describe something for which no dictionary word exists. Introduced in the 1980s TV comedy series &quot;Not Necessarily the News&quot;, sniglets were generated and published in significant numbers, along with submissions by fans, in several books by Rich Hall, beginning with his &quot;Sniglets&quot;, &quot;Sniglets for Kids&quot;, and &quot;More Sniglets&quot; in the mid-1980s.

==Origin==
===Development by Rich Hall===
The term &quot;sniglet&quot; was conceived by comedian Rich Hall during his tenure on the 1980s HBO comedy series &quot;Not Necessarily the News&quot;. Each monthly episode featured a regular segment on sniglets, which Hall described as &quot;any word that doesn&#x27;t appear in the dictionary, but should&quot;. In 1984, a collection of sniglets was published by Hall, titled &quot;Sniglets (snig&#x27; lit: any word that doesn&#x27;t appear in the dictionary, but should)&quot;. This was followed by a &quot;daily comic panel&quot; in newspapers, four more books, a game, and a calendar. Many sniglets are portmanteau words, a comedic style often traced to Lewis Carroll.

The Hall books have their entries arranged in alphabetical order like a dictionary, with information on how to pronounce the word, followed by a definition and sometimes accompanied by an illustration. The original book has two appendices, &quot;Anatomical Sniglets&quot; and &quot;Extra Added Bonus Section for Poets&quot;, and &quot;More Sniglets&quot; includes an &quot;Audio-Visual Sniglets&quot; section. All five books included an &quot;Official Sniglets Entry Blank&quot;, beginning, &quot;Dear Rich: Here&#x27;s my sniglet, which is every bit as clever as any in this dictionary.&quot;

The &quot;Game of Sniglets&quot; is a board game in which players tried to identify the official sniglet from among a list that also included sniglets that fellow participants had created to go along with a provided definition. Players earn points by either guessing which word is the official sniglet, or by having their word chosen as the best candidate; the points earned determine how many spaces players can advance on the game board. The game instructions offer suggestions for creating a new sniglet, such as combining or blending words; changing the spelling of a word related to the definition; or creating new, purely nonsensical words.

===Precursors===
In 1914, humorist Gelett Burgess published a dictionary of original neologisms, &quot;Burgess Unabridged: A New Dictionary of Words You Have Always Needed&quot;. Humor writer Paul Jennings had published made-up meanings of real place-names in a 1963 essay appearing in &quot;The Jenguin Pennings&quot;. Author Douglas Adams, while travelling with British comedy producer John Lloyd, suggested they play a game he had learned at school in which players were challenged to make up plausible word definitions for place names taken from road maps; the definitions they came up with were later incorporated into a 1983 book, &quot;The Meaning of Liff&quot;. The similarities and relationship between the content of this book and the Hall concept of sniglets is noted, by Barbara Wallraff, in &quot;Word Court&quot; (2001). Douglas Adams believed that when the format of Lloyd&#x27;s satirical TV show &quot;Not the Nine O&#x27;Clock News&quot; was sold to America—where it became &quot;Not Necessarily the News&quot;—the producers also took the made-up word definition concept, which became the sniglets popularized by Hall.

==Beyond comedy==
In a 1990 interview, Hall was asked if the &quot;Sniglets books [were] completely for comic value?&quot; He answered, Anne Wescott Dodd&#x27;s &quot;A Handbook for Substitute Teachers&quot; (1989) and Marcia L. Tate&#x27;s &quot;Reading and Language Arts Worksheets Don&#x27;t Grow Dendrites: 20 Literacy Strategies That Engage the Brain&quot; (2005) suggest creating sniglets as a classroom activity, and so bear out his claim.

Popular English language experts such as Richard Lederer and Barbara Wallraff have noted sniglets in their books, &quot;The Miracle of Language&quot; and &quot;Word Court: Wherein Verbal Virtue Is Rewarded, Crimes Against the Language Are Punished, and Poetic Justice Is Done&quot;, respectively. The idea has been borrowed by Barbara Wallraff for her book &quot;Word Fugitives: In Pursuit of Wanted Words&quot;, where &quot;word fugitives&quot; is her term for invented words. Wallraff&#x27;s &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot; column &quot;Word Fugitives&quot; features words invented by readers, although they had to be puns, which many sniglets are not.

==Examples==
* Aquadextrous: possessing the ability to turn the bathtub faucet with the toes.
* Castcaspers: dead actors who appear on television.
* Chwads: discarded gum found beneath tables and countertops.
* Essoasso: One who swerves through a service station to avoid a red light.
* Glutetic chair: the chair design found in movie theaters.
* Icelanche: When ice at the bottom of an upturned glass suddenly moves toward the mouth as one attempts to finish drinking the liquid.
* Jokesult: When someone insults you, you call them on it, and they say, &quot;It was just a joke.&quot;
* Larry: a frayed toothbrush.
* Premblememblemation: The act of checking that a letter is in a mailbox after it has been dropped.
* Snackmosphere: the pocket of air found inside snack and/or potato chip bags.
* Terma helper: The extra verbiage used to stretch a 600-word essay to the required 1000.
* Toboggan hagen: a large ice cream sundae.
*Eyes-Hockey: The substance found in the corner of your eye in the morning.
*Pursabyss: where unrecovered belongings reside within a woman&#x27;s handbag.

==In popular culture==
Homer Simpson, a fictional character of the animated television series &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, suggests &quot;Son of Sniglet&quot; as a good book to name as a favorite and a life influence when he is completing his college application in the episode &quot;Homer Goes to College&quot;.

The fictional character Dale Gribble in the animated television series &quot;King of the Hill&quot; explains his inappropriate laughter upon successfully sabotaging a new relationship of fellow character Bill Dauterive, saying &quot;just remembered a funny sniglet!&quot;

The satirical newspaper &quot;The Onion&quot; published an article in 2001 mocking sniglets as an obscure fad.

==See also==

* Daffynition
* Dord
* Eggcorn
* Jabberwocky
* Mondegreen
* Phono-semantic matching
==References==
==Further reading==
=== Primary sources ===
Rich Hall released several volumes of collected sniglets, illustrated by Arnie Ten:
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Game of Sniglets&quot; (1990), .
* &quot;Sniglet a Day – 1994 Calendar&quot; (1993), .

==External links==
* Arnie Ten official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7547769" start="2" end="9" title="Sniglet" label="sniglet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062139" start="153" end="177" title="Not Necessarily the News" label="Not Necessarily the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098577" start="299" end="308" title="Rich Hall" label="Rich Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098577" start="528" end="537" title="Rich Hall" label="Rich Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="569" end="572" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062139" start="593" end="617" title="Not Necessarily the News" label="Not Necessarily the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="1082" end="1093" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="1133" end="1146" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="2273" end="2278" title="Blend word" label="blend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499602" start="2372" end="2389" title="nonsense word" label="nonsensical words"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998059" start="2427" end="2441" title="Gelett Burgess" label="Gelett Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2477" end="2486" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151576" start="2584" end="2597" title="Paul Jennings (UK author)" label="Paul Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="2719" end="2732" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q366162" start="2780" end="2790" title="John Lloyd (producer)" label="John Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q875382" start="3035" end="3054" title="The Meaning of Liff" label="The Meaning of Liff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044417" start="3311" end="3341" title="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News" label="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062139" start="3390" end="3414" title="Not Necessarily the News" label="Not Necessarily the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327301" start="4019" end="4034" title="Richard Lederer" label="Richard Lederer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4039" end="4055" title="Barbara Wallraff" label="Barbara Wallraff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="4478" end="4494" title="Atlantic Monthly" label="Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="4595" end="4598" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="5739" end="5752" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="5756" end="5763" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="5816" end="5828" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q94318" start="5997" end="6018" title="Homer Goes to College" label="Homer Goes to College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210461" start="6051" end="6063" title="Dale Gribble" label="Dale Gribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135966" start="6104" end="6120" title="King of the Hill" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908691" start="6231" end="6245" title="Bill Dauterive" label="Bill Dauterive"/>
<link wikidata="Q618236" start="6330" end="6339" title="The Onion" label="The Onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208341" start="6428" end="6439" title="Daffynition" label="Daffynition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858131" start="6442" end="6446" title="Dord" label="Dord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297397" start="6449" end="6456" title="Eggcorn" label="Eggcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="6459" end="6470" title="Jabberwocky" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156877" start="6473" end="6483" title="Mondegreen" label="Mondegreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128781" start="6486" end="6509" title="Phono-semantic matching" label="Phono-semantic matching"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83003" wikidata="Q2930613" url="?curid=83003" title="Conscientious objector">
<text>A conscientious objector is an &quot;individual who has claimed the right to refuse to perform military service&quot; on the grounds of freedom of conscience or religion. The term has also been extended to objecting to working for the military–industrial complex due to a crisis of conscience. In some countries, conscientious objectors are assigned to an alternative civilian service as a substitute for conscription or military service.

A number of organizations around the world celebrate the principle on May 15 as International Conscientious Objection Day.

On March 8, 1995, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/83 stated that &quot;persons performing military service should not be excluded from the right to have conscientious objections to military service&quot;. This was re-affirmed on April 22, 1998, when resolution 1998/77 recognized that &quot;persons [already] performing military service may &quot;develop&quot; conscientious objections&quot;.

==History==
Many conscientious objectors have been executed, imprisoned, or otherwise penalized when their beliefs led to actions conflicting with their society&#x27;s legal system or government. The legal definition and status of conscientious objection has varied over the years and from nation to nation. Religious beliefs were a starting point in many nations for legally granting conscientious objector status.

The earliest recorded conscientious objector, Maximilianus, was conscripted into the Roman Army in the year 295, but &quot;told the Proconsul in Numidia that because of his religious convictions he could not serve in the military&quot;. He was executed for this, and was later canonized as Saint Maximilian.

An early recognition of conscientious objection was granted by William the Silent to the Dutch Mennonites in 1575. They could refuse military service in exchange for a monetary payment.

Formal legislation to exempt objectors from fighting was first granted in mid-18th-century Great Britain following problems with attempting to force Quakers into military service. In 1757, when the first attempt was made to establish a British Militia as a professional national military reserve, a clause in the Militia Ballot Act 1757 allowed Quakers exemption from military service.

In the United States, conscientious objection was permitted from the country&#x27;s founding, although regulation was left to individual states prior to the introduction of conscription.

==International law==
===Universal Declaration of Human Rights===
In 1948, the issue of the right to &quot;conscience&quot; was dealt with by the United Nations General Assembly in Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It reads:

The proclamation was ratified during the General Assembly on 10 December 1948 by a vote of 48 in favour, 0 against, with 8 abstentions.

In 1974, the Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations, Seán MacBride said, in his Nobel Lecture, &quot;To the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights one more might, with relevance, be added. It is &#x27;The Right to Refuse to Kill&#x27;.&quot;

In 1976, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights entered into force. It was based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and was originally created in 1966. Nations that have signed this treaty are bound by it. Its Article 18 begins: &quot;Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.&quot;

However, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights left the issue of conscientious objection inexplicit, as in this quote from War Resisters International: &quot;Article 18 of the Covenant does put some limits on the right [to freedom of thought, conscience and religion], stating that [its] manifestations must not infringe on public safety, order, health or morals. Some states argue that such limitations [on the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion] would [derivatively] permit them to make conscientious objection during time of war a threat to public safety, or mass conscientious objection a disruption to public order, ... [Some states] even [argue] that it is a &#x27;moral&#x27; duty to serve the state in its military.&quot;

On 30 July 1993, explicit clarification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Article 18 was made in the United Nations Human Rights Committee general comment 22, Paragraph 11: &quot;The Covenant does not explicitly refer to a right to conscientious objection, but the Committee believes that such a right can be derived from article 18, inasmuch as the obligation to use lethal force may seriously conflict with the freedom of conscience and the right to manifest one&#x27;s religion or belief.&quot; In 2006, the committee has found for the first time a right to conscientious objection under article 18, although not unanimously.

In 1997, an announcement of Amnesty International&#x27;s forthcoming campaign and briefing for the UN Commission on Human Rights included this quote: &quot;The right to conscientious objection to military service is not a marginal concern outside the mainstream of international human rights protection and promotion.&quot;

In 1998, the Human Rights Commission reiterated previous statements and added &quot;states should ... refrain from subjecting conscientious objectors ... to repeated punishment for failure to perform military service&quot;. It also encouraged states &quot;to consider granting asylum to those conscientious objectors compelled to leave their country of origin because they fear persecution owing to their refusal to perform military service ...&quot;

In 2001, Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union recognised the right to conscientious objection.

===Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status===
The Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status (the Handbook) of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) states:

171. Not every conviction, genuine though it may be, will constitute a sufficient reason for claiming refugee status after desertion or draft-evasion. It is not enough for a person to be in disagreement with his government regarding the political justification for a particular military action. Where, however, the type of military action, with which an individual does not wish to be associated, is condemned by the international community as contrary to basic rules of human conduct, punishment for desertion or draft-evasion could, in the light of all other requirements of the definition, in itself be regarded as persecution.

==National law==
===United States===

At least two state constitutions have recognized an individual right not to bear arms. Pennsylvania&#x27;s Constitution of 1790 states &quot;Those who conscientiously scruple to bear arms, shall not be compelled to do so; but shall pay an equivalent for personal service.&quot; New Hampshire&#x27;s Constitution of 1784 states &quot;No person, who is conscientiously scrupulous about the lawfulness of bearing arms, shall be compelled thereto.&quot;

==Selective conscientious objection==
Air Commodore Lionel Charlton, of the British Royal Air Force (RAF), served in the military from 1898 to 1928. In 1923 he selectively refused to serve in the RAF Iraq Command. (He later went on to serve as Air Officer Commanding No 3 Group.)

On 4 June 1967, John Courtney Murray, an American Jesuit priest and theologian, delivered an address at Western Maryland College concerning a more specific type of conscientious objection: &quot;the issue of selective conscientious objection, conscientious objection to particular wars, or as it is sometimes called, discretionary armed service.&quot;

On 8 March 1971, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in the case of &quot;Gillette v. United States&quot; that &quot;the exemption for those who oppose &#x27;participation in war in any form&#x27; applies to those who oppose participating in all war and not to those who object to participation in a particular war only.&quot;

On 14 September 2003, in Israel, 27 reserve pilots and former pilots refused to serve in only specific missions. These specific missions included &quot;civilian population centers&quot; in &quot;the [occupied] territories&quot;. These pilots clarified: &quot;We ... shall continue to serve in the Israel Defense Forces and the Air Force for every mission in defense of the state of Israel.&quot;

On 25 May 2005, journalist Jack Random wrote the following: &quot;The case of Sergeant Kevin Benderman (Iraq War Resister) raises the burning issue of selective conscientious objection: While it is universally accepted that an individual cannot be compelled against conscience to war in general, does the same hold for an individual who objects, in the depths of the soul, to a particular war?&quot;

==Religious motives==

Cases of behavior which could be considered as religiously motivated conscientious objection are historically attested long before the modern term appeared. For example, the Medieval &quot;Orkneyinga Saga&quot; mentions that Magnus Erlendsson, Earl of Orkney – the future Saint Magnus – had a reputation for piety and gentleness, and because of his religious convictions refused to fight in a Viking raid on Anglesey, Wales, instead staying on board his ship singing psalms.

The reasons for refusing to perform military service are varied. Many conscientious objectors cite religious reasons. Unitarian Universalists object to war in their sixth principle &quot;The goal of world community with peace, liberty and justice for all&quot;. Members of the Historic Peace Churches such as Quakers, Anabaptists (Mennonites, Amish, Old Order Mennonite, Conservative Mennonites, the Bruderhof Communities and Church of the Brethren), as well as Holiness Pacifists such as the Reformed Free Methodist Church, Emmanuel Association of Churches, the Immanuel Missionary Church and Church of God (Guthrie, Oklahoma), object to war from the conviction that Christian life is incompatible with military action, because Jesus enjoins his followers to love their enemies and to refuse violence. The Book of Discipline of the Reformed Free Methodist Church teaches:
Since the American Civil War, Seventh-day Adventists have been known as non-combatants, and have done work in hospitals or to give medical care rather than combat roles, and the church has upheld the non-combative position. Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses and Christadelphians refuse to participate in the armed services on the grounds that they believe they should be neutral in worldly conflicts and often cite the latter portion of Isaiah 2:4 which states, &quot;...neither shall they learn war anymore&quot;. Other objections can stem from a deep sense of responsibility toward humanity as a whole, or from simple denial that any government possesses the moral authority to command warlike behavior from its citizens.

The varied experiences of non-combatants are illustrated by those of Seventh-day Adventists when there was mandatory military service: &quot;Many Seventh-day Adventists refuse to enter the army as combatants, but participate as medics, ambulance drivers, etc. During World War II in Germany, many SDA conscientious objectors were sent to concentration camps or mental institutions; some were executed. Some Seventh-day Adventists volunteered for the US Army&#x27;s Operation Whitecoat, participating in research to help others. The Church preferred to call them &quot;conscientious participants&quot;, because they were willing to risk their lives as test subjects in potentially life-threatening research. Over 2,200 Seventh-day Adventists volunteered in experiments involving various infectious agents during the 1950s through the 1970s in Fort Detrick, MD.&quot; Earlier, a schism arose during and after World War I between Seventh-day Adventists in Germany who agreed to serve in the military if conscripted and those who rejected all participation in warfare—the latter group eventually forming a separate church (the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement).

In the early Christian Church followers of Christ refused to take up arms.

After the Roman Empire officially embraced Christianity, the just war theory was developed in order to reconcile warfare with Christian belief. After Theodosius I made Christianity an official religion of the Empire, this position slowly developed into the official position of the Western Church. In the 11th century, there was a further shift of opinion in the Latin-Christian tradition with the crusades, strengthening the idea and acceptability of holy war. Objectors became a minority. Some theologians see the Constantinian shift and the loss of Christian pacifism as the great failing of the Church.

Ben Salmon was a Catholic conscientious objector during World War I and outspoken critic of Just War theology. The Catholic Church denounced him and &quot;The New York Times&quot; described him as a &quot;spy suspect&quot;. The US military (in which he was never inducted) charged him with desertion and spreading propaganda, then sentenced him to death (this was later revised to 25 years hard labor). On June 5, 1917, Salmon wrote in a letter to President Wilson:

Nowadays, the Catholic Church teaches that &quot;Public authorities should make equitable provision for those who for reasons of conscience refuse to bear arms; these are nonetheless obliged to serve the human community in some other way.&quot; (point 2311 of the Catechism of the Catholic Church)

Because of their conscientious objection to participation in military service, whether armed or unarmed, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses have often faced imprisonment or other penalties. In Greece, for example, before the introduction of alternative civilian service in 1997, hundreds of Witnesses were imprisoned, some for three years or even more for their refusal. In Armenia, young Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses were imprisoned because of their conscientious objection to military service; this was discontinued in November 2013. The government of South Korea also imprisons hundreds for refusing the draft. In Switzerland, virtually every Jehovah&#x27;s Witness is exempted from military service.

For believers in Indian religions, the opposition to warfare may be based on either the general idea of &quot;ahimsa&quot;, nonviolence, or on an explicit prohibition of violence by their religion, e.g., for a Buddhist, one of the five precepts is &quot;Pānātipātā veramaṇi sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi&quot;, or &quot;I undertake the precept to refrain from destroying living creatures&quot;, which is in obvious opposition to the practice of warfare. The 14th Dalai Lama has stated that war &quot;should be relegated to the dustbin of history&quot;. On the other hand, many Buddhist sects, especially in Japan, have been thoroughly militarized, warrior monks (&quot;yamabushi&quot; or &quot;sōhei&quot;) participating in the civil wars. Hindu beliefs do not go against the concept of war, as seen in the Gita. Both Sikhs and Hindus believe war should be a last resort and should be fought to sustain life and morality in society.

Followers of the Baháʼí Faith are advised to do social service instead of active army service, but when this is not possible because of obligations in certain countries, the Baháʼí laws include &quot;loyalty to one&#x27;s government&quot;, and the individual should perform the army service.

Some practitioners of pagan religions, particularly Wicca, may object on the grounds of the Wiccan rede, which states &quot;An it harm none, do what ye will&quot; (or variations). The threefold law may also be grounds for objection.

A notable example of a conscientious objector was the Austrian devout Roman Catholic Christian Franz Jägerstätter, who was executed on August 9, 1943, for openly refusing to serve in the Nazi &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;, consciously accepting the penalty of death. He was declared Blessed by Pope Benedict XVI in 2007 for dying for his beliefs, and is viewed as a symbol of self-sacrificing resistance.

==Alternatives for objectors==
Some conscientious objectors are unwilling to serve the military in any capacity, while others accept noncombatant roles. While conscientious objection is usually the refusal to collaborate with military organizations, as a combatant in war or in any supportive role, some advocate compromising forms of conscientious objection. One compromising form is to accept non-combatant roles during conscription or military service. Alternatives to military or civilian service include serving an imprisonment or other punishment for refusing conscription, falsely claiming unfitness for duty by feigning an allergy or a heart condition, delaying conscription until the maximum drafting age, or seeking refuge in a country which does not extradite those wanted for military conscription. Avoiding military service is sometimes labeled draft dodging, particularly if the goal is accomplished through dishonesty or evasive maneuvers. However, many people who support conscription will distinguish between &quot;bona fide&quot; &quot;conscientious objection&quot; and &quot;draft dodging&quot;, which they view as evasion of military service without a valid excuse.

Conservative Mennonites do not object to serving their country in peaceful alternatives (alternative service) such as hospital work, farming, forestry, road construction and similar occupations. Their objection is in being part in any military capacity whether noncombatant or regular service. During World War II and the Korean, Vietnam war eras they served in many such capacities in alternative I-W service programs initially through the Mennonite Central Committee and now through their own alternatives.

Despite the fact that international institutions such as the United Nations (UN) and the Council of Europe (CoE) regard and promote conscientious objection as a human right, , it still does not have a legal basis in most countries. Among the roughly one-hundred countries that have conscription, only thirty countries have some legal provisions, 25 of them in Europe. In Europe, most countries with conscription more or less fulfill international guidelines on conscientious objection legislation (except for Greece, Cyprus, Turkey, Finland and Russia) today. In many countries outside Europe, especially in armed conflict areas (e.g. Democratic Republic of the Congo), conscientious objection is punished severely.

In 1991, The Peace Abbey established the National Registry for Conscientious Objection where people can publicly state their refusal to participate in armed conflict.

==Conscientious objection around the world==
===Belgium===
Conscription was mandatory to all able-bodied Belgian males until 1994, when it was suspended. Civilian service was possible since 1963. Objectors could apply for the status of conscience objector. When granted, they did an alternative service with the civil service or with a socio-cultural organisation. The former would last 1.5 times as long as the shortest military service, the latter twice as long.

After their service, objectors are not allowed to take jobs that require them to carry weapons, such as police jobs, until the age of 42.

Since conscription was suspended in 1994 and military service is voluntary, the status of conscience objector can not be granted anymore in Belgium.

===Canada===
Mennonites and other similar peace churches in Canada were automatically exempt from any type of service during Canada&#x27;s involvement in World War I by provisions of the Order in Council of 1873 yet initially, many were imprisoned until the matter was again resettled. With pressure of public opinion, the Canadian government barred entry of additional Mennonite and Hutterite immigrants, rescinding the privileges of the Order in Council. During Canada&#x27;s involvement in World War II, Canadian conscientious objectors were given the options of noncombatant military service, serving in the medical or dental corps under military control or working in parks and on roads under civilian supervision. Over 95% chose the latter and were placed in Alternative Service camps. Initially the men worked on road building, forestry and firefighting projects. After May 1943, as the labour shortage developed within the nation and another Conscription Crisis burgeoned, men were shifted into agriculture, education and industry. The 10,700 Canadian objectors were mostly Mennonites (63%) and Dukhobors (20%).

===Colombia===
Conscientious objection is recognised in Colombia.

===Czechoslovakia===
In Czechoslovakia, those not willing to enter mandatory military service could avoid it by signing a contract for work lasting years in unattractive occupations, such as mining. Those who did not sign were imprisoned. Both numbers were tiny. After the communist party lost its power in 1989, alternative civil service was established. As of 2006, both the Czech Republic and Slovakia have abolished conscription. The Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms in both countries now guarantees the right to refuse military service on grounds on conscience or religious belief.

===Denmark===
Any male getting drafted, but unwilling to serve, has the possibility to avoid military service by instead serving community service for the duration of the conscription. According to a poll from July 2011, 2 out of 3 Danes want conscription abolished.

===Eritrea===
There is no right to conscientious objection to military service in Eritrea – which is of an indefinite length – and those who refuse the draft are imprisoned. Some Jehovah&#x27;s Witness conscientious objectors have been in jail since 1994.

===Finland===

Finland introduced conscription in 1881, but its enforcement was suspended in 1903 as part of Russification. During the Finnish Civil War in 1918, conscription was reintroduced for all able-bodied men. In 1922, the option of noncombatant military service was introduced, but service in the military remained compulsory on pain of imprisonment. After the struggle of pacifist Arndt Pekurinen a law was passed providing for a peacetime-only alternative to military service, or civilian service (Finnish ). The law was dubbed &quot;Lex Pekurinen&quot; after him. During the Winter War, Pekurinen and other conscientious objectors were imprisoned, and Pekurinen was eventually executed at the front in 1941, during the Continuation War.

After the war, a conscientious objector&#x27;s civilian service lasted 16 months, whereas military service was 8 months at its shortest. To qualify for civilian service, an objector had to explain his conviction before a board of inspection that included military officers and clergymen. In 1987, the duration of the service was shortened to 13 months and the board of inspection was abolished. In 2008, the term was further shortened to 12 months to match the duration of the longest military service (that of officer trainees and technical crew). Today, a person subject to conscription may apply for civilian service at any time before or during his military service, and the application is accepted as a matter of course. A female performing voluntary military service can quit her service anytime during the first 45 days, however, if she wants to quit after those 45 days she would be treated like a male and assigned to civilian service.

Persons who have completed their civilian service during peacetime have, according to the legislation enacted in 2008, the right to serve in non-military duties also during a crisis situation. They may be called to serve in various duties with the rescue services or other necessary work of a non-military nature. Persons who declare themselves to be conscientious objectors only after a crisis has started must, however, prove their conviction before a special board. Before the new legislation, the right to conscientious objection was acknowledged only in peacetime. The changes to the service term and to the legal status of objectors during a crisis situation were made as a response to human rights concerns voiced by several international bodies, who are overseeing the implementation of human rights agreements. These organisations had demanded Finland to take measures to improve its legislation concerning conscientious objectors, which they considered discriminatory. None of these organisations have yet raised concerns on the current legislation.

There are a small number of total objectors who refuse even civilian service, and are imprisoned for six months. This is not registered into the person&#x27;s criminal record.
===France===

The creation of a legal status for conscientious objectors in France was the subject of a long struggle involving for instance or the much-publicised trials of Protestant activists Jacques Martin, Philippe Vernier and Camille Rombault in 1932–1933 or the hunger strike of anarchist Louis Lecoin in 1962.

The legal status law was passed in December 1963, 43 years (and many prison sentences) after the first requests.

In 1983, a new law passed by socialist Interior Minister Pierre Joxe considerably improved this status, simplifying the conditions under which the status would be granted. Conscientious objectors were then free to choose an activity in the social realm where they would spend their civil service time. However, in order to avoid too many applications for civil service at the expense of the military, the duration of the civil service is however kept twice as long as the military service.

The effect of these laws was suspended in 2001 when compulsory military service was abolished in France. The special prison at Strasbourg for Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, who refuse to join any military, was also abolished.

Since 1986, the associations defending conscientious objection in France have chosen to celebrate their cause on 15 May.

===Germany===
====Nazi Germany====
In Nazi Germany, conscientious objection was not recognized in the law. In theory, objectors would be drafted and then court-martialled for desertion. The practice was even harsher: going beyond the letter of an already extremely flexible law, conscientious objection was considered subversion of military strength, a crime normally punished with death. On 15 September 1939, August Dickmann, a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness, and the first conscientious objector of the war to be executed, died by a firing squad at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp. Among others, Franz Jägerstätter was executed after his conscientious objection, on the grounds that he could not fight for an evil force.

====East Germany====

After World War II in East Germany, there was no official right to conscientious objection. Nevertheless, and uniquely among the Eastern bloc, objections were accepted and the objectors assigned to construction units. They were however part of the military, so that a fully civilian alternative did not exist. Also, &quot;construction soldiers&quot; were discriminated against in their later professional life.

====West Germany and reunified Germany====
According to Article 4(3) of the German constitution: &quot;No person may be forced against their conscience to perform armed military service. Details shall be regulated by a federal law.&quot;

According to Article 12a, a law may be passed to require every male from the age of 18 to military service called &quot;Wehrdienst&quot;; also, a law can require conscientious objectors to perform non-military service instead called &quot;Wehrersatzdienst&quot;, literally &quot;military replacement service&quot;, or colloquially &quot;Zivildienst&quot;. These laws were applicable and demanded compulsory service in the German armed forces (German: &quot;Bundeswehr&quot;) until the abolition of draft in 2011. Initially, each conscientious objector had to appear in person to a panel hearing at the draft office (or contest a negative decision at the administrative court). The suspension of the procedure (1977), allowing to &quot;object with a post card&quot;, was ruled unconstitutional in 1978. Beginning in 1983, competence was shifted to the &quot;Kreiswehrersatzamt&quot; (district military replacement office), which had discretion to either approve or reject a conscientious objection, which had to consist of a detailed written statement by an applicant giving reasons as to why the applicant was conscientiously objecting. This was generally just a formality, and objections were not often rejected. In later years in particular however, with the rise of the Internet, conscientious objections fell into disrepute because of the ease of being able to simply download existing example objections. It earned some conscientious objections the suspicion of an applicant simply attempting an easy way out of military service. On the other hand, certain organizations within the German peace movement had been offering pamphlets for decades giving suggestions to applicants as to the proper wording and structure of an objection which would have the greatest chances of success.

Following a 1985 Federal Constitution Court decision, Wehrersatzdienst could be no simple choice of convenience for an applicant, but he had to cite veritable conflict of conscience which made him unable to perform any kind of military service at all. If there was doubt about the true nature of an objector&#x27;s application, he could be summoned to appear before a panel at the Kreiswehrersatzamt to explain his reasons in person. An approved conscientious objection in any case then meant that an applicant was required by law to perform Wehrersatzdienst. Complete objection both to military and replacement service was known as &quot;Totalverweigerung&quot;; it was illegal and could be punished with a fine or a suspended custodial sentence.

Nearly the only legal way to get both out of military service and replacement service was to be deemed physically unfit for military service. Both men who entered military service and those who wanted to go into replacement service had to pass a military physical examination at the military replacement office. Five categories/levels of physical fitness, or &quot;Tauglichkeitsstufen&quot;, existed. &quot;Tauglichkeitsstufe 5&quot;, in short &quot;T5&quot;, meant that a person was rejected for military service and thus also did not need to enter replacement service. &quot;T5&quot; status was usually only granted if a person had physical or mental disabilities or was otherwise significantly impaired, such as due to very poor eyesight or debilitating chronic illnesses. However, in the last years of the draft, T5 was increasingly given to potential recruits with only minor physical or mental handicaps.

Another way to get out of service completely was the &quot;two brothers rule&quot;, which stated that if two older brothers had already served in the military, any following male children of a family were exempt from service.

Due to West Berlin&#x27;s special status between the end of the Second World War and 1990 as a city governed by foreign military powers, draft did not apply within its borders. This made Berlin a safe haven for many young people who chose to move to the city to prevent criminal court repercussions for &quot;Totalverweigerung&quot;. As &quot;Totalverweigerer&quot; were often part of the far-left political spectrum, this was one factor which spawned a politically active left-wing and left-wing radical scene in the city.

Wehrersatzdienst was for a long time considerably longer than military service, by up to a third, even when the duration of service was gradually reduced following reunification and the end of the Cold War. This was held by some as a violation of constitutional principles, but was upheld in several court decisions based on the reasoning that former service personnel could be redrafted for military exercises called &quot;Wehrübungen&quot;, while somebody who had served out his replacement service could not. Moreover, work conditions under military service typically involved more hardship and inconvenience than Wehrersatzdienst. In 2004, military service and Wehrersatzdienst were then made to last equal lengths of time.

Military service and draft were controversial during much of their existence. Reasons included the consideration that Germans could be made to fight against their fellow Germans in East Germany. Moreover, draft only applied to men, which was seen as gender based discrimination by some, but was often countered by the argument that women usually gave up their careers either temporarily or permanently to raise their children. With the end of the Cold War and the German military&#x27;s primary purpose of defending its home territory increasingly looking doubtful, draft also began to become more arbitrary, as only certain portions of a particular birth year were drafted (usually those in very healthy physical condition), while others were not. This was seen as a problem of &quot;Wehrgerechtigkeit&quot;, or equal justice of military service.

Then-German President Roman Herzog said in a 1994 speech (which was frequently cited as an argument for draft abolition) that only the necessity for national defense, not any other arguments can justify draft. On the other hand, this logic tended to not be extended to men serving Wehrersatzdienst, as they usually worked in fields of public health, elderly care, medical assistance or assistance for the disabled. Their relatively low-paid work was seen as an ever more important backbone of a health sector which was grappling with rapidly increasing costs of care.

In 2011 the mandatory draft was abolished in Germany, mainly due to a perceived lack of aforementioned necessity. The &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; now solely relies on service members who deliberately choose it as a career path. Neither Article 12a (establishing the possibility of draft) nor Article 4 (3) (permitting conscientious objection) have been removed from the German Constitution. In theory, this makes a full reversion to draft (and Wehrersatzdienst) possible, if it is thought to be necessary.

===Hungary===
Conscription was suspended in Hungary in 2004. Before being drafted anyone can apply for the status of conscientious objector and fulfill his duties in unarmed military service or civilian service.

===Israel===

All Israeli citizens and permanent residents are liable to military service. However, the Ministry of Defense has used its discretion under article 36 of this law to automatically exempt all non-Jewish women and all Arab men, except for the Druze, from military service ever since Israel was established. Israeli Arabs may volunteer to perform military service, but very few do so (except among the Bedouin population of Israel).

In discussing the status of the armed forces shortly after the founding of the State of Israel, representatives of orthodox religious parties argued that yeshiva students should be exempt from military service. This derives from the Jewish tradition that if a man wants to dedicate his life to religious study, society must allow him to do so. The request of orthodox political parties to &quot;prevent neglect of studying the Torah&quot; was granted by the authorities. But in recent years this exemption practice has become the subject of debate in Israeli society, as the absolute and the relative numbers of the men who received this exemption rose sharply. In 2012, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled in the case of &quot;Ressler et al. v. The Knesset et al.&quot;. that the blanket exemption granted to ultra-Orthodox yeshiva students was &quot;ultra vires&quot; the authority of the Minister of Defence, and that it violated Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty and was, therefore, unconstitutional.

As for conscientious objection, in 2002, in the case of &quot;David Zonschein et al. v. Military Advocate General et al.&quot;, the Supreme Court reiterated its position that selective conscientious objection was not permitted, adding that conscientious objection could only be recognized in cases of general objection to military service.

Women can claim exemption from military service on grounds of conscience under arts. 39 (c) and 40 of the Defense Service Law, according to which religious reasons can be grounds for exemption.

===Italy===
Until 2004 conscription was mandatory to all able-bodied Italian males. Those who were born in the last months of the year typically used to serve in the Navy, unless judged unable for ship service (in this case they could be sent back to Army or Air Force). Until 1972, objectors were considered as traitors and tried by a military tribunal; after 1972, objectors could choose an alternative civilian service, which was eight months longer than standard military service (fifteen months, then twelve, as for Army and Air Force, 24 months, then eighteen, then twelve as for the Navy). Since such length was judged too punitive, an arrangement was made to make the civilian service as long as the military service. Since 2004, Italian males no longer need to object because military service has been turned into volunteer for both males and females.

===Marshall Islands===
In the Republic of the Marshall Islands no person can be conscripted if, after being afforded a reasonable opportunity to do so, he has established that he is a conscientious objector to participation in war (Marshall Islands Constitution Article II Section 11).

===The Netherlands===
Conscription was mandatory to all able-bodied Dutch males until 1 May 1997, when it was suspended. The Law on conscientious objections military services is active since 27 September 1962. Objectors have to work a third time longer in civil service than is normal for military service. The civil service have to be provided by government services, or by institutions designated for employment of conscientious objectors designated by the Secretary of Social Affairs and Employment, who work in the public interest.

=== New Zealand ===
In 1916 conscription was introduced in New Zealand, with only Quakers, Christadelphians, and Seventh-day Adventists having automatic exemption from the conscription. During the First World War, between 1,500 and 2,000 objectors and defaulters were convicted, or came under state control, for their opposition to war. At least 64 of these were still at Waikeria Prison on 5 March 1919 – some of whom had gone on hunger strike in protest.

Also during the First World War fourteen objectors, including Archibald Baxter, were forcibly sent to the front lines and were subject to Field Punishment No. 1, which &quot;involved being tethered tightly by the wrists to a sloping pole to ensure their bodies hung with their hands taking all their weight.&quot;

During World War Two, conscription was re-introduced in 1940 and 5000 men applied for an exemption on the grounds of conscientious objection. Of these, 800 were imprisoned for the length of the war, and were barred from voting for ten years when they were released following the end of the war.

In the contemporary setting, there is no statute or case law which deal with conscientious objection. But, the OHCHR believes that the Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the ratification of Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights creates a legal framework which enables conscientious objection.

===Romania===
In Romania, as of 23 October 2006 conscription was suspended, therefore, the status of conscience objector does not apply. This came about due to a 2003 constitutional amendment which allowed the parliament to make military service optional. The Romanian Parliament voted to abolish conscription in October 2005, with the vote formalizing one of many military modernization and reform programs that Romania agreed to when it joined NATO.

===Russia===
The Russian Empire allowed Russian Mennonites to run and maintain forestry service units in South Russia in lieu of their military obligation. The program was under church control from 1881 through 1918, reaching a peak of seven thousand conscientious objectors during World War I. An additional five thousand Mennonites formed complete hospital units and transported wounded from the battlefield to Moscow and Ekaterinoslav hospitals.

After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Leon Trotsky issued a decree allowing alternative service for religious objectors whose sincerity was determined upon examination. Vladimir Chertkov, a follower of Leo Tolstoy, chaired the &quot;United Council of Religious Fellowships and Groups&quot;, which successfully freed 8000 conscientious objectors from military service during the Russian Civil War. The law was not applied uniformly and hundreds of objectors were imprisoned and over 200 were executed.The United Council was forced to cease activity in December 1920, but alternative service was available under the New Economic Policy until it was abolished in 1936. Unlike the earlier forestry and hospital service, later conscientious objectors were classified &quot;enemies of the people&quot; and their alternative service was performed in remote areas in a gulag-like environment in order to break their resistance and encourage enlistment.

In the present day, Russian draft legislation allows people to choose an alternative civilian service for religious or ideological reasons. Most objectors are employed in healthcare, construction, forestry and post industries, serving 18 to 21 months.

===Serbia===
Serbia introduced civil service for Conscientious objectors in 2009. the service lasted 9 months and people serving were task to help out in government facilities such as post offices, kindergartens, hospitals etc. In 2020 during covid-19 they were called to help prepare military hospitals for the influx of military and civilian patients.
When civil service was introduced the mandatory military service period was reduced from 12 months to 6 months.
Mandatory military service was abolished in 2011.

===South Africa===
During the 1980s, hundreds of South African white males dodged the draft, refused the call-up or objected to conscription in the South African Defence Force. Some simply deserted, or joined organisations such as the End Conscription Campaign, an anti-war movement banned in 1988, while others fled into exile and joined the Committee on South African War Resistance. Most lived in a state of internal exile, forced to go underground within the borders of the country until a moratorium on conscription was declared in 1993. Opposition to the Angolan War, was rife in English-speaking campuses, and later the war in the townships became the focus of these groupings.

===South Korea===

The terminology conscientious objector technically has not existed in Korean dictionary until recently. In fact, significant majority of Korean citizens simply associate conscientious objectors with draft dodging, and are unaware of the fact that conscientious objector draftees in other westernized countries are required to serve in alternative services. Since the establishment of the Republic of Korea, thousands of conscientious objectors had no choice but to be imprisoned as criminals. Every year about 500 young men, mostly Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, are arrested for refusing the draft.

South Korea&#x27;s stance has drawn criticism from The U.N. Human Rights Committee, which argues that South Korea is violating article 18 of the ICCPR, which guarantees freedom of thought and conscience. In 2006, 2010, and again in 2011 the U.N. Human Rights Committee, after reviewing petitions from South Korean conscientious objectors, declared that the government was violating Article 18 of the ICCPR, the provision that guarantees the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.

The government&#x27;s National Action Plan (NAP) for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights has not shown a clear stance on the pressing human rights issues such as, among other things, the rights of conscientious objectors to military service.

In September 2007, the government announced a program to give conscientious objectors an opportunity to participate in alternative civilian service. The program stipulates three years of civilian service that is not connected with the military in any way. However, that program has been postponed indefinitely after the succeeding administration took office in 2008.

The government argues that introducing an alternative service would jeopardize national security and undermine social equality and cohesion. This is amid an increasing number of countries which retain compulsory service have introduced alternatives. In addition, some countries, including those with national security concerns have shown that alternative service can be successfully implemented.

On 15 January 2009 the Korean Presidential Commission on Suspicious Deaths in the Military released its decision acknowledging that the government was responsible for the deaths of five young men, who were Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses and had forcibly been conscripted into the army.
The deaths resulted from &quot;the state&#x27;s anti-human rights violence&quot; and &quot;its acts of brutality&quot; during the 1970s that continued into the mid-1980s. This decision is significant since it is the first one recognizing the state&#x27;s responsibility for deaths resulting from violence within the military.
According to the commission&#x27;s decision, &quot;the beatings and acts of brutality committed against them by military officials were attempts to compel and coerce them to act against their conscience (religion) and were unconstitutional, anti-human rights acts that infringed severely upon the freedom of conscience (religion) guaranteed in the Constitution.&quot;

The records of conscientious objectors to military service are kept by a governmental investigative body as criminal files for five years. As a consequence, conscientious objectors are not allowed to enter a government office and apply for any type of national certification exam. It is also very unlikely that they will be employed by any company that inquires about criminal records.

From 2000 to 2008, Korean Military Manpower Administration said that at least 4,958 men have objected to service in the military because of religious beliefs. Among those, 4,925 were Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, 3 were Buddhists, and the other 30 refused the mandatory service because of conscientious objections other than religious reasons.
Since 1950, there have been more than 16,000 Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses sentenced to a combined total of 31,256 years for refusing to perform military service. If alternative service is not provided, some 500 to 900 young men will continue to be added each year to the list of conscientious objectors criminalized in Korea.

In 2015, Lee Yeda was the first conscientious objector to be allowed to live in France via asylum.

In June 2018, the Constitutional Court ruled 6–3 that Article 5 of the country&#x27;s Military Service Act is unconstitutional because it fails to provide an alternative civilian national service for conscientious objectors. , 19,300 South Korean conscientious objectors had gone to prison since 1953. The Defense Ministry said it would honor the ruling by introducing alternative services as soon as possible.

On 1 November 2018, the Supreme Court of Korea decided that conscientious objection is a valid reason to refuse mandatory military service, and vacated and remanded the appellate court&#x27;s decision finding a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness guilty of the objection.

===Spain===
Conscientious objection was not permitted in Francoist Spain. Conscientious objectors usually refused to serve on religious grounds, such as being Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and were placed in prison for the duration of their sentences. The Spanish Constitution of 1978 acknowledged conscientious objectors. The Spanish parliament established a longer service () as an alternative to the Army. In spite of this, a strong movement appeared that refused both services. The Red Cross was the only important organisation employing objectors. Because of this, the waiting lists for the PSS were long, especially in areas like Navarre, where pacifism, Basque nationalism and a low unemployment rate discouraged young males from the army. Thousands of &quot;insumisos&quot; (non-submittants) publicly refused the PSS, and hundreds were imprisoned. In addition a number of those in the military decided to refuse further duties. A number of people not liable for military service made declarations of self-incrimination, stating that they had encouraged &quot;insumisión&quot;. The government, fearing popular reaction, reduced the length of service and instead of sentencing &quot;insumisos&quot; to prison declared them unfit for public service.

Fronting the decreasing birth rate and the popular opposition to an army seen as a continuating institution of one of the pillars of the dictatorship&#x27;s regime, the Spanish government tried to modernise the model carried from the Franco era, professionalizing it and thus bringing an end to conscription by the end of 2001. The new army tried to provide an education for civilian life and participated in peace operations in Bosnia.

===Taiwan===
There is the possibility of avoiding military service by instead serving civilian services for the duration of the conscription.

===Turkey===
Conscientious objection is highly controversial in Turkey. Turkey and Azerbaijan are the only two countries refusing to recognize conscientious objection and sustain their membership in the Council of Europe. In January 2006, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) found Turkey had violated article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibition of degrading treatment) in a case dealing with the conscientious objection of Osman Murat Ülke. In 2005, Mehmet Tarhan was sentenced to four years in a military prison as a conscientious objector (he was unexpectedly released in March 2006). Journalist Perihan Mağden was tried by a Turkish court for supporting Tarhan and advocating conscientious objection as a human right; but later, she was acquitted.

, there were 125 objectors including 25 female objectors in Turkey. Another 256 people of Kurdish origin also had announced their conscientious objection to military service. Conscientious objector İnan Süver was named a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.

On 14 November 2011, the Ministry of Justice announced a draft proposal to legalise conscientious objection in Turkey and that it was to take effect two weeks after approval by the President to the change. This decision to legalize by the Turkish government was because of pressure from the European Court of Human Rights. The ECHR gave the Turkish government a deadline until the end of 2011 to legalize conscientious objection. The draft was withdrawn afterwards.

A commission was founded within the National Assembly of the Republic to write a new constitution in 2012. The commission is still in negotiations on various articles and conscientious objection is one of the most controversial issues.

===United Kingdom===
The United Kingdom recognised the right of individuals not to fight in the 18th century following major problems with attempting to force Quakers into military service. The Militia Ballot Act of 1757 allowed Quakers to be excluded from service in the Militia. It then ceased to be a major issue, since Britain&#x27;s armed forces were generally all-volunteer. Press gangs were used to strengthen army and navy rolls on occasions from the 16th to the early 19th centuries. Pressed men did have the right of appeal, in the case of sailors, to the Admiralty. The Royal Navy last took pressed men during the Napoleonic Wars.

A more general right to refuse military service was not introduced until the First World War. Britain introduced conscription with the Military Service Act of January 1916, which came into full effect on 2 March 1916. The Act allowed for objectors to be absolutely exempted, to perform alternative civilian service or to serve as a non-combatant in the army Non-Combatant Corps, according to the extent to which they could convince a Military Service Tribunal of the quality of their objection.

Around 16,000 men were recorded as conscientious objectors, with Quakers, traditionally pacifist, forming a large proportion: 4,500 objectors were exempted on condition of doing civilian &quot;work of national importance&quot;, such as farming, forestry or social service; and 7,000 were conscripted into the specially-created Non-Combatant Corps. Six thousand were refused any exemption and forced into main army regiments; if they then refused to obey orders, they were court-martialled and sent to prison. Thus, the well-known pacifist and religious writer Stephen Henry Hobhouse was called up in 1916: he and many other Quaker activists took the unconditionalist stand, refusing both military and alternative service, and on enforced enlistment were court-martialled and imprisoned for disobedience. Conscientious objectors formed only a tiny proportion of Military Service Tribunals&#x27; cases over the conscription period, estimated at 2 per cent. Tribunals were notoriously harsh towards conscientious objectors, reflecting widespread public opinion that they were lazy, degenerate, ungrateful &#x27;shirkers&#x27; seeking to benefit from the sacrifices of others.

In an attempt to press the issue, in May 1916 a group of thirty-five objectors, including the Richmond Sixteen, were taken to France as conscripts and given military orders, the disobedience of which would warrant a death sentence. These men, known as &quot;The Frenchmen&quot;, refused; the four ringleaders were formally sentenced to death by court-martial but immediately reprieved, with commutation to ten-years&#x27; penal servitude.

Although a few objectors were accepted for non-combatant service in the Royal Army Medical Corps, acting as nursing/paramedic assistants, the majority of non-combatants served in the Non-Combatant Corps on non-lethal stores, road and railway building and general labouring in the UK and France. Conscientious objectors who were deemed not to have made any useful contribution to the state were formally disenfranchised (through a clause inserted in the Representation of the People Act 1918 at the insistence of back-bench MPs) for the five years 1 September 1921 – 31 August 1926, but as it was a last-minute amendment there was no administrative machinery to enforce it, which was admitted to be a &quot;dead letter&quot;.

Britain&#x27;s conscription legislation of 1916 did not apply to Ireland, despite it then being part of the United Kingdom. In 1918 the Army&#x27;s manpower shortage led to passing a further act enabling conscription in Ireland if and when the government saw fit. In the event, the government never saw fit, although the legislation led to the Conscription Crisis of 1918. British conscription in the Second World War did not apply to Northern Ireland. Many Irishmen volunteered to fight in both world wars. The various parts of the British Empire and Commonwealth had their own laws: in general, all the larger countries of the Empire participated, and some were, in proportion to their population, major participants in the First World War.

In the Second World War, following the National Service (Armed Forces) Act 1939, there were nearly 60,000 registered Conscientious Objectors. Testing by tribunals resumed, this time by special Conscientious Objection Tribunals chaired by a judge, and the effects were much less harsh. If objectors were not a member of the Quakers or some similar pacifist organisation, it was generally enough to say that they objected to &quot;warfare as a means of settling international disputes&quot;, a phrase from the Kellogg–Briand Pact of 1928. The tribunals could grant full exemption, exemption conditional on alternative service, exemption only from combatant duties, or dismiss the application. Of the 61,000 who were registered, 3,000 were given complete exemption; 18,000 applications were initially dismissed, but a number of such applicants succeeded at the Appellate Tribunal, sometimes after a &quot;qualifying&quot; sentence of three-months&#x27; imprisonment for an offence deemed to have been committed on grounds of conscience. Of those directed to non-combatant military service almost 7,000 were allocated to the Non-Combatant Corps, re-activated in mid-1940; its companies worked in clothing and food stores, in transport, or any military project not requiring the handling of &quot;material of an aggressive nature&quot;. In November 1940 it was decided to allow troops in the NCC to volunteer for work in bomb disposal and over 350 men volunteered. Other non-combatants worked in the Royal Army Medical Corps. For conscientious objectors exempted conditional upon performing civil work, acceptable occupations were farm work, mining, firefighting and the ambulance service. About 5,500 objectors were imprisoned, most charged with refusal to attend a medical examination as a necessary preliminary to call-up after being refused exemption, and some charged with non-compliance with the terms of conditional exemption. A further 1,000 were court-martialled by the armed forces and sent to military detention barracks or civil prisons. Unlike the First World War, most sentences were relatively short, and there was no pattern of continually repeated sentences. The social stigma attached to &#x27;conchies&#x27; (as they were called) was considerable; regardless of the genuineness of their motives, cowardice was often imputed.

Conscription in the United Kingdom was retained, with rights of conscientious objection, as National Service until the last call-up in 1960 and the last discharge in 1963. The use of all volunteer soldiers was hoped to remove the need to consider conscientious objectors. Ever since the First World War, there have been volunteer members of the armed forces who have developed a conscientious objection to service; a procedure was devised for them in the Second World War and with adaptations, it continues.

===United States===

There are currently legal provisions in the United States for recognizing conscientious objection, both through the Selective Service System and through the Department of Defense. The United States recognizes religious and moral objections, but not selective objections. Conscientious objectors in the United States may perform either civilian work or noncombatant service in lieu of combatant military service.

Historically, conscientious objectors have been persecuted in the United States. After the Selective Service System was founded during World War I, such persecutions decreased in frequency, and recognition for conscientious objectors grew.

===Other countries===
As of 2005, conscientious objectors in several countries may serve as field paramedics in the army (although some do not consider this a genuine alternative, as they feel it merely helps to make war more humane instead of preventing it). Alternatively, they may serve without arms, although this, too, has its problems. In certain European countries such as Austria, Greece and Switzerland, there is the option of performing an alternative civilian service, subject to the review of a written application or after a hearing about the state of conscience. In Greece, the alternative civilian service is twice as long as the corresponding military service; in Austria &quot;Zivildienst&quot; is one-third times longer, the Swiss &quot;Zivildienst&quot; is one and one-half times longer than military service. In 2005, the Swiss parliament considered whether willingness to serve one and a half times longer than an army recruit was sufficient proof of sincerity, citing that the cost of judging the state of conscience of a few thousand men per year was too great.

==Conscientious objection in professional forces==
Only two European Union countries – Germany and the Netherlands – recognize the right to conscientious objection for contract and professional military personnel.

In the United States, military personnel who come to a conviction of conscientious objection during their tour of duty must appear in front of a panel of experts, which consists of psychiatrists, military chaplains and officers.

In Switzerland, the panel consists entirely of civilians, and military personnel have no authority whatsoever. In Germany, the draft has been suspended since 2011.

==See also==

* Antimilitarism
* Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors
* Center on Conscience &amp; War
* Conscientious Objectors Commemorative Stone
* Conscientious objection to military taxation
* Counter-recruitment
* Franz Jägerstätter
* Friends&#x27; Ambulance Unit
* GI Rights Network
* Medical Cadet Corps
* Pax Christi
* Peace movement
* Peace Pledge Union
* Richmond Sixteen
* Selective conscientious objection
* Tax resistance
* Voluntaryism
* War resister
* War Resisters&#x27; International
* War Resisters League
==References==
==Further reading==
*Alexander, Paul, (2008),&quot;Peace to War: Shifting Allegiances in the Assemblies of God&quot;. Telford, PA: Cascadia Publishing/Herald Press. A history and analysis of conscientious objection in the Assemblies of God, the largest Pentecostal denomination. 
* Barker, Rachel. &quot;Conscience, government and war: Conscientious objection in Great Britain 1939–45&quot; (Routledge, 2021).
* Bennett, Scott H. (2003). &quot;Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–1963.&quot; (Syracuse Univ. Press).
* Brennan, Jason. &quot;Conscientious tax objection: why the liberal state must accommodate tax resisters.&quot; &quot;Public Affairs Quarterly&quot; 26.2 (2012): 141–159.
* Keim, Albert N. (1990). &quot;The CPS Story: An Illustrated History of Civilian Public Service&quot;, pp. 75–79. Good Books. online
* Gingerich, Melvin (1949), &quot;Service for Peace, A History of Mennonite Civilian Public Service&quot;, Mennonite Central Committee.
* Krahn, Cornelius, Gingerich, Melvin &amp; Harms, Orlando (Eds.) (1955). &quot;The Mennonite Encyclopedia&quot;, Volume I, pp. 76–78. Mennoniite Publishing House.
* Magelssen, Morten. &quot;When should conscientious objection be accepted?&quot; &quot; Journal of Medical Ethics&quot; 38.1 (2012): 18–21. online
* Matthews, Mark (2006). &quot;Smoke Jumping on the Western Fire Line: Conscientious Objectors during World War II&quot;, University of Oklahoma Press. 
* Moorehead, Caroline (1987). &quot;Troublesome People: Enemies of War, 1916–86&quot;, Hamish Hamilton Ltd, 
* Quakers in Britain — Conscientious Objectors.
* Robb, Linsey. &quot;The &#x27;Conchie Corps&#x27;: Conflict, Compromise and Conscientious Objection in the British Army, 1940–1945.&quot; &quot;Twentieth Century British History&quot; 29.3 (2018): 411–434. online
* Tinnelly CM, Joseph T. &quot;The Conscientious Objector Under the Selective Service Act of 1940.&quot; &quot;St. John&#x27;s Law Review&quot; 15.2 (2013): 6+ online.

===Primary sources===
* Bennett, Scott H. (2005). &quot;Army GI, Pacifist CO: The World War II Letters of Frank and Albert Dietrich&quot; (Fordham Univ. Press).
* McNair, Donald (2008) &quot;A Pacifist at War: Military Memoirs of a Conscientious Objector in Palestine 1917–1918&quot; Anastasia Press, Much Hadham 
* Mock, Melanie Springer (2003). &quot;Writing Peace: The Unheard Voices of Great War Mennonite Objectors&quot;, Cascadia Publishing House. 
* U.S. Selective Service, &quot;Conscientious Objection and Alternative Service: Who Qualifies &quot;

==Further viewing==
* Rick Tejada-Flores, Judith Ehrlich (2000), &quot;The good war and those who refused to fight it&quot;; Paradigm Productions in association with the Independent Television Service, aired on PBS.
* Catherine Ryan, Gary Weimberg (2008), &quot;Soldiers of Conscience&quot;; Luna Productions. Aired on the PBS nonfiction series &quot;POV&quot;.
* Molly Stuart, Amitai Ben-Abba (2019), &quot;Objector&quot;; Java Films. A documentary about Israeli conscientious objector Atalya Ben-Abba, premiered at IDFA. – 

==External links==
* Schleif, Luke: Conscientious Objectors, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Patterson, David S.: Pacifism, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Alternative Service in the Second World War: Conscientious Objectors in Canada 1939–1945
* The National Registry for Conscientious Objection
* International Conscientious Objectors&#x27; Day (War Resisters&#x27; International)
* of Human Rights factsheet on case law on conscientious objection
* &quot;Making a Choice: Conscientious Objection or Refusing to Register&quot; (Resisters.info)
* The European Bureau for Conscientious Objection
* Refusing to Kill: conscientious objection and human rights in World War I. Peace Pledge Union, 2006.
* Watch His Conscience: A Short History Of The Conscientious Objector. By Michael D. Peabody
* Catholic Peace Fellowship
* The Right to Refuse to Bear Arms – the most authoritative recent world survey on provisions for conscientious objection to military service, by War Resisters&#x27; International
* A Conscientious Objector&#x27;s Guide to the UN Human Rights System
* You have no enemies. A Call for Conscientious Objection. By Dieter Duhm
*&quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot; A film about conscientious objector, Desmond T.Doss who received &#x27;Medal of Honor&#x27; in WW2.
* Objector – a 2019 documentary about Israeli conscientious objector Atalya Ben-Abba.
* International Conscientious Objectors&#x27; Day</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="2" end="24" title="Conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="95" end="111" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q573756" start="136" end="157" title="freedom of conscience" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="161" end="169" title="freedom of religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="235" end="262" title="military–industrial complex" label="military–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q702635" start="368" end="384" title="civilian service" label="civilian service"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="405" end="417" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="586" end="627" title="United Nations Commission on Human Rights" label="United Nations Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737567" start="1451" end="1463" title="Maximilian of Tebessa" label="Maximilianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="1777" end="1795" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="1809" end="1818" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1992" end="2005" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2050" end="2057" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933815" start="2137" end="2152" title="Militia (Great Britain)" label="British Militia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2214" end="2237" title="Militia Ballot Act 1757" label="Militia Ballot Act 1757"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2295" end="2308" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="2461" end="2473" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="2622" end="2653" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="2675" end="2712" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="2746" end="2754" title="ratified" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="2885" end="2924" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q244395" start="2926" end="2939" title="Seán MacBride" label="Seán MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3097" end="3124" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights#&amp;quot;The Right to Refuse to Kill&amp;quot;" label="The Right to Refuse to Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="3152" end="3204" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="3205" end="3223" title="coming into force" label="entered into force"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="3436" end="3454" title="freedom of thought" label="freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890441" start="3630" end="3657" title="War Resisters International" label="War Resisters International"/>
<link wikidata="Q770764" start="4398" end="4420" title="Human Rights Committee" label="Human Rights Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="4940" end="4961" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="5011" end="5040" title="UN Commission on Human Rights" label="UN Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="5698" end="5749" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="5980" end="6025" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="6145" end="6152" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="6166" end="6175" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774161" start="6460" end="6483" title="international community" label="international community"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="7202" end="7215" title="Air Commodore" label="Air Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555573" start="7216" end="7231" title="Lionel Charlton" label="Lionel Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275406" start="7360" end="7376" title="RAF Iraq Command" label="RAF Iraq Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698125" start="7408" end="7430" title="Air Officer Commanding" label="Air Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958510" start="7431" end="7441" title="No. 3 Group RAF" label="No 3 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619214" start="7461" end="7481" title="John Courtney Murray" label="John Courtney Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7495" end="7501" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="7502" end="7508" title="Priesthood (Catholic Church)" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800835" start="7549" end="7573" title="Western Maryland College" label="Western Maryland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7819" end="7853" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19048081" start="7881" end="7906" title="Gillette v. United States" label="Gillette v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="8160" end="8166" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8168" end="8246" title="Refusal to serve in the IDF#Pilots&amp;#x27; letter incident" label="27 reserve pilots and former pilots refused to serve in only specific missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="8432" end="8453" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574484" start="8619" end="8634" title="Kevin Benderman" label="Kevin Benderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574484" start="8636" end="8653" title="List of Iraq War resisters" label="Iraq War Resister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642345" start="9145" end="9160" title="Orkneyinga Saga" label="Orkneyinga Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q522317" start="9181" end="9214" title="Magnus Erlendsson, Earl of Orkney" label="Magnus Erlendsson, Earl of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="9364" end="9372" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="9374" end="9379" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="9423" end="9428" title="psalm" label="psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="9550" end="9573" title="Unitarian Universalists" label="Unitarian Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371246" start="9709" end="9732" title="Peace Churches" label="Historic Peace Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="9741" end="9748" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="9763" end="9773" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="9775" end="9780" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="9782" end="9801" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="9803" end="9826" title="Conservative Mennonites" label="Conservative Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q992197" start="9832" end="9853" title="Bruderhof Communities" label="Bruderhof Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089826" start="9858" end="9880" title="Church of the Brethren" label="Church of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796422" start="9925" end="9955" title="Reformed Free Methodist Church" label="Reformed Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759165" start="9957" end="9989" title="Emmanuel Association of Churches" label="Emmanuel Association of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q107072036" start="9995" end="10021" title="Immanuel Missionary Church" label="Immanuel Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116878" start="10026" end="10059" title="Church of God (Guthrie, Oklahoma)" label="Church of God (Guthrie, Oklahoma)"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="10161" end="10166" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943014" start="10239" end="10257" title="Book of Discipline" label="Book of Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="10335" end="10357" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="10529" end="10553" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827" start="10558" end="10574" title="Christadelphians" label="Christadelphians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="10957" end="10972" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q958055" start="11486" end="11505" title="Operation Whitecoat" label="Operation Whitecoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="11898" end="11904" title="Schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q463471" start="12144" end="12181" title="Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement" label="Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="12192" end="12214" title="early Christian Church" label="early Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="12228" end="12234" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12271" end="12283" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="12304" end="12316" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="12322" end="12337" title="just war theory" label="just war theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="12659" end="12666" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827102" start="12713" end="12721" title="religious war" label="holy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q311388" start="12777" end="12796" title="Constantinian shift" label="Constantinian shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="12813" end="12831" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039460" start="12835" end="12852" title="Great Apostasy" label="the great failing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886403" start="12869" end="12879" title="Ben Salmon" label="Ben Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="13818" end="13824" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="13999" end="14006" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="14238" end="14249" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="14343" end="14359" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="14436" end="14442" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="14450" end="14461" title="nonviolence" label="nonviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="14536" end="14544" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074929" start="14557" end="14570" title="five precepts" label="five precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="14777" end="14792" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475695" start="15013" end="15018" title="sōhei" label="sōhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="15126" end="15130" title="Gita" label="Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="15270" end="15282" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256083" start="15427" end="15438" title="Baháʼí laws" label="Baháʼí laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="15568" end="15583" title="paganism" label="pagan religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="15598" end="15603" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q371912" start="15638" end="15649" title="Wiccan rede" label="Wiccan rede"/>
<link wikidata="Q838286" start="15730" end="15743" title="threefold law" label="threefold law"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="15834" end="15842" title="Austrians" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15850" end="15864" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45243" start="15875" end="15893" title="Franz Jägerstätter" label="Franz Jägerstätter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="15978" end="15987" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="16046" end="16062" title="Beatification" label="declared Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="16066" end="16083" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="16573" end="16586" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="16616" end="16632" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="17036" end="17049" title="draft dodger" label="draft dodging"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="17210" end="17219" title="bona fide" label="bona fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q702635" start="17454" end="17473" title="alternative service" label="alternative service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="17964" end="17981" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567015" start="18384" end="18390" title="Conscription in Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833681" start="18392" end="18398" title="Conscription in Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162772" start="18400" end="18406" title="Conscription in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162764" start="18408" end="18415" title="Conscription in Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118976" start="18420" end="18426" title="Conscription in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="18510" end="18542" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="18865" end="18872" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q606950" start="19640" end="19680" title="Military history of Canada during World War I" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s involvement in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="19702" end="19718" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="19885" end="19894" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="19899" end="19908" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106715343" start="19979" end="20020" title="Military history of Canada during the Second World War" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s involvement in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="20465" end="20484" title="Conscription Crisis of 1944" label="Conscription Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="20618" end="20627" title="Doukhobor" label="Dukhobors"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="20727" end="20741" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="20976" end="21006" title="Velvet Revolution" label="communist party lost its power"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="21080" end="21094" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="21099" end="21107" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="21141" end="21183" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="21651" end="21658" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060999" start="21676" end="21693" title="Conscription in Eritrea" label="indefinite length"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="21935" end="21948" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="21961" end="21978" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q692068" start="22216" end="22231" title="Arndt Pekurinen" label="Arndt Pekurinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="22412" end="22422" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="22556" end="22572" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26884656" start="24953" end="24967" title="Jacques Martin (pacifist)" label="Jacques Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="25044" end="25053" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666714" start="25054" end="25066" title="Louis Lecoin" label="Louis Lecoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q977974" start="25248" end="25259" title="Pierre Joxe" label="Pierre Joxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="26064" end="26076" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554609" start="26344" end="26375" title="Wehrkraftzersetzung" label="subversion of military strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="26574" end="26606" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q45243" start="26622" end="26640" title="Franz Jägerstätter" label="Franz Jägerstätter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="26792" end="26804" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q811867" start="27092" end="27112" title="construction soldier" label="construction soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="27258" end="27277" title="Grundgesetz" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058962" start="27758" end="27769" title="Zivildienst" label="Zivildienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="27850" end="27862" title="Bundeswehr" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="28075" end="28095" title="administrative court" label="administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="31104" end="31115" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563" start="33222" end="33234" title="Roman Herzog" label="Roman Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q437458" start="33550" end="33562" title="elderly care" label="elderly care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910156" start="34502" end="34518" title="Israeli citizenship law" label="Israeli citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115389" start="34739" end="34744" title="Druze in Israel" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="34803" end="34816" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Israeli Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q574548" start="34897" end="34925" title="Negev Bedouin" label="Bedouin population of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="35083" end="35090" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="36539" end="36546" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="36782" end="36790" title="Treason" label="traitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="37362" end="37394" title="Republic of the Marshall Islands" label="Republic of the Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="38215" end="38226" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="38238" end="38245" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827" start="38247" end="38263" title="Christadelphians" label="Christadelphians"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="38269" end="38291" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660471" start="38528" end="38536" title="Waikeria" label="Waikeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786208" start="38676" end="38692" title="Archibald Baxter" label="Archibald Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641140" start="38752" end="38768" title="Field punishment" label="Field Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="39336" end="39341" title="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="OHCHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054980" start="39360" end="39383" title="New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990" label="Bill of Rights Act 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="39408" end="39445" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="39454" end="39506" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="39590" end="39597" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="39735" end="39764" title="Constitution of Romania" label="2003 constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="39833" end="39852" title="Romanian Parliament" label="Romanian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="40019" end="40023" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="40043" end="40057" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="40066" end="40083" title="Russian Mennonite" label="Russian Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469274" start="40105" end="40121" title="Forestry service (Russia)" label="forestry service"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="40439" end="40445" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="40450" end="40463" title="Ekaterinoslav" label="Ekaterinoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="40486" end="40512" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="40514" end="40526" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718475" start="40645" end="40662" title="Vladimir Chertkov" label="Vladimir Chertkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="40678" end="40689" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="40854" end="40871" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45745" start="41090" end="41109" title="New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="41337" end="41342" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="42340" end="42367" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340207" start="42427" end="42452" title="End Conscription Campaign" label="End Conscription Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565903" start="42535" end="42576" title="Committee on South African War Resistance" label="Committee on South African War Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="42735" end="42764" title="South African Border War" label="Opposition to the Angolan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="43285" end="43302" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="47860" end="47875" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="48055" end="48083" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="48285" end="48294" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="48435" end="48442" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="48460" end="48478" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="49289" end="49295" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="49484" end="49490" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49697" end="49706" title="Conscription in Turkey#Conscientious objection" label="in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="49719" end="49729" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="49879" end="49909" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107091" start="50087" end="50103" title="Osman Murat Ülke" label="Osman Murat Ülke"/>
<link wikidata="Q968238" start="50114" end="50127" title="Mehmet Tarhan" label="Mehmet Tarhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468092" start="50262" end="50276" title="Perihan Mağden" label="Perihan Mağden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080110" start="50614" end="50624" title="İnan Süver" label="İnan Süver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667873" start="50637" end="50659" title="prisoner of conscience" label="prisoner of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294877" start="50712" end="50731" title="Ministry of Justice (Turkey)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="51190" end="51223" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="National Assembly of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="51550" end="51557" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933815" start="51663" end="51670" title="Militia (Great Britain)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="51772" end="51783" title="Press gangs" label="Press gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="51957" end="51966" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="51972" end="51982" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="52016" end="52031" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="52111" end="52126" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852175" start="52169" end="52189" title="Military Service Act (United Kingdom)" label="Military Service Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737178" start="52392" end="52411" title="Non-Combatant Corps" label="Non-Combatant Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852179" start="52468" end="52493" title="Military Service Tribunals" label="Military Service Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53002" end="53018" title="Court-martial#United Kingdom" label="court-martialled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609463" start="53090" end="53112" title="Stephen Henry Hobhouse" label="Stephen Henry Hobhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390366" start="53798" end="53814" title="Richmond Sixteen" label="Richmond Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="54216" end="54240" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153130" start="54547" end="54562" title="Disfranchisement" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="54597" end="54634" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="54935" end="54942" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="54978" end="54992" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162757" start="55214" end="55241" title="Conscription Crisis of 1918" label="Conscription Crisis of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="55271" end="55287" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="55305" end="55321" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="55328" end="55336" title="Irishmen" label="Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="55403" end="55417" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="55422" end="55434" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581509" start="55653" end="55693" title="National Service (Armed Forces) Act 1939" label="National Service (Armed Forces) Act 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="56122" end="56141" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="57030" end="57043" title="bomb disposal" label="bomb disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="57109" end="57133" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131596" start="57240" end="57244" title="farm" label="farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="57251" end="57257" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="57259" end="57271" title="firefighting" label="firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="57280" end="57297" title="Emergency medical services" label="ambulance service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="57954" end="57988" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="Conscription in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="58046" end="58062" title="National Service" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="58600" end="58624" title="Selective Service System" label="Selective Service System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="58641" end="58662" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="59032" end="59043" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="59518" end="59525" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="59538" end="59549" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696705" start="59832" end="59843" title="Zivildienst in Austria" label="Zivildienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423498" start="59893" end="59904" title="Swiss Civilian Service" label="Zivildienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q506674" start="60850" end="60864" title="Antimilitarism" label="Antimilitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060618" start="60867" end="60912" title="Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors" label="Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060007" start="60915" end="60945" title="Center on Conscience &amp;amp; War" label="Center on Conscience &amp;amp; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964178" start="60948" end="60991" title="Conscientious Objectors Commemorative Stone" label="Conscientious Objectors Commemorative Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162734" start="60994" end="61038" title="Conscientious objection to military taxation" label="Conscientious objection to military taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176897" start="61041" end="61060" title="Counter-recruitment" label="Counter-recruitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q45243" start="61063" end="61081" title="Franz Jägerstätter" label="Franz Jägerstätter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504100" start="61084" end="61112" title="Friends&amp;#x27; Ambulance Unit" label="Friends&amp;#x27; Ambulance Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513539" start="61115" end="61132" title="GI Rights Network" label="GI Rights Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237992" start="61135" end="61154" title="Medical Cadet Corps" label="Medical Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559556" start="61157" end="61168" title="Pax Christi" label="Pax Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="61171" end="61185" title="Peace movement" label="Peace movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157422" start="61188" end="61206" title="Peace Pledge Union" label="Peace Pledge Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390366" start="61209" end="61225" title="Richmond Sixteen" label="Richmond Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111532429" start="61228" end="61261" title="Selective conscientious objection" label="Selective conscientious objection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937612" start="61264" end="61278" title="Tax resistance" label="Tax resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q552590" start="61281" end="61293" title="Voluntaryism" label="Voluntaryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968738" start="61296" end="61308" title="War resister" label="War resister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890441" start="61311" end="61344" title="War Resisters&amp;#x27; International" label="War Resisters&amp;#x27; International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410527" start="61347" end="61367" title="War Resisters League" label="War Resisters League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977035" start="64124" end="64154" title="Independent Television Service" label="Independent Television Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q589237" start="64318" end="64330" title="Molly Stuart" label="Molly Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64332" end="64347" title="Amitai Ben-Abba" label="Amitai Ben-Abba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666506" start="64471" end="64475" title="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam" label="IDFA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83004" wikidata="Q4862163" url="?curid=83004" title="Penthus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Penthus (Πενθος) or Penthos was the personification of grief. He favors those who weep for the dead. It is believed that he likes to also torment the individuals who mourn. He accompanied Tisiphone when Hera sent her to madden Ino and Athamas.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862163" start="20" end="27" title="Penthus" label="Penthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862163" start="40" end="47" title="Penthus" label="Penthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026040" start="75" end="80" title="grief" label="grief"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83006" wikidata="Q117364" url="?curid=83006" title="Clause">
<text>In language, a clause is a constituent or phrase that comprises a semantic predicand (expressed or not) and a semantic predicate. A typical clause consists of a subject and a syntactic predicate, the latter typically a verb phrase composed of a verb with or without any objects and other modifiers. However, the subject is sometimes unexpressed if it is easily deducible from the context, especially in null-subject language but also in other languages, including instances of the imperative mood in English.

A complete simple sentence contains a single clause with a finite verb. Complex sentences contain at least one clause subordinated (&quot;dependent&quot;) to an &quot;independent clause&quot; (one that could stand alone as a simple sentence), which may be co-ordinated with other independents with or without dependents. Some dependent clauses are non-finite, i.e. they do not contain any element/verb marking a specific tense.

==Two major distinctions==
A primary division for the discussion of clauses is the distinction between independent clauses and dependent clauses. An independent clause can stand alone, i.e. it can constitute a complete sentence by itself. A dependent clause, by contrast, relies on an independent clause&#x27;s presence to be efficiently utilizable.

A second significant distinction concerns the difference between finite and non-finite clauses. A finite clause contains a structurally central finite verb, whereas the structurally central word of a non-finite clause is often a non-finite verb. Traditional grammar focuses on finite clauses, the awareness of non-finite clauses having arisen much later in connection with the modern study of syntax. The discussion here also focuses on finite clauses, although some aspects of non-finite clauses are considered further below.

Clauses can be classified according to a distinctive trait that is a prominent characteristic of their syntactic form. The position of the finite verb is one major trait used for classification, and the appearance of a specific type of focusing word (e.g. &#x27;Wh&#x27;-word) is another. These two criteria overlap to an extent, which means that often no single aspect of syntactic form is always decisive in deciding how the clause functions. There are, however, strong tendencies.

===Standard SV-clauses===
Standard SV-clauses (subject-verb) are the norm in English. They are usually declarative (as opposed to exclamative, imperative, or interrogative); they express information neutrally, e.g.

::The pig has not yet been fed. Declarative clause, standard SV order
::I&#x27;ve been hungry for two hours. Declarative clause, standard SV order
::...that I&#x27;ve been hungry for two hours. Declarative clause, standard SV order, but functioning as a subordinate clause due to the appearance of the subordinator &quot;that&quot;

Declarative clauses like these are by far the most frequently occurring type of clause in any language. They can be viewed as basic, with other clause types being derived from them. Standard SV-clauses can also be interrogative or exclamative, however, given the appropriate intonation contour and/or the appearance of a question word, e.g.

::a. The pig has not yet been fed? Rising intonation on &quot;fed&quot; makes the clause a yes/no question.

::b. The pig has not yet been fed! Spoken forcefully, this clause is exclamative.

::c. You&#x27;ve been hungry for how long? Appearance of interrogative word &quot;how&quot; and rising intonation make the clause a constituent question

Examples like these demonstrate that how a clause functions cannot be known based entirely on a single distinctive syntactic criterion. SV-clauses are usually declarative, but intonation and/or the appearance of a question word can render them interrogative or exclamative.

===Verb first clauses===
Verb first clauses in English usually play one of three roles: 1. They express a yes/no-question via subject–auxiliary inversion, 2. they express a condition as an embedded clause, or 3. they express a command via imperative mood, e.g.

::a. He must stop laughing. Standard declarative SV-clause (verb second order)
::b. Should he stop laughing? Yes/no-question expressed by verb first order
::c. Had he stopped laughing, ... Condition expressed by verb first order
::d. Stop laughing! Imperative formed with verb first order

::a. They have done the job. Standard declarative SV-clause (verb second order)
::b. Have they done the job? Yes/no-question expressed by verb first order
::c. Had they done the job, ... Condition expressed by verb first order
::d. Do the job! Imperative formed with verb first order

Most verb first clauses are independent clauses. Verb first conditional clauses, however, must be classified as embedded clauses because they cannot stand alone.

===&quot;Wh&quot;-clauses===
In English, &quot;Wh&quot;-clauses contain a &quot;wh&quot;-word. &quot;Wh&quot;-words often serve to help express a constituent question. They are also prevalent, though, as relative pronouns, in which case they serve to introduce a relative clause and are not part of a question. The &quot;wh&quot;-word focuses a particular constituent, and most of the time, it appears in clause-initial position. The following examples illustrate standard interrogative &quot;wh&quot;-clauses. The b-sentences are direct questions (independent clauses), and the c-sentences contain the corresponding indirect questions (embedded clauses):

::a. Sam likes the meat. Standard declarative SV-clause
::b. Who likes the meat? Matrix interrogative &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the subject
::c. They asked who likes the meat. Embedded interrogative &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the subject

::a. Larry sent Susan to the store. Standard declarative SV-clause
::b. Whom did Larry send to the store? Matrix interrogative &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the object, subject-auxiliary inversion present
::c. We know whom Larry sent to the store. Embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the object, subject-auxiliary inversion absent

::a. Larry sent Susan to the store. Standard declarative SV-clause
::b. Where did Larry send Susan? Matrix interrogative &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the oblique object, subject-auxiliary inversion present
::c. Someone is wondering where Larry sent Susan. Embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause focusing on the oblique object, subject-auxiliary inversion absent

One important aspect of matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clauses is that subject-auxiliary inversion is obligatory when something other than the subject is focused. When it is the subject (or something embedded in the subject) that is focused, however, subject-auxiliary inversion does not occur.

::a. Who called you? Subject focused, no subject-auxiliary inversion
::b. Whom did you call? Object focused, subject-auxiliary inversion occurs

Another important aspect of &quot;wh&quot;-clauses concerns the absence of subject-auxiliary inversion in embedded clauses, as illustrated in the c-examples just produced. Subject-auxiliary inversion is obligatory in matrix clauses when something other than the subject is focused, but it never occurs in embedded clauses regardless of the constituent that is focused. A systematic distinction in word order emerges across matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clauses, which can have VS order, and embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clauses, which always maintain SV order, e.g.

::a. Why are they doing that? Subject-auxiliary inversion results in VS order in matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clause.
::b. They told us why they are doing that. Subject-auxiliary inversion is absent in embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause.
::c. *They told us why are they doing that. Subject-auxiliary inversion is blocked in embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause.

::a. Whom is he trying to avoid? Subject-auxiliary inversion results in VS order in matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clause.
::b. We know whom he is trying to avoid. Subject-auxiliary inversion is absent in embedded &quot;wh-&quot;clause.
::c. *We know whom is he trying to avoid. Subject-auxiliary inversion is blocked in embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause.

===Relative clauses===

Relative clauses are a mixed group. In English they can be standard SV-clauses if they are introduced by &quot;that&quot; or lack a relative pronoun entirely, or they can be &quot;wh&quot;-clauses if they are introduced by a &quot;wh&quot;-word that serves as a relative pronoun.
==Clauses according to semantic predicate-argument function==
Embedded clauses can be categorized according to their syntactic function in terms of predicate-argument structures. They can function as arguments, as adjuncts, or as predicative expressions. That is, embedded clauses can be an argument of a predicate, an adjunct on a predicate, or (part of) the predicate itself. The predicate in question is usually the predicate of an independent clause, but embedding of predicates is also frequent.

===Argument clauses===
A clause that functions as the argument of a given predicate is known as an &quot;argument clause&quot;. Argument clauses can appear as subjects, as objects, and as obliques. They can also modify a noun predicate, in which case they are known as &quot;content clauses&quot;.

::That they actually helped was really appreciated. SV-clause functioning as the subject argument
::They mentioned that they had actually helped. SV-clause functioning as the object argument

::What he said was ridiculous. &quot;Wh&quot;-clause functioning as the subject argument
::We know what he said. &quot;Wh&quot;-clause functioning as an object argument
::He talked about what he had said. &quot;Wh&quot;-clause functioning as an oblique object argument

The following examples illustrate argument clauses that provide the content of a noun. Such argument clauses are content clauses:

::a. the claim that he was going to change it Argument clause that provides the content of a noun (i.e. content clause)
::b. the claim that he expressed Adjunct clause (relative clause) that modifies a noun

::a. the idea that we should alter the law Argument clause that provides the content of a noun (i.e. content clause)
::b. the idea that came up Adjunct clause (relative clause) that modifies a noun

The content clauses like these in the a-sentences are arguments. Relative clauses introduced by the relative pronoun &quot;that&quot; as in the b-clauses here have an outward appearance that is closely similar to that of content clauses. The relative clauses are adjuncts, however, not arguments.

===Adjunct clauses===
Adjunct clauses are embedded clauses that modify an entire predicate-argument structure. All clause types (SV-, verb first, &quot;wh-&quot;) can function as adjuncts, although the stereotypical adjunct clause is SV and introduced by a subordinator (i.e. subordinate conjunction, e.g. &quot;after&quot;, &quot;because&quot;, &quot;before&quot;, &quot;now&quot;, etc.), e.g.

::a. Fred arrived before you did. Adjunct clause modifying matrix clause
::b. After Fred arrived, the party started. Adjunct clause modifying matrix clause
::c. Susan skipped the meal because she is fasting. Adjunct clause modifying matrix clause

These adjunct clauses modify the entire matrix clause. Thus &quot;before you did&quot; in the first example modifies the matrix clause &quot;Fred arrived&quot;. Adjunct clauses can also modify a nominal predicate. The typical instance of this type of adjunct is a relative clause, e.g.

::a. We like the music that you brought. Relative clause functioning as an adjunct that modifies the noun &quot;music&quot;
::b. The people who brought music were singing loudly. Relative clause functioning as an adjunct that modifies the noun &quot;people&quot;
::c. They are waiting for some food that will not come. Relative clause functioning as an adjunct that modifies the noun &quot;food&quot;

===Predicative clauses===
An embedded clause can also function as a predicative expression. That is, it can form (part of) the predicate of a greater clause.

::a. That was when they laughed. Predicative SV-clause, i.e. a clause that functions as (part of) the main predicate
::b. He became what he always wanted to be. Predicative &quot;wh&quot;-clause, i.e. &quot;wh&quot;-clause that functions as (part of) the main predicate

These predicative clauses are functioning just like other predicative expressions, e.g. predicative adjectives (&quot;That was good&quot;) and predicative nominals (&quot;That was the truth&quot;). They form the matrix predicate together with the copula.

==Representing clauses==
Some of the distinctions presented above are represented in syntax trees. These trees make the difference between main and subordinate clauses very clear, and they also illustrate well the difference between argument and adjunct clauses. The following dependency grammar trees show that embedded clauses are dependent on an element in the independent clause, often on a verb:

The independent clause comprises the entire trees in both instances, whereas the embedded clauses constitute arguments of the respective independent clauses: the embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause &quot;what we want&quot; is the object argument of the predicate &quot;know&quot;; the embedded clause &quot;that he is gaining&quot; is the subject argument of the predicate &quot;is motivating&quot;. Both of these argument clauses are dependent on the verb of the matrix clause. The following trees identify adjunct clauses using an arrow dependency edge:

These two embedded clauses are adjunct clauses because they provide circumstantial information that modifies a superordinate expression. The first is a dependent of the main verb of the matrix clause and the second is a dependent of the object noun. The arrow dependency edges identify them as adjuncts. The arrow points away from the adjunct towards it governor to indicate that semantic selection is running counter to the direction of the syntactic dependency; the adjunct is selecting its governor. The next four trees illustrate the distinction mentioned above between matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clauses and embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clauses

The embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clause is an object argument each time. The position of the &quot;wh&quot;-word across the matrix clauses (a-trees) and the embedded clauses (b-trees) captures the difference in word order. Matrix &quot;wh&quot;-clauses have V2 word order, whereas embedded wh-clauses have (what amounts to) V3 word order. In the matrix clauses, the &quot;wh&quot;-word is a dependent of the finite verb, whereas it is the head over the finite verb in the embedded &quot;wh&quot;-clauses.

==Clauses vs phrases==
There has been confusion about the distinction between clauses and phrases. This confusion is due in part to how these concepts are employed in the phrase structure grammars of the Chomskyan tradition. In the 1970s, Chomskyan grammars began labeling many clauses as CPs (i.e. complementizer phrases) or as IPs (i.e. inflection phrases), and then later as TPs (i.e. tense phrases), etc. The choice of labels was influenced by the theory-internal desire to use the labels consistently. The X-bar schema acknowledged at least three projection levels for every lexical head: a minimal projection (e.g. N, V, P, etc.), an intermediate projection (e.g. N&#x27;, V&#x27;, P&#x27;, etc.), and a phrase level projection (e.g. NP, VP, PP, etc.). Extending this convention to the clausal categories occurred in the interest of the consistent use of labels.

This use of labels should not, however, be confused with the actual status of the syntactic units to which the labels are attached. A more traditional understanding of clauses and phrases maintains that phrases are not clauses, and clauses are not phrases. There is a progression in the size and status of syntactic units: &quot;words &lt; phrases &lt; clauses&quot;. The characteristic trait of clauses, i.e. the presence of a subject and a (finite) verb, is absent from phrases. Clauses can be, however, embedded inside phrases.

==Non-finite clauses==

The central word of a non-finite clause is usually a non-finite verb (as opposed to a finite verb). There are various types of non-finite clauses that can be acknowledged based in part on the type of non-finite verb at hand. Gerunds are widely acknowledged to constitute non-finite clauses, and some modern grammars also judge many &quot;to&quot;-infinitives to be the structural locus of non-finite clauses. Finally, some modern grammars also acknowledge so-called small clauses, which often lack a verb altogether. It should be apparent that non-finite clauses are (by and large) embedded clauses.

===Gerund clauses===
The underlined words in the following examples are considered non-finite clauses, e.g.

::a. Bill stopping the project was a big disappointment. Non-finite gerund clause
::b. Bill&#x27;s stopping of the project was a big disappointment. Gerund with noun status

::a. We&#x27;ve heard about Susan attempting a solution. Non-finite gerund clause
::b. We&#x27;ve heard about Susan&#x27;s attempting of a solution. Gerund with noun status

::a. They mentioned him cheating on the test. Non-finite gerund clause
::b. They mentioned his cheating on the test. Gerund with noun status

Each of the gerunds in the a-sentences (&quot;stopping&quot;, &quot;attempting&quot;, and &quot;cheating&quot;) constitutes a non-finite clause. The subject-predicate relationship that has long been taken as the defining trait of clauses is fully present in the a-sentences. The fact that the b-sentences are also acceptable illustrates the enigmatic behavior of gerunds. They seem to straddle two syntactic categories: they can function as non-finite verbs or as nouns. When they function as nouns as in the b-sentences, it is debatable whether they constitute clauses, since nouns are not generally taken to be constitutive of clauses.

===&quot;to&quot;-infinitive clauses===
Some modern theories of syntax take many &quot;to&quot;-infinitives to be constitutive of non-finite clauses. This stance is supported by the clear predicate status of many &quot;to&quot;-infinitives. It is challenged, however, by the fact that &quot;to&quot;-infinitives do not take an overt subject, e.g.

::a. She refuses to consider the issue.
::a. He attempted to explain his concerns.

The &quot;to&quot;-infinitives &quot;to consider&quot; and &quot;to explain&quot; clearly qualify as predicates (because they can be negated). They do not, however, take overt subjects. The subjects &quot;she&quot; and &quot;he&quot; are dependents of the matrix verbs &quot;refuses&quot; and &quot;attempted&quot;, respectively, not of the &quot;to&quot;-infinitives. Data like these are often addressed in terms of control. The matrix predicates &quot;refuses&quot; and &quot;attempted&quot; are control verbs; they control the embedded predicates &quot;consider&quot; and &quot;explain&quot;, which means they determine which of their arguments serves as the subject argument of the embedded predicate. Some theories of syntax posit the null subject PRO (i.e. pronoun) to help address the facts of control constructions, e.g.

::b. She refuses PRO to consider the issue.
::b. He attempted PRO to explain his concerns.

With the presence of PRO as a null subject, &quot;to&quot;-infinitives can be construed as complete clauses, since both subject and predicate are present.

PRO-theory is particular to one tradition in the study of syntax and grammar (Government and Binding Theory, Minimalist Program). Other theories of syntax and grammar (e.g. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, Construction Grammar, dependency grammar) reject the presence of null elements such as PRO, which means they are likely to reject the stance that &quot;to&quot;-infinitives constitute clauses.

===Small clauses===
Another type of construction that some schools of syntax and grammar view as non-finite clauses is the so-called small clause. A typical small clause consists of a noun phrase and a predicative expression, e.g.

::We consider that a joke. Small clause with the predicative noun phrase &quot;a joke&quot;
::Something made him angry. Small clause with the predicative adjective &quot;angry&quot;
::She wants us to stay. Small clause with the predicative non-finite &quot;to&quot;-infinitive &quot;to stay&quot;

The subject-predicate relationship is clearly present in the underlined strings. The expression on the right is a predication over the noun phrase immediately to its left. While the subject-predicate relationship is indisputably present, the underlined strings do not behave as single constituents, a fact that undermines their status as clauses. Hence one can debate whether the underlined strings in these examples should qualify as clauses. The layered structures of the chomskyan tradition are again likely to view the underlined strings as clauses, whereas the schools of syntax that posit flatter structures are likely to reject clause status for them.

== See also ==
*Adverbial clause
*Balancing and deranking
*Dependent clause
*Phrase
*Relative clause
*Sentence (linguistics)
*T-unit
*Thematic equative

==Notes==
==References==
*
* Kroeger, Paul R. (2005). &quot;Analysing Grammar: An Introduction&quot;. Cambridge. UK: Cambridge University Press.
* Radford, Andrew (2004). &quot;English syntax: An introduction&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="3" end="11" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q117364" start="15" end="21" title="Clause" label="clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786828" start="27" end="38" title="Constituent (linguistics)" label="constituent"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="42" end="48" title="Phrase (grammar)" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771079" start="75" end="84" title="predicand" label="predicand"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="119" end="128" title="Predicate (grammar)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="161" end="168" title="subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="185" end="194" title="Predicate (grammar)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778442" start="219" end="230" title="verb phrase" label="verb phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="245" end="249" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="270" end="276" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q732699" start="288" end="297" title="Grammatical modifier" label="modifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982067" start="403" end="424" title="null-subject language" label="null-subject language"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="481" end="496" title="imperative mood" label="imperative mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q560583" start="500" end="507" title="English grammar" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156548" start="521" end="536" title="simple sentence" label="simple sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="569" end="580" title="finite verb" label="finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156548" start="582" end="598" title="Complex sentence" label="Complex sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122094" start="642" end="663" title="dependent clause" label="&amp;quot;dependent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419215" start="677" end="695" title="independent clause" label="independent clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515434" start="858" end="868" title="Non-finite clause" label="non-finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="1434" end="1445" title="finite verb" label="finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="1519" end="1534" title="non-finite verb" label="non-finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2074" end="2093" title="&amp;#x27;Wh&amp;#x27;-word" label="&amp;#x27;Wh&amp;#x27;-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121559" start="2821" end="2833" title="Subordinator (grammar)" label="subordinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165577" start="3138" end="3145" title="Contour (linguistics)" label="contour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345343" start="3285" end="3300" title="yes–no question" label="yes/no question"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082216" start="3941" end="3968" title="subject–auxiliary inversion" label="subject–auxiliary inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4847" end="4854" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082216" start="6491" end="6518" title="subject-auxiliary inversion" label="subject-auxiliary inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402059" start="8130" end="8145" title="Relative clause" label="Relative clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304610" start="8355" end="8374" title="wh-word" label="&amp;quot;wh&amp;quot;-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050744" start="8392" end="8408" title="relative pronoun" label="relative pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185614" start="8610" end="8618" title="argument (linguistics)" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975444" start="8624" end="8631" title="adjunct (linguistics)" label="adjunct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931259" start="8640" end="8662" title="predicative expression" label="predicative expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459189" start="9187" end="9201" title="content clause" label="content clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="10785" end="10808" title="subordinate conjunction" label="subordinate conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931259" start="11910" end="11932" title="predicative expression" label="predicative expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="12519" end="12525" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="12805" end="12823" title="dependency grammar" label="dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732820" start="13836" end="13844" title="government (linguistics)" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447724" start="13871" end="13880" title="selection (linguistics)" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516105" start="14376" end="14389" title="V2 word order" label="V2 word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="14714" end="14720" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="14795" end="14819" title="phrase structure grammar" label="phrase structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="15135" end="15147" title="X-bar theory" label="X-bar schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="16103" end="16118" title="non-finite verb" label="non-finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="16136" end="16147" title="finite verb" label="finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="16275" end="16281" title="Gerund" label="Gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543027" start="16516" end="16528" title="small clause" label="small clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165823" start="18738" end="18745" title="Control (linguistics)" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046248" start="19074" end="19077" title="PRO (linguistics)" label="PRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q355605" start="19477" end="19506" title="Government and Binding Theory" label="Government and Binding Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q177724" start="19508" end="19526" title="Minimalist Program" label="Minimalist Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q379294" start="19572" end="19608" title="Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar" label="Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188797" start="19610" end="19630" title="Construction Grammar" label="Construction Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="19632" end="19650" title="dependency grammar" label="dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543027" start="19937" end="19949" title="small clause" label="small clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786828" start="20619" end="20630" title="Constituent (linguistics)" label="constituent"/>
<link wikidata="Q132120" start="21010" end="21026" title="Adverbial clause" label="Adverbial clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850006" start="21028" end="21051" title="Balancing and deranking" label="Balancing and deranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122094" start="21053" end="21069" title="Dependent clause" label="Dependent clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="21071" end="21077" title="Phrase" label="Phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402059" start="21079" end="21094" title="Relative clause" label="Relative clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="21096" end="21118" title="Sentence (linguistics)" label="Sentence (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667942" start="21120" end="21126" title="T-unit" label="T-unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781191" start="21128" end="21145" title="Thematic equative" label="Thematic equative"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="21264" end="21290" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694956" start="21294" end="21309" title="Andrew Radford (linguist)" label="Radford, Andrew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83008" wikidata="Q357397" url="?curid=83008" title="Tertium comparationis">
<text>Tertium comparationis (Latin for &quot;the third [part] of the comparison&quot;) is the quality that two things which are being compared have in common. It is the point of comparison which prompted the author of the comparison in question to liken someone or something to someone or something else in the first place.

If a comparison visualizes an action, state, quality, object, or a person by means of a parallel which is drawn to a different entity, the two things which are being compared do not necessarily have to be identical. However, they must possess at least one quality in common. This common quality has traditionally been referred to as &quot;tertium comparationis&quot;.

The most common devices used to achieve this are metaphors and similes, especially, but by no means exclusively, in poetic language. In many cases one aspect of the comparison is implied rather than made explicit. The New Testament scholar, Adolf Jülicher, applied the concept of tertium comparationis to the parables of Jesus. According to Jülicher, a parable or similitude (extended simile or metaphor) has three parts: a picture part (&quot;Bildhälfte&quot;), a reality part (&quot;Sachhälfte&quot;), and the point of comparison (&quot;tertium comparationis&quot;) between the picture part and the reality part. &quot;The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which someone found and hid; then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field&quot; (Matthew 13:44). In this parable, the picture part is the hidden treasure, the reality part is God&#x27;s kingdom, and the &quot;tertium comparationis&quot; is the inestimable value of the kingdom.

==Examples==
*Necessity is the mother of invention. (English proverb)
:Objects of comparison: relationship between mother and child, relationship between necessity and invention
:&quot;Tertium comparationis&quot;: source, where something derives from
*Woman is the nigger of the world. (John Lennon)
:Objects of comparison: treatment of Black people in US culture, treatment of women in global culture
:&quot;Tertium comparationis&quot;: inhumane treatment, subjugation, discrimination
*Goodbye, England&#x27;s rose. (Elton John on the death of Princess Diana)
:Objects of comparison: Diana; roses
:&quot;Tertium comparationis&quot;: beauty

*If they [our two souls] be two, they are two so
:As stiff twin compasses are two;
:Thy soul, the fixed foot, makes no show
:To move, but doth, if th&#x27;other do.
::(John Donne: &quot;A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning&quot;) (Read the whole poem.)

:Objects of comparison: two souls; twin compasses
:&quot;Tertium comparationis&quot;: a non-physical link between separate objects that causes action in one to result in action to the other.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="23" end="28" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="737" end="745" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q199714" start="751" end="757" title="simile" label="simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="804" end="819" title="poetry" label="poetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q86465" start="929" end="943" title="Adolf Jülicher" label="Adolf Jülicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q51632" start="997" end="1014" title="parables of Jesus" label="parables of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="1732" end="1739" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="1936" end="1942" title="nigger (word)" label="nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="1958" end="1969" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="2142" end="2156" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="2189" end="2199" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="2216" end="2230" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="2481" end="2491" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83009" wikidata="Q1465871" url="?curid=83009" title="Phthonus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Phthonus (; Ancient Greek: Φθόνος &quot;Phthónos&quot;), or sometimes [[Zelus]], was the personification of jealousy and envy, most prominently in matters of romance. In Nonnus&#x27;s &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;, he is by proxy the cause of Semele&#x27;s death, having informed Hera of Zeus&#x27;s affair with the princess. He also appears in Callimachus&#x27;s Hymn to Apollo, goading the god into an argument. He is often compared and linked to the goddess of chaos and discord, Éris, for always causing the same effects as the goddess, using and abusing jealousy and envy to create fights between everyone. Furthermore, they are both Daemons.

His female counterpart was Nemesis, personification of revenge. In contrast to Phthonus’ domain being closely tied to romantic and sexual jealousy, Nemesis was more closely related to violent retribution.

This deity, already envious of Dionysus before his birth, incited jealousy in Athena by displaying an image of Ares clad in fake blood-drenched armor. Additionally, this provoked Hera’s envy, leading her to seek another celestial spouse as she suspected Zeus would remain with Semele. The deity persisted in provoking Hera and Athena, recalling Zeus’s various affairs and foretelling heroic feats for Dionysus. According to Irenaeus, Gnostics believed that the first angel and Authadia conceived the children Kakia (wickedness), Zelos (emulation), Phthonus (envy), Erinnys (fury), and Epithymia (lust).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465871" start="20" end="28" title="Phthonus" label="Phthonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="32" end="45" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465871" start="90" end="99" title="Phthonus" label="[[Zelus]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="190" end="196" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="210" end="220" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q776139" start="256" end="262" title="Semele" label="Semele"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="293" end="297" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="301" end="305" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="358" end="369" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="385" end="391" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="496" end="500" title="Eris (mythology)" label="Éris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157625" start="652" end="659" title="Daimon" label="Daemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185747" start="689" end="696" title="Nemesis" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q776139" start="1145" end="1151" title="Semele" label="Semele"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="1292" end="1300" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="1302" end="1310" title="Gnostics" label="Gnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349433" start="1377" end="1382" title="Kakia" label="Kakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="1433" end="1440" title="Erinyes" label="Erinnys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1453" end="1462" title="Epithymia" label="Epithymia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83010" wikidata="Q192483" url="?curid=83010" title="Lemnos">
<text>Lemnos or Limnos (; ) is a Greek island in the northern Aegean Sea. Administratively the island forms a separate municipality within the Lemnos regional unit, which is part of the North Aegean region. The principal town of the island and seat of the municipality is Myrina. At , it is the 8th-largest island of Greece.

==Geography==
Lemnos is primarily a flat island, but the western region, particularly the northwest, is rocky and mountainous. At 430 meters above sea level, Mount Skopia is the highest point. The chief towns are Myrina, on the western coast, and Moudros on the eastern shore of a large bay in the middle of the island. Myrina (also called Kastro, meaning &quot;castle&quot;) possesses a good harbour. It is the seat of all trade carried on with the mainland.

Lemnos also has a 7-hectare desert, the Pachies Ammoudies of Lemnos.

===Climate===
The climate in Lemnos is mainly Mediterranean (&quot;Csa&quot;). Winters are generally mild, but with occasional snowfall. Strong winds are a feature of the island, especially in August and during the winter, with a maximum average wind speed of 20.7 km/h in February, hence its nickname &quot;the wind-ridden one&quot; (in Greek, Ανεμόεσσα). The temperature is typically 2 to 5 degrees Celsius less than in Athens, especially in summertime.

==Mythic Lemnos==
For ancient Greeks, the island was sacred to Hephaestus, god of metallurgy, who—as he tells himself in &quot;Iliad&quot; I.590ff—fell on Lemnos when Zeus hurled him headlong out of Olympus. There, he was cared for by the Sinties, according to &quot;Iliad&quot;, or by Thetis (Apollodorus, &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; I:3.5), and there with a Thracian nymph Cabiro (a daughter of Proteus) he fathered a tribe called the Kaberoi. Sacred initiatory rites dedicated to them were performed in the island. Its ancient capital was named Hephaistia in the god&#x27;s honour.

Hephaestus&#x27; forge, which was located on Lemnos, as well as the name &quot;Aethaleia&quot;, sometimes applied to it, points to its volcanic character. It is said that fire occasionally blazed forth from Mosychlos, one of its mountains. The ancient geographer Pausanias relates that a small island called Chryse, off the Lemnian coast, was swallowed up by the sea. All volcanic action is now extinct.

The earliest inhabitants are said to have been a Thracian tribe, whom the Greeks called &quot;Sintians&quot;, &quot;robbers&quot;. The name &quot;Lemnos&quot; is said by Hecataeus to have been applied in the form of a title to Cybele among the Thracians. The worship of Cybele was characteristic of Thrace, where it had spread from Asia Minor at a very early period. Hypsipyle and Myrina (the name of one of the chief towns) are Amazon names, which are always connected with Asiatic Cybele-worship.

According to the epitome of the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; traditionally attributed to Apollodorus (&quot;Epitome&quot; I:9), when Dionysus found Ariadne abandoned on Naxos, he brought her to Lemnos and there fathered Thoas, Staphylus, Oenopion, and Peparethus. Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Natural History&quot; (xxxvi. 13) speaks of a remarkable labyrinth in Lemnos, which has not been identified in modern times.

According to a Hellenic legend, the women were all deserted by their husbands for Thracian women, and in revenge they murdered every man on the island. From this barbarous act, the expression &quot;Lemnian deeds&quot; became proverbial among the Hellenes. According to Apollonius of Rhodes&#x27; &quot;Argonautica&quot; the Argonauts landing soon after found only women in the island, ruled by Hypsipyle, daughter of the old king Thoas. From the Argonauts and the Lemnian women were descended the race called Minyans, whose king Euneus, son of Jason and Hypsipyle, sent wine and provisions to the Achaeans at Troy. According to later Greek historians, the Minyans were expelled by a Pelasgian tribe who came from Attica.

The historical element underlying these traditions is probably that the original Thracian people were gradually brought into communication with the Greeks as navigation began to unite the scattered islands of the Aegean; the Thracian inhabitants were technologically primitive in comparison with the Greek mariners.

In another legend, Philoctetes was left on Lemnos by the Greeks on their way to Troy; and there he suffered ten years&#x27; agony from his wounded foot, until Odysseus and Neoptolemus induced him to accompany them to Troy. According to Sophocles, he lived beside Mount Hermaeus, which Aeschylus makes one of the beacon points to flash the news of Troy&#x27;s downfall home to Argos.

==History==

===Prehistory===
The ruins of the oldest human settlement in the Aegean Islands found so far have been unearthed in archaeological excavations on Lemnos by a team of Greek, Italian and American archaeologists at the Ouriakos site on the Louri coast of Fyssini in Moudros municipality. The excavation began in early June 2009 and the finds brought to light, consisting mainly of high quality stone tools, are from the Epipaleolithic Period, indicating a settlement of hunters and gatherers and fishermen of the 12th millennium BC.
A rectangular building with a double row of stepped seats on the long sides, at the southwest side of the hill of Poliochne, dates back to the Early Bronze Age and was possibly used as a kind of Bouleuterion.

In August and September 1926, members of the Italian School of Archaeology at Athens conducted trial excavations on the island. The overall purpose of the excavations was to shed light on the island&#x27;s pre-Hellenic &quot;Etrusco-Pelasgian&quot; civilization, following the discovery of the &quot;Lemnos stele&quot;, bearing an inscription philologists related to the Etruscan language. The excavations, with then-current political overtones, were conducted on the site of the city of Hephaistia (i. e., Palaiopolis) where the Pelasgians, according to Herodotus, surrendered to Miltiades of Athens in 510 BC, initiating the social and political hellenization of the island. There, a necropolis (ca. 9th–8th centuries BC) was discovered, revealing bronze objects, pots, and over 130 ossuaries. The ossuaries contained distinctly male and female funeral ornaments. Male ossuaries contained knives and axes whereas female ossuaries contained earrings, bronze pins, necklaces, gold-diadems, and bracelets. The decorations on some of the gold objects contained spirals of Mycenaean origin, but had no Geometric forms. According to their ornamentation, the pots discovered at the site were from the Geometric period. However, the pots also preserved spirals indicative of Mycenaean art. The results of the excavations indicate that the Early Iron Age inhabitants of Lemnos could be a remnant of a Mycenaean population and, in addition, the earliest attested reference to Lemnos is the Mycenaean Greek &quot;ra-mi-ni-ja&quot;, &quot;Lemnian woman&quot;, written in Linear B syllabic script. Professor Della Seta reports:

The lack of weapons of bronze, the abundance of weapons of iron, and the type of the pots and the pins gives the impression that the necropolis belongs to the ninth or eighth century B.C. That it did not belong to a Greek population, but to a population which, in the eyes of the Hellenes, appeared barbarous, is shown by the weapons. The Greek weapon, dagger or spear, is lacking: the weapons of the barbarians, the axe and the knife, are common. Since, however, this population … preserves so many elements of Mycenaean art, the Tyrrhenians or Pelasgians of Lemnos may be recognized as a remnant of a Mycenaean population.

===Antiquity===
According to Homer, Lemnos was inhabited by the Sintians. Thucydides mentions Tyrrhenians as the pre-Greek inhabitants.

Homer speaks as if there were one town in the island called Lemnos. In Classical times there were two towns, Myrina (also called Kastro) and Hephaistia, which was the chief town. Coins from Hephaestia are found in considerable number, and various types including the goddess Athena with her owl, native religious symbols, the caps of the Dioscuri, Apollo, etc. Few coins of Myrina are known. They belong to the period of Attic occupation, and bear Athenian types. A few coins are also known which bear the name of the whole island, rather than of either city.

A trace of the Lemnian language is found on a 6th-century inscription on a funerary stele, the Lemnos stele. Lemnos later adopted the Attic dialect of Athens.

Coming down to a better authenticated period, it is reported that Lemnos was conquered by Otanes, a general of Darius Hystaspis. But soon (510 BC) it was reconquered by Miltiades the Younger, the tyrant of the Thracian Chersonese. Miltiades later returned to Athens and Lemnos was an Athenian possession until the Macedonian empire absorbed it. By 450 BC, Lemnos was an Athenian cleruchy. The Athenian settlers brought with them Athenian drama, dated to at least 348 BC. However, the tradition of theater seems to date back to the 5th century, and recent excavations at the site Hephaisteia suggest that the theater dated to the late 6th to early 5th century.

On a barren island near Lemnos there was an altar of Philoctetes with a brazen serpent, bows and breastplate bound with strips, to remind of the sufferings of the hero.

In 197 BC, the Romans declared it free, but in 166 BC gave it over to Athens which retained nominal possession of it until the whole of Greece was made a province of the Roman Republic in 146 BC. After the division of the Roman Empire in 395, Lemnos passed to the Byzantine Empire.

Pliny the Elder writes about a labyrinth on Lemnos which was built by the Lemnian architects Zmilis, Rhoecus, and Theodorus.

=== Middle Ages ===

As a province of the Byzantine Empire, Lemnos belonged to the theme of the Aegean Sea, and was a target of Saracen raids in the 10th century and of Seljuk raids in the 11th century. Following the dissolution and division of the Empire after the Fourth Crusade, Lemnos (known by Westerners as &quot;Stalimene&quot;) was apportioned to the Latin Empire, and given as a fief to the Navigajoso family under the Venetian (or possibly of mixed Greek and Venetian descent) &quot;megadux&quot; Filocalo Navigajoso. Filocalo died in 1214, and was succeeded by his son Leonardo and his daughters, who partitioned the island into three fiefs between them. Leonardo retained the title of &quot;megadux&quot; of the Latin Empire and half the island with the capital, Kastro, while his sisters and their husbands received one quarter each with the fortresses of Moudros and Kotsinos. Leonardo died in 1260 and was succeeded by his son Paolo Navigajoso, who resisted Byzantine attempts at reconquest until his death during a siege of the island by the Byzantine admiral Licario in 1277. Resistance continued by his wife, but in 1278 the Navigajosi were forced to capitulate and cede the island back to Byzantium.

During the last centuries of Byzantium, Lemnos played a prominent role: following the loss of Asia Minor, it was a major source of food, and it played an important role in the recurring civil wars of the 14th century. As the Ottoman threat mounted in the 15th century, possession of Lemnos was demanded by Alfonso V of Aragon in exchange for offering assistance to the beleaguered Byzantines, while the last Byzantine emperor, Constantine XI Palaiologos, offered it to the Genoese captain Giustiniani Longo, if the Ottoman besiegers were driven off. Dorino I Gattilusio, the ruler of Lesbos, also acquired Lemnos as his fief shortly before the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.

===Ottoman period===
Following the fall of Constantinople (1453), and thanks to the intercession of Michael Critobulus, Sultan Mehmed II recognized Dorino I Gattilusio&#x27;s possession of Lemnos and Thasos in exchange for an annual tribute of 2,325 gold coins. When Dorino died in 1455, his son and successor Domenico was only granted Lemnos, however. In 1456, Mehmed II attacked and captured the Gattilusi domains in Thrace (Ainos and the islands of Samothrace and Imbros). During the subsequent negotiations with Domenico Gattilusio, the Greek populace of Lemnos rose up against Domenico&#x27;s younger brother Niccolò Gattilusio and submitted to the Sultan, who appointed a certain Hamza Bey as governor under the Bey of Gallipoli, Isma&#x27;il. Mehmed granted a special legal charter (&quot;kanun-name&quot;) to Lemnos, Imbros, and Thasos, at this time, later revised by Selim I in 1519. In 1457 a Papal fleet under Cardinal Ludovico Scarampi Mezzarota captured the island. Pope Callixtus III (in office 1455–1458) hoped to establish a new military order on the island, which controlled the exit of the Dardanelles, but nothing came of it as Isma&#x27;il Bey soon recovered Lemnos for the Sultan.

In 1464, during the First Ottoman–Venetian War, the Venetians seized Lemnos and other former Gattilusi possessions, but the area reverted to Ottoman control in accordance with the 1479 Treaty of Constantinople. In the aftermath, the Kapudan Pasha, Gedik Ahmed, repaired the island&#x27;s fortifications and brought in settlers from Anatolia. At this time, the administration of the island was also reformed and brought in line with Ottoman practice, with a governor (&quot;voevoda&quot;), judge (&quot;kadi&quot;), and elders (&quot;kodjabashis&quot;) heading the local Greek inhabitants. In the late 16th century, Lemnos is recorded, along with Chios, as &quot;the only prosperous island of the Archipelago&quot;. It had 74 villages, three of them inhabited by Turkish Muslims.

In July 1656, during the Fifth Ottoman–Venetian War, the Venetians captured the island again following a major victory over the Ottoman fleet. The Ottomans under Topal Mehmed Pasha recovered it barely a year later, on 15 November 1657, after besieging the capital of Kastro for 63 days. The famous Sufi poet Niyazi Misri was exiled to Lemnos for several years during the late 17th century. In July 1770, Russian forces under Count Alexei Grigoryevich Orlov besieged Kastro for three months during the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774. The fortress had just surrendered when an attack by the Ottoman fleet under Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pasha on the Russian vessels in Mudros Bay forced the Russians to withdraw (9–10 October 1770). Only a few days later, the pasha and Orlov clashed once again at Mudros, which once again resulted in an Ottoman victory.
Under Ottoman rule, Lemnos initially formed part of the &quot;sanjaks&quot; of Gallipoli or Mytilene under the Eyalet of the Archipelago, but was constituted as a separate &quot;sanjak&quot; in the reforms of the mid-19th century, at the latest by 1846. Abolished in 1867, the sanjak was re-formed in 1879 and existed until the island&#x27;s capture by the Greeks in 1912. It comprised the islands of Lemnos (Limni in Turkish), Agios Efstratios (Bozbaba), Imbros (Imroz) and Tenedos (Bozcaada).

The French scholar Vital Cuinet, in his 1896 work &quot;La Turquie d&#x27;Asie&quot;, recorded a population of 27,079, of which 2,450 were Muslims and the rest Greek Orthodox.

===Modern period===


On 8 October 1912, during the First Balkan War, Lemnos became part of Greece. The Greek navy under Rear Admiral Pavlos Kountouriotis captured it after a brief action without any casualties from the Ottoman garrison, who were returned to Anatolia. Peter Charanis, born on the island in 1908, and later a professor of Byzantine history at Rutgers University, recounts when the island was liberated and Greek soldiers were sent to the villages and stationed themselves in the public squares. Some of the children ran to see what Greek soldiers looked like; &quot;What are you looking at?&quot;, one of them asked; &quot;At Hellenes&quot;, the children replied; &quot;Are you not Hellenes yourselves?&quot;, a soldier retorted; &quot;No, we are Romans&quot;, the children replied; which might seem odd at a first glance, but indicates that in parts of Greece the locals self-identified as a continuation of the Eastern, Greek-speaking part of the Roman Empire (Ρωμιοί), along with their Greek identity.

Moudros Bay became a forward anchorage for the Greek fleet, which enabled it to keep watch on the Dardanelles and prevent a foray by the Ottoman Navy into the Aegean. The Ottomans&#x27; two attempts to achieve this were beaten back in the battles of Elli and Lemnos. Thus the Ottomans were prevented from supplying and reinforcing their land forces in Macedonia by sea, a critical factor in the success of the Balkan League in the war.

During World War I, in early 1915, the Allies used the island to try to capture the Dardanelles Straits, some away. This was done chiefly by the British and largely due to the urging of Winston Churchill. The harbour at Moudros was put under the control of British Admiral Rosslyn Wemyss, who was ordered to prepare the then largely unused harbour for operations against the Dardanelles.

The harbour was broad enough for British and French warships, but lacked suitable military facilities, which was recognized early on. Troops intended for Gallipoli had to train in Egypt, and the port found it difficult to cope with casualties of the Gallipoli campaign. The campaign was called off in evident failure at the close of 1915. Moudros&#x27; importance receded, although it remained the Allied base for the blockade of the Dardanelles during the war. The town of Lemnos, Victoria, Australia, established in 1927 as a soldier settlement zone for returning First World War soldiers, was named after the island. There are three Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) cemeteries on the island, the first one for the 352 Allied soldiers in Portianou, the second one for the 148 Australian and 76 New Zealander soldiers in the town of Moudros and the third one for the Ottoman soldiers (170 Egyptian and 56 Turkish soldiers).

In late October 1918, the armistice between the Ottoman Empire and the Allies was signed at Moudros.

After the Red Army victory in the Russian Civil War in 1920, many Kuban Cossacks fled the country to avoid persecution from the Bolsheviks. A notable evacuation point was the Greek island of Lemnos where 18,000 Kuban Cossacks landed, though many later died of starvation and disease. Most left the island after a year.

During World War II, the island was occupied by the Germans on 25 April 1941, in the wake of the Wehrmacht’s invasion of Greece, by the Infanterie Regiment 382/164 Inf.Division under the command of Oberst Wilhelm-Helmuth Beukemann. The same bay of Moudros used by the Allies in WWI served as a base for German ships controlling the northern Aegean sea. An important fact is that the occupation forces included German punitive bataillon, the famous 999 units, in this case the 999th Light Afrika Division (Wehrmacht) and its Afrika Schützen Regiment 963 (later Festungs Infanterie Bataillon 999). These included many German and Austrian antifascist political prisoners enrolled by force, many of whom then joined the Greek People&#x27;s Liberation Army (ELAS), such as Wolfgang Abendroth. Partially evacuated since August 1944, the island was liberated on 16 and 17 of October 1944 by the Greek Sacred Band (World War II) or Greek Sacred Squadron under the command of the British Raiding Forces (as part of the SAS or Special Air Service).

Today the island has about 30 villages and settlements. The province includes the island of Agios Efstratios to the southwest which has some exceptional beaches.

==Municipality==


The present municipality of Lemnos was formed on the merger of the following four former municipalities, each of which became municipal units, following the 2011 local government reform:
*Atsiki
*Moudros
*Myrina
*Nea Koutali

Lemnos and the smaller island of Agios Efstratios previously formed part of Lesbos Prefecture. In 2011, the prefecture was abolished and Lemnos and Agios Efstratios now form Lemnos Regional Unit. Lemnos Province, abolished in 2006, comprised the same territory as the present regional unit.

===Subdivisions===
The municipal units of Atsiki, Moudros, Myrina and Nea Koutali are subdivided into the following communities (constituent villages in brackets):

Atsiki
*Agios Dimitrios
*Atsiki (Atsiki, Propouli)
*Dafni
*Karpasi
*Katalakko
*Sardes
*Varos (Varos, Aerolimin)

Moudros 
*Fisini (Fisini, Agia Sofia)
*Kalliopi
*Kaminia (Kaminia, Voroskopos)
*Kontopouli (Kontopouli, Agios Alexandros, Agios Theodoros)
*Lychna (Lychna, Anemoessa)
*Moudros (Moudros, Koukonisi)
*Panagia (Panagia, Kortisonas)
*Plaka
*Repanidi (Repanidi, Kotsinos)
*Roussopouli
*Romanou
*Skandali

Myrina 
*Myrina (Myrina, incl. Androni)
*Thanos (Thanos, Paralia Thanous)
*Kaspakas (Kaspakas, Agios Ioannis, Gali, Limenaria)
*Kornos (Kornos, Psylloi)
*Platy (Platy, Paralia Plateos, Plagisos Molos)

Nea Koutali
*Agkaryones
*Kallithea
*Kontias
*Livadochori (Livadochori, Poliochni)
*Nea Koutali
*Pedino (Neo Pedino, Palaio Pedino, Vounaria)
*Portianou
*Tsimandria

==Culture==
===Cuisine===
Local specialties include:

*Kalathaki Limnou, cheese
*Melichloro, cheese
*Fava (Lathyrus clymenum)
*&quot;Paximadia&quot;
*&quot;Tiganopites&quot;
*Flomaria, type of pasta
*Valanes, type of pasta
*Limnio wine
*&quot;Katiméria&quot;, dessert (tiganites, type of pancakes)
*&quot;Feloúdia&quot;, dessert

===Sports===
*Ifaistos Limnou BC

== Economy ==

Lemnos has a strong husbandry tradition, being famous for the Kalathaki Limnou (PDO), a cheese made from sheep and goat milk; as well as for the Melichloro or Melipasto cheese and its yogurt. Fruit and vegetables that grow on the island include almonds, figs, melons, watermelons, tomatoes, pumpkins and olives. The main crops are wheat, barley, sesame; in fact, Lemnos was Constantinople&#x27;s granary after the Byzantine Empire lost its Anatolian possessions in the 1320s. Lemnos also produces honey (from thyme-fed bees), but, as is the case with most products of a local nature in Greece, the produced quantities are little more than simply sufficient for the local market. Muscat grapes are grown widely, and are used to produce an unusual table wine that is dry yet has a strong Muscat flavor. Since 1985, the variety and quality of Lemnos wines have increased greatly.

The island&#x27;s economically active population in 2001 was 6,602. Of them, 12% were employers, 20.5% self-employed, 55.3% wage-earners, 7.1% unpaid, auxiliary family members, and 5.1% did not declare line of occupation. Of the economically active population, 17.9% worked in agriculture, 5.3% in light manufacturing, 11% in construction, 6.7% in hotels and restaurants, and the rest in other lines of business. In 2001, the island had 12,116 regular dwellings, of which 65% were stone-built, and 90.2% had pitched roofs made of red tiles.

==Transport==
The only airport is Lemnos International Airport, east of Myrina. The island is well served by ferries from Piraeus (Athens), Lavrio, and Thessaloniki.

==Notable people==
*Alcamenes (5th century BC); sculptor
* (1618-1694); Turkish Sufi, poet
*Ioannis Dimitriou, cotton and industrialist merchant
*Peter Charanis, historian
*Komninos Pyromaglou, WWII resistance figure
*Ilias Iliou (1904 – 1985); politician, leader of United Democratic Left
*Rallis Kopsidis (1929 - 2010); painter, writer
*Panagiotis Magdanis, Olympic rower

== In popular culture ==
A slightly fictionalized Lemnos appears in the 2013 tactical shooter video game &quot;Arma 3&quot; as the island of &quot;Altis&quot;, part of the island country of the &quot;Republic of Altis and Stratis&quot;. Altis is the main setting of the game, and originally kept the name &quot;Lemnos&quot; before an incident in 2012 between the game&#x27;s developers and Greek authorities prompted the developers to rename the island. &quot;Stratis&quot;, based on Agios Efstratios, is south of the island as it is in real life.

In &quot;God of War&quot;, at some point in the story Kratos finds a bottle of Lemnian wine, which he claims to come from Lemnos, a place close to where he was born. He eventually shares it with his son Atreus.

==See also==
*Lemnian language
*Lemniscate
*Limnio wine
*Lemnian Athena
*Armistice of Mudros (or Moudros)

==References==
==Sources==
*Dimitris Plantzos&quot;, The Story of Lemnos. Myth - History - Heritage,&quot; Athens: Kapon Editions (2022). 

==External links==
* Lemnos travel guide website
* Lemnos International Airport &quot;Hephaestus&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="0" end="6" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="10" end="16" title="Lemnos" label="Limnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q213881" start="27" end="39" title="Greek island" label="Greek island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="56" end="66" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q655612" start="137" end="157" title="Lemnos (regional unit)" label="Lemnos regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173620" start="180" end="192" title="North Aegean" label="North Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="193" end="199" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310605" start="266" end="272" title="Myrina, Greece" label="Myrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213881" start="289" end="307" title="Greek islands" label="8th-largest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310605" start="533" end="539" title="Myrina, Greece" label="Myrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014244" start="567" end="574" title="Moudros" label="Moudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="713" end="720" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q42177947" start="821" end="848" title="Pachies Ammoudies of Lemnos" label="Pachies Ammoudies of Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="897" end="910" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1273" end="1279" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="1371" end="1381" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1435" end="1440" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="1507" end="1514" title="Mount Olympus" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q92286365" start="1547" end="1554" title="Sinties" label="Sinties"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="1594" end="1600" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="1673" end="1678" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q191481" start="1701" end="1708" title="Proteus" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q940138" start="1741" end="1748" title="Cabeiri" label="Kaberoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731882" start="1852" end="1862" title="Hephaistia" label="Hephaistia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="2025" end="2033" title="volcanic island" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2153" end="2162" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088480" start="2198" end="2204" title="Chryse Island" label="Chryse"/>
<link wikidata="Q92286365" start="2389" end="2397" title="Sintians" label="Sintians"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="2465" end="2474" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="2522" end="2528" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="2539" end="2548" title="Thrace" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2627" end="2637" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="2833" end="2844" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="2923" end="2931" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="2938" end="2945" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="2959" end="2964" title="Naxos Island" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230535" start="3010" end="3015" title="Thoas (king of Lemnos)" label="Thoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332185" start="3017" end="3026" title="Staphylus (son of Dionysus)" label="Staphylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q937216" start="3028" end="3036" title="Oenopion" label="Oenopion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3054" end="3069" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="3083" end="3098" title="Pliny&amp;#x27;s Natural History" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q48963" start="3140" end="3149" title="labyrinth" label="labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521239" start="3407" end="3420" title="Lemnian deeds" label="Lemnian deeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="3478" end="3498" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="3511" end="3522" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="3533" end="3542" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q775296" start="3603" end="3612" title="Hypsipyle" label="Hypsipyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065225" start="3718" end="3725" title="Minyans" label="Minyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373992" start="3738" end="3744" title="Euneus" label="Euneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="3753" end="3758" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="3818" end="3822" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107822" start="3892" end="3901" title="Pelasgians" label="Pelasgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="3922" end="3928" title="Attica, Greece" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="4267" end="4278" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="4407" end="4415" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="4420" end="4431" title="Neoptolemus" label="Neoptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="4484" end="4493" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="4533" end="4542" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="4624" end="4629" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4839" end="4853" title="archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="5036" end="5047" title="stone tools" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q829005" start="5062" end="5083" title="Epipaleolithic" label="Epipaleolithic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="5112" end="5133" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunters and gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q115287" start="5155" end="5173" title="12th millennium BC" label="12th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542545" start="5289" end="5298" title="Poliochne" label="Poliochne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5318" end="5334" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q751024" start="5370" end="5382" title="Bouleuterion" label="Bouleuterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576779" start="5430" end="5469" title="Italian School of Archaeology at Athens" label="Italian School of Archaeology at Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q36203" start="5685" end="5697" title="Lemnos stele" label="Lemnos stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="5756" end="5773" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731882" start="5873" end="5883" title="Hephaistia" label="Hephaistia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="5966" end="5975" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="6033" end="6046" title="hellenization" label="hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q255595" start="6170" end="6179" title="Ossuary" label="ossuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="6455" end="6464" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="6946" end="6954" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q92286365" start="7693" end="7701" title="Sintians" label="Sintians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355160" start="7723" end="7734" title="Tyrrhenians" label="Tyrrhenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q965052" start="7742" end="7751" title="Pre-Greek substrate" label="pre-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="7766" end="7771" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310605" start="7875" end="7881" title="Myrina, Greece" label="Myrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731882" start="7907" end="7917" title="Hephaistia" label="Hephaistia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="8104" end="8112" title="Dioscuri" label="Dioscuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="8114" end="8120" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36203" start="8342" end="8358" title="Lemnian language" label="Lemnian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36203" start="8422" end="8434" title="Lemnos stele" label="Lemnos stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="8461" end="8474" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q713782" start="8577" end="8583" title="Otanes" label="Otanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="8598" end="8614" title="Darius I of Persia" label="Darius Hystaspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="8656" end="8677" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="8746" end="8752" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="8801" end="8808" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="9201" end="9212" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="9488" end="9502" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="9540" end="9552" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9582" end="9598" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="9601" end="9616" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="9810" end="9815" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q254304" start="9823" end="9833" title="Aegean Sea (theme)" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="9855" end="9862" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="9896" end="9902" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="9993" end="10007" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="10086" end="10098" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="10220" end="10227" title="megadux" label="megadux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449190" start="10234" end="10253" title="Filocalo Navigajoso" label="Filocalo Navigajoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526049" start="10307" end="10315" title="Leonardo Navigajoso" label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310605" start="10502" end="10508" title="Myrina, Greece" label="Kastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313903" start="10608" end="10616" title="Kotsinos" label="Kotsinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132223" start="10669" end="10685" title="Paolo Navigajoso" label="Paolo Navigajoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q779618" start="10803" end="10810" title="Licario" label="Licario"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="11041" end="11051" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11172" end="11179" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="11253" end="11272" title="Alfonso V of Aragon" label="Alfonso V of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37142" start="11374" end="11400" title="Constantine XI Palaiologos" label="Constantine XI Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="11420" end="11427" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q59879" start="11436" end="11453" title="Giustiniani Longo" label="Giustiniani Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152695" start="11497" end="11516" title="Dorino I Gattilusio" label="Dorino I Gattilusio"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="11531" end="11537" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="11591" end="11613" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q648868" start="11724" end="11742" title="Michael Critobulus" label="Michael Critobulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="11751" end="11760" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="11824" end="11830" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290095" start="11934" end="11942" title="Domenico Gattilusio" label="Domenico"/>
<link wikidata="Q610751" start="12051" end="12056" title="Enez" label="Ainos"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="12076" end="12086" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q658437" start="12091" end="12097" title="Imbros" label="Imbros"/>
<link wikidata="Q990030" start="12238" end="12256" title="Niccolò Gattilusio" label="Niccolò Gattilusio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838566" start="12342" end="12358" title="Sanjak of Gallipoli" label="Bey of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="12500" end="12507" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="12527" end="12532" title="Papal States" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256684" start="12554" end="12581" title="Ludovico Scarampi Mezzarota" label="Ludovico Scarampi Mezzarota"/>
<link wikidata="Q160369" start="12603" end="12621" title="Pope Callixtus III" label="Pope Callixtus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q474717" start="12669" end="12683" title="Military order (society)" label="military order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="12732" end="12743" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154983" start="12847" end="12873" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1463–1479)" label="First Ottoman–Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12879" end="12888" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980621" start="13012" end="13036" title="Treaty of Constantinople (1479)" label="Treaty of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068364" start="13060" end="13073" title="Kapudan Pasha" label="Kapudan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q539183" start="13075" end="13086" title="Gedik Ahmed Pasha" label="Gedik Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="13159" end="13167" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="13300" end="13307" title="voevoda" label="voevoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345855" start="13323" end="13339" title="Kadi (Ottoman Empire)" label="&amp;quot;kadi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12883699" start="13360" end="13371" title="kodjabashis" label="kodjabashis"/>
<link wikidata="Q699602" start="13632" end="13658" title="Cretan War (1645–1669)" label="Fifth Ottoman–Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q256563" start="13712" end="13725" title="Battle of the Dardanelles (1656)" label="major victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="13905" end="13909" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q454884" start="14038" end="14063" title="Alexei Grigoryevich Orlov" label="Alexei Grigoryevich Orlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q119166868" start="14064" end="14072" title="Siege of Lemnos (1770)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="14108" end="14138" title="Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774" label="Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14182" end="14188" title="Battle of Kastro" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583786" start="14216" end="14242" title="Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pasha" label="Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14376" end="14383" title="Battle of Mudros" label="clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014244" start="14398" end="14404" title="Mudros" label="Mudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="14517" end="14523" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033129" start="14566" end="14591" title="Eyalet of the Archipelago" label="Eyalet of the Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="14653" end="14660" title="Tanzimat" label="reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871548" start="14783" end="14804" title="Capture of Lemnos (1912)" label="island&amp;#x27;s capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q393937" start="14883" end="14899" title="Agios Efstratios" label="Agios Efstratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q211817" start="14930" end="14937" title="Tenedos" label="Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675197" start="14970" end="14982" title="Vital Cuinet" label="Vital Cuinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="15180" end="15196" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="15220" end="15226" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q374655" start="15262" end="15282" title="Pavlos Kountouriotis" label="Pavlos Kountouriotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871548" start="15295" end="15315" title="Capture of Lemnos (1912)" label="after a brief action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607415" start="15397" end="15411" title="Peter Charanis" label="Peter Charanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993777" start="15466" end="15483" title="History of the Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine history"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="15487" end="15505" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="15891" end="15897" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16107" end="16113" title="Names of the Greeks#Romans (Ῥωμαῖοι)" label="Ρωμιοί"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014244" start="16150" end="16161" title="Moudros Bay" label="Moudros Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="16248" end="16259" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="16287" end="16299" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q604175" start="16400" end="16404" title="Naval Battle of Elli" label="Elli"/>
<link wikidata="Q604185" start="16409" end="16415" title="Naval Battle of Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="16502" end="16511" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239225" start="16560" end="16573" title="Balkan League" label="Balkan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16594" end="16605" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="16626" end="16632" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="16671" end="16682" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="16773" end="16790" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225006" start="16860" end="16874" title="Rosslyn Wemyss" label="Rosslyn Wemyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="17130" end="17139" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17156" end="17161" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="17226" end="17244" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521256" start="17450" end="17466" title="Lemnos, Victoria" label="Lemnos, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557352" start="17504" end="17522" title="Soldier settlement (Australia)" label="soldier settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="17612" end="17646" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231818" start="17725" end="17734" title="Portianou" label="Portianou"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="17937" end="17946" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="18047" end="18064" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q861646" start="18079" end="18093" title="Kuban Cossacks" label="Kuban Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18340" end="18352" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="18430" end="18439" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342261" start="18546" end="18563" title="Helmuth Beukemann" label="Helmuth Beukemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q568656" start="18809" end="18848" title="999th Light Afrika Division (Wehrmacht)" label="999th Light Afrika Division (Wehrmacht)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="19049" end="19084" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q69166" start="19101" end="19119" title="Wolfgang Abendroth" label="Wolfgang Abendroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234727" start="19227" end="19253" title="Sacred Band (World War II)" label="Sacred Band (World War II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="19350" end="19369" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q393937" start="19465" end="19481" title="Agios Efstratios" label="Agios Efstratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q757780" start="19743" end="19749" title="Atsiki" label="Atsiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014244" start="19751" end="19758" title="Moudros" label="Moudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310605" start="19760" end="19766" title="Myrina, Greece" label="Myrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564417" start="19768" end="19779" title="Nea Koutali" label="Nea Koutali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880011" start="20246" end="20261" title="Agios Dimitrios, Lemnos" label="Agios Dimitrios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20290" end="20295" title="Dafni, Lemnos" label="Dafni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20297" end="20304" title="Karpasi" label="Karpasi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20306" end="20315" title="Katalakko" label="Katalakko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20317" end="20323" title="Sardes, Greece" label="Sardes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20325" end="20330" title="Varos, Greece" label="Varos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455162" start="20361" end="20367" title="Fisini" label="Fisini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455162" start="20377" end="20387" title="Agia Sofia, Lemnos" label="Agia Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353847" start="20390" end="20398" title="Kalliopi, Greece" label="Kalliopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566263" start="20400" end="20407" title="Kaminia, Lemnos" label="Kaminia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566263" start="20418" end="20428" title="Voroskopos" label="Voroskopos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430369" start="20431" end="20441" title="Kontopouli" label="Kontopouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12872099" start="20455" end="20471" title="Agios Alexandros" label="Agios Alexandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707260" start="20491" end="20497" title="Lychna" label="Lychna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129817" start="20549" end="20556" title="Panagia, Lemnos" label="Panagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943583" start="20580" end="20585" title="Plaka, Lemnos" label="Plaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313903" start="20587" end="20595" title="Repanidi" label="Repanidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313903" start="20607" end="20615" title="Kotsinos" label="Kotsinos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20618" end="20629" title="Roussopouli" label="Roussopouli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20631" end="20638" title="Romanou, Lemnos" label="Romanou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20640" end="20648" title="Skandali" label="Skandali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20691" end="20697" title="Thanos, Lemnos" label="Thanos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20725" end="20733" title="Kaspakas" label="Kaspakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432455" start="20778" end="20784" title="Kornos, Greece" label="Kornos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202550" start="20804" end="20809" title="Platy, Lemnos" label="Platy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761978" start="20865" end="20875" title="Agkaryones" label="Agkaryones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353875" start="20877" end="20886" title="Kallithea, Lemnos" label="Kallithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430346" start="20888" end="20895" title="Kontias" label="Kontias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654234" start="20897" end="20908" title="Livadochori, Lemnos" label="Livadochori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159279" start="20948" end="20954" title="Pedino, Lemnos" label="Pedino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231818" start="20994" end="21003" title="Portianou" label="Portianou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849672" start="21005" end="21015" title="Tsimandria" label="Tsimandria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21072" end="21088" title="Kalathaki Limnou" label="Kalathaki Limnou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12813815" start="21124" end="21141" title="Lathyrus clymenum" label="Lathyrus clymenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25042582" start="21150" end="21159" title="Paximathia" label="Paximadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104624537" start="21192" end="21200" title="Flomaria" label="Flomaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570871" start="21241" end="21247" title="Limnio" label="Limnio"/>
<link wikidata="Q56073344" start="21361" end="21379" title="Ifaistos Limnou BC" label="Ifaistos Limnou BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="21476" end="21479" title="Protected Designation of Origin" label="PDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147190" start="21580" end="21586" title="Greek yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="21810" end="21819" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="21905" end="21910" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="22075" end="22081" title="Muscat (grape and wine)" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670580" start="22850" end="22878" title="Lemnos International Airport" label="Lemnos International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="22938" end="22945" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="22947" end="22953" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219865" start="22956" end="22962" title="Lavrio" label="Lavrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="22968" end="22980" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q505640" start="23003" end="23012" title="Alcamenes" label="Alcamenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062011" start="23075" end="23092" title="Ioannis Dimitriou" label="Ioannis Dimitriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607415" start="23129" end="23143" title="Peter Charanis" label="Peter Charanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q834136" start="23156" end="23175" title="Komninos Pyromaglou" label="Komninos Pyromaglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998025" start="23201" end="23212" title="Ilias Iliou" label="Ilias Iliou"/>
<link wikidata="Q201478" start="23250" end="23272" title="United Democratic Left" label="United Democratic Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287051" start="23274" end="23289" title="Rallis Kopsidis" label="Rallis Kopsidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129842" start="23322" end="23341" title="Panagiotis Magdanis" label="Panagiotis Magdanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260861" start="23435" end="23451" title="tactical shooter" label="tactical shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="23452" end="23462" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q676123" start="23469" end="23475" title="Arma 3" label="Arma 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="23530" end="23544" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23689" end="23708" title="Arma 3#2012 espionage arrests" label="an incident in 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q393937" start="23842" end="23858" title="Agios Efstratios" label="Agios Efstratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345138" start="23916" end="23926" title="God of War (2018 video game)" label="God of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36203" start="24133" end="24149" title="Lemnian language" label="Lemnian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q10545374" start="24151" end="24161" title="Lemniscate" label="Lemniscate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570871" start="24163" end="24169" title="Limnio" label="Limnio"/>
<link wikidata="Q950701" start="24176" end="24190" title="Lemnian Athena" label="Lemnian Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="24192" end="24211" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="Armistice of Mudros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83011" wikidata="Q4843985" url="?curid=83011" title="Pirene (nymph)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Pirene or Peirene (Ancient Greek: Πειρήνη means &quot;of the osiers&quot;), a nymph, was either the daughter of the river god Asopus, Laconian king Oebalus, or the river god Achelous, depending on different sources. By Poseidon she became the mother of Lecheas and Cenchrias. 

== Mythology ==
When her son Cenchrias was unintentionally killed by Artemis, Pirene&#x27;s grief was so profound that she became nothing but tears and turned into the Pirene (fountain) outside the gates of Corinth. The Corinthians had a small sanctuary dedicated to Pirene by the fountain where honey-cakes were offered to her to during the dry months of early summer.

The fountain was sacred to the Muses and it was there that Bellerophon found Pegasus (as Polyidus had claimed), drinking, and tamed him.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot; translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pindar, &quot;The Odes of Pindar&quot; including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.

==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843985" start="20" end="26" title="Pirene (nymph)" label="Pirene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843985" start="30" end="37" title="Pirene (nymph)" label="Peirene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="39" end="52" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="98" end="103" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q622781" start="146" end="152" title="Asopus" label="Asopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="154" end="161" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162217" start="168" end="175" title="Oebalus" label="Oebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="194" end="202" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="239" end="247" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224981" start="273" end="280" title="Lecheas" label="Lecheas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="285" end="294" title="Cenchrias" label="Cenchrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="367" end="374" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389191" start="466" end="483" title="Pirene (fountain)" label="Pirene (fountain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="505" end="512" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="700" end="705" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q189872" start="728" end="739" title="Bellerophon" label="Bellerophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162797" start="746" end="753" title="Pegasus" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335996" start="758" end="766" title="Polyidus" label="Polyidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="838" end="854" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="905" end="928" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="946" end="968" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1343" end="1352" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="1751" end="1757" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83012" wikidata="Q964952" url="?curid=83012" title="Tupelo (tree)">
<text>Tupelo , genus Nyssa , is a small genus of deciduous trees with alternate, simple leaves. It is sometimes included in the subfamily Nyssoideae of the dogwood family, Cornaceae, but is placed by other authorities in the family Nyssaceae. In the APG IV system, it is placed in Nyssaceae.

Most &quot;Nyssa&quot; species are highly tolerant of wet soils and flooding, and some need such environments as habitat. Some of the species are native to eastern North America, from southeastern Canada through the Eastern United States to Mexico and Central America. Other species are found in eastern and southeastern Asia, from China south through Indochina to Java and southwest to the Himalayas.

==Names==
The genus name &quot;Nyssa&quot; refers to a Greek water nymph. The name tupelo, the common name used for &quot;Nyssa&quot;, is of Native American origin, coming from the Creek words &quot;ito&quot; &#x27;tree&#x27; and &quot;opilwa&quot; &#x27;swamp&#x27;; it was in use by the mid-18th century. This tree should not be confused with the tulip poplar, &quot;Liriodendron sp&quot;.

The city of Tupelo, Mississippi, is named for this tree.

==Species==

Between seven and ten living species of &quot;Nyssa&quot; are recognized:
* &quot;Nyssa aquatica&quot; – Water tupelo (southeastern United States)
* &quot;Nyssa biflora&quot; (or &quot;Nyssa sylvatica&quot; var. &quot;biflora&quot;) – Swamp tupelo, or swamp black-gum
* &quot;Nyssa javanica&quot; - Eastern Himalayas, Indochina, Borneo, Java, Sumatra
* &quot;Nyssa ogeche&quot; – Ogeechee tupelo (southeastern United States)
* &quot;Nyssa sinensis&quot; – Chinese tupelo (southern China, Vietnam, Myanmar)
* †&quot;Nyssa spatulata&quot; (Extinct, Middle Eocene; Clarno Formation, Oregon)
* &quot;Nyssa sylvatica&quot; – Black tupelo or black-gum (eastern + central United States; eastern + southern Mexico; Ontario)
* &quot;Nyssa talamancana&quot; - (Panama, Costa Rica)
* †&quot;Nyssa texana&quot; (Extinct, late Eocene to early Oligocene, Whitsett and Yeuga Formations, East Texas)
* &quot;Nyssa ursina&quot;
* &quot;Nyssa yunnanensis&quot; – Yunnan tupelo (Yunnan)
==Uses==

Tupelo wood is used extensively by artistic woodcarvers, especially for carving ducks and other wildfowl. It power carves excellently and holds good detail in the end grain. In commerce, it is used for shipping containers and interior parts of furniture, and is used extensively in the veneer and panel industry for crossbanding, plywood cores, and backs. The wood can be readily pulped and is used for high-grade book and magazine papers. In the past, the hollow trunks were used as &quot;bee gums&quot; to hold beehives.

Tupelos are popular ornamental trees for their mature form, shade, and spectacular autumn leaf colors.

Tupelos are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including &quot;Endoclita damor&quot;.

The Ogeechee Tupelo, sometimes referred to as the Ocheechee Lime, which is native to Georgia and north Florida produces an edible fruit in the form of a sour, oblong drupe.

===Honey===
Tupelos of the species &quot;Nyssa ogeche&quot; are valued as honey plants in the southeastern United States, particularly in the Gulf Coast region. They produce a very light, mild-tasting honey. In Florida, beekeepers keep beehives along the river swamps on platforms or floats during tupelo bloom to produce certified tupelo honey, which commands a high price on the market because of its flavor. Monofloral honey made from the nectar of &quot;Nyssa ogeche&quot; has such a high ratio of fructose to glucose that it does not crystallize.

The Apalachicola River in the Florida panhandle is the center for tupelo honey. The honey is produced wherever tupelo trees (three species) bloom in southeastern USA, but the purest and most expensive version (which is certified by pollen analysis) is produced in this valley. In a good harvest year, the tupelo honey crop produced by a group of specialized Florida beekeepers has a value approaching $1,000,000.

==Fossil record==
Fruits conforming morphologically and anatomically to &quot;Nyssa&quot; have been identified from the Campanian of Alberta, Canada. The fruits conform to a kind that is common in the Paleogene, formerly called &quot;Palaeonyssa&quot;.

== See also ==
* &quot;Ulee&#x27;s Gold&quot;, a film about a tupelo honey farmer

==References==
==External links==
* USDA Plants Profile for &quot;Nyssa&quot; (tupelo)
* Page on &quot;Nyssa aquatica&quot; in America, including many photos, from Louisiana State University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q964952" start="0" end="6" title="Tupelo (tree)" label="Tupelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="34" end="39" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="43" end="52" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="53" end="57" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q159545" start="150" end="157" title="Cornus (genus)" label="dogwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q161403" start="166" end="175" title="Cornaceae" label="Cornaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q204564" start="226" end="235" title="Nyssaceae" label="Nyssaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="244" end="257" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="345" end="349" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="355" end="360" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="433" end="439" title="native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="451" end="464" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="484" end="490" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="511" end="524" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="528" end="534" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="539" end="554" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="608" end="612" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="619" end="624" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="639" end="648" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="652" end="656" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="678" end="687" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="745" end="750" title="ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="751" end="762" title="naiad" label="water nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q523014" start="871" end="876" title="Creek language" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q158783" start="1039" end="1051" title="tulip poplar" label="tulip poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157236" start="1059" end="1071" title="Liriodendron" label="Liriodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q667727" start="1095" end="1114" title="Tupelo, Mississippi" label="Tupelo, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071273" start="1236" end="1250" title="Nyssa aquatica" label="Nyssa aquatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071274" start="1309" end="1322" title="Nyssa biflora" label="Nyssa biflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q10905587" start="1430" end="1444" title="Nyssa javanica" label="Nyssa javanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252686" start="1513" end="1525" title="Nyssa ogeche" label="Nyssa ogeche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071277" start="1587" end="1601" title="Nyssa sinensis" label="Nyssa sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21397408" start="1669" end="1684" title="Nyssa spatulata" label="Nyssa spatulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179665" start="1750" end="1765" title="Nyssa sylvatica" label="Nyssa sylvatica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1878" end="1895" title="Nyssa talamancana" label="Nyssa talamancana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1934" end="1946" title="Nyssa texana" label="Nyssa texana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2046" end="2058" title="Nyssa ursina" label="Nyssa ursina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205729" start="2073" end="2090" title="Nyssa yunnanensis" label="Nyssa yunnanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="2176" end="2186" title="woodcarver" label="woodcarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="2418" end="2424" title="wood veneer" label="veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="2462" end="2469" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="2512" end="2518" title="wood pulp" label="pulped"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="2622" end="2629" title="bee gum" label="bee gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="2645" end="2653" title="beehive (beekeeping)" label="beehives"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="2676" end="2691" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156320" start="2739" end="2756" title="autumn leaf color" label="autumn leaf color"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="2799" end="2804" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="2814" end="2825" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376252" start="2851" end="2866" title="Endoclita damor" label="Endoclita damor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252686" start="3090" end="3102" title="Nyssa ogeche" label="Nyssa ogeche"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="3123" end="3128" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="3191" end="3201" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q852389" start="3269" end="3278" title="beekeeper" label="beekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776580" start="3460" end="3476" title="Monofloral honey" label="Monofloral honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="3551" end="3559" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="3563" end="3570" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q617414" start="3606" end="3624" title="Apalachicola River" label="Apalachicola River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="3632" end="3649" title="Florida panhandle" label="Florida panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414069" start="3834" end="3849" title="Melissopalynology" label="pollen analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="4136" end="4145" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="4149" end="4156" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="4217" end="4226" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060364" start="4293" end="4309" title="Ulee&amp;#x27;s Gold" label="Ulee&amp;#x27;s Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="4517" end="4543" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83013" wikidata="Q1585274" url="?curid=83013" title="Pauline Hanson's One Nation">
<text>Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation (PHON or ONP), also known as One Nation or One Nation Party, is a right-wing populist political party in Australia. It is led by Pauline Hanson.

One Nation was founded in 1997, by member of parliament Pauline Hanson and her advisors David Ettridge and David Oldfield after Hanson was disendorsed as a federal candidate for the Liberal Party of Australia. The disendorsement came before the 1996 federal election following comments she made about Indigenous Australians. Oldfield, a councillor on Manly Council in suburban Sydney and at one time an employee of Liberal minister Tony Abbott, was the organisational architect of the party. Hanson sat as an independent for one year before forming Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation.

One Nation had electoral success in the late 1990s, before suffering an extended decline after 2001. Nevertheless, One Nation has had a profound impact on debates on multiculturalism and immigration in Australia. Following Hanson&#x27;s return as leader and the 2016 federal election, the party gained four seats in the Senate, including one for Hanson herself, in Queensland. Since 2022, the party has two seats in the senate. 

The party denounces economic rationalism and globalisation. Adopting strong protectionist policies, One Nation advocates the restoration of import tariffs, a revival of Australia&#x27;s manufacturing industry, and an increase in support for small business and the rural sector. One Nation&#x27;s policies and platform have been characterised as racist and xenophobic by critics.

==History==
===1997: One Nation founded===

Shortly after being elected to federal parliament, Hanson formed the One Nation party with co-founders David Oldfield and David Ettridge. During the formative days of One Nation, Oldfield was employed by Liberal Party backbench MP Tony Abbott as a political advisor. One Nation was launched on 11 April 1997, at an event held in Ipswich, Queensland. The party was officially registered by the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) on 27 June.

===1998: First elections===

The 1998 Queensland state election produced One Nation&#x27;s greatest electoral success, with the ALP winning 44 seats to be the largest party in the Assembly, the Coalition winning 32 seats and One Nation winning 11 seats. During the campaign, polling for One Nation lead to commentators saying One Nation might secure the balance of power in a hung parliament. During the campaign, all three major political parties suffered a decline in voter support due to One Nation having entered the fray. The National Party saw an 11.1% drop in support, their Liberal Party coalition partners lost 6.7% and Labor&#x27;s vote dropped 4.0%. To the surprise of many pundits, the One Nation Party received 22.7% of the first preference vote, giving them the second largest voter turnout for any party in Queensland during the 1998 election. One Nation drew the majority of its support from regional and rural Queensland, winning nine of its 11 seats in rural and regional electorates. 

With nearly 23% of the vote, One Nation gained a higher percentage of the vote than any other third party (i.e. not Labor or Coalition) at the state or territory level since Federation. This was also the only election at which a third party gained more votes than both the Liberal Party and the National Party considered separately.

Subsequently, the One Nation contingent in the Queensland Parliament split, with dissident members forming the rival City-Country Alliance in late 1999.

At the 1998 federal election, Hanson contested the new seat of Blair after a redistribution effectively split Oxley in half. Hanson lost to Liberal candidate Cameron Thompson, and the One Nation candidate in Oxley lost the seat to ALP candidate Bernie Ripoll. One Nation candidate Heather Hill was elected as a senator for Queensland. Hill&#x27;s eligibility to sit as a senator was successfully challenged in &quot;Sue v Hill&quot; under the Australian Constitution on the basis that she had failed to renounce her childhood British citizenship, despite being a naturalised Australian citizen. The seat went to the party&#x27;s Len Harris following a recount.

Political scientists Ian McAllister and Clive Bean, in an analysis of the 1998 federal election, found that although it was assumed that One Nation supporters came from a traditionally conservative demographic, instead:
Within a year of One Nation&#x27;s electoral success, three of the 11 Queensland MPs elected had quit the party claiming the leadership had too much control over the party.

==== Internal disputes and claims of corruption ====
The party was affected by internal divisions and has split several times. Lawsuits involving ex-members did eventually force Hanson to repay approximately $500,000 of public funding won at the 1998 Queensland election amid claims by Abbott that the party was fraudulently registered. Abbott established a trust fund called &quot;Australians for Honest Politics Trust&quot; to help bankroll civil court cases against the party. The suits alleged that the party was undemocratically constituted in order to concentrate all power in the hands of three people—Hanson, Ettridge and Oldfield (in particular Oldfield)—and that it technically had only two members: Ettridge and Hanson. Even though Hanson&#x27;s fraud charges were dropped, the Electoral Commission of Queensland never reimbursed Hanson for the monies that they collected from the claim.

The first Annual General Meeting of the One Nation party was held in April 1999, which critic Paul Reynolds said demonstrated that One Nation lacked organisation.

At the 1999 New South Wales state election, David Oldfield was elected to the New South Wales Legislative Council. In October 2000, Hanson expelled Oldfield from the party after a disagreement. His expulsion created even more instability in a party which was constantly embroiled in scandal and internal strife. Oldfield attacked Hanson publicly, saying that &quot;everything including her maiden speech and every word of any consequence that she&#x27;s said since, has actually been written for her&quot;. Oldfield engineered a split within the party, creating One Nation NSW, in 2001. The new party took advantage of electoral party registration laws to register itself as a political party under the &#x27;One Nation&#x27; name with the NSW electoral commission, and achieved registration in April 2002.

At the 2001 Western Australian state election One Nation won three seats in the state, however the party was reduced to 3 seats the same year at the 2001 Queensland state election. During the 2001 Australian federal election, the party&#x27;s vote fell from 9% to 5.5%. Hanson failed in her bid to win a Senate seat from Queensland, despite polling a strong 10% of the primary vote. Hanson also failed to win a seat in the New South Wales Legislative Council.

==== Electoral fraud charges ====
In 2001, disendorsed One Nation candidate Terry Sharples accused the party of not having the 500 members needed for registration, and called for the party to be deregistered, which was carried by the Supreme Court. Hanson appealed the verdict but was unsuccessful. Hanson appeared before the Brisbane Magistrates Court to face charges of electoral fraud, that same year. Hanson pleaded not guilty to the charges, claiming that she was being subjected to &quot;a political witch-hunt.&quot; While court hearings proceeded, Hanson ran for a seat in the NSW Upper House as an independent, but only received 1.9 per cent of the vote.

Both Ettridge and Hanson were found guilty of fraudulently registering One Nation and obtaining more than $500,000 from the AEC, in 2003. Crown lawyers accused them both of falsely claiming more than 500 people were party members when they were not truly members. Hanson was sentenced to three years in jail, stating outside the court that the verdict was &quot;Rubbish, I&#x27;m not guilty... it&#x27;s a joke&quot;.

It was later disclosed that Abbott had been working behind the scenes to take Ettridge and Hanson down, meeting with several disgruntled One Nation members including Sharples. On November 6 of that same year, Hanson was released from prison after successfully appealing her conviction; she was acquitted on all counts.

=== 2004–2013: Electoral decline ===
At the 2004 Queensland state election, One Nation polled less than 5% of the vote and its sole elected representative, Rosa Lee Long, acted as an independent. One Nation attempted to defend its Queensland Senate seat at the 2004 federal election, but lost it (effectively to the National Party). Len Harris&#x27;s Senate term expired on 30 June 2005.

On 8 February 2005, One Nation lost federal party status but was re-registered in time for the 2007 federal election. It still had state parties in Queensland and New South Wales. Subsequently, it created another state party in Western Australia. In the February 2005 Western Australian state election, the One Nation vote collapsed.

In the 2006 South Australian state election, six One Nation candidates stood for the lower house. Their highest levels of the primary vote was 4.1% in the district of Hammond and 2.7% in Goyder, with the other four hovering around 1%. They attracted 0.8% (7559 votes) of the upper house vote. One Nation consequently won no seats in that election.

In the 2006 Queensland state election, the party contested four of 89 seats, and its vote collapsed. It suffered a swing of 4.3% to be left with just 0.6% of the vote. Its only remaining seat in the state (and country), Tablelands, was retained with an increased majority by Rosa Lee Long. Tablelands was abolished prior to the 2009 Queensland state election, with Lee Long failing to win the seat of Dalrymple.

In the 2012 Queensland state election the party unsuccessfully contested six seats. The party received only 2,525 first preference votes (representing 0.1% of the total cast) across the state.

=== 2013–2015: Hanson&#x27;s return as leader ===
Hanson rejoined One Nation as a member in 2013. Later that year, she unsuccessfully contested the Senate for New South Wales at the 2013 federal election. In 2014, Hanson was reappointed as leader by the One Nation executive. She contested the seat of Lockyer for the party at the January 2015 Queensland state election, falling 114 votes short of defeating sitting Liberal National Party member Ian Rickuss.

In 2013, it was reported by One Nation that the party had more than 5000 members, with the figure rising since Hanson returned as party leader.

In July 2015, Hanson announced that the party was renamed the original &quot;Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation&quot; and contested in the Senate for Queensland at the 2016 federal election.

In the lead up to the 2016 election, Hanson arranged a &quot;Fed Up&quot; tour that began in July 2015 as part of her re-election campaign, flying in a private plane to Rockhampton prior to a Reclaim Australia rally, piloted by James Ashby.

=== 2016–present: Return to federal politics ===
At the 2016 federal election the party polled 4.3% (+3.8) of the nationwide primary vote in the Senate. Only Queensland polled higher for the party than their nationwide percentage − the party polled 9.2% (+8.6) of the primary vote in that state. Pauline Hanson (QLD) and three other One Nation candidates − Malcolm Roberts (QLD), Brian Burston (NSW) and Rod Culleton (WA) were elected to the Senate. Elected to the 3rd Queensland Senate spot, as per convention Hanson is serving a six-year term while the three other One Nation Senators who were elected in the last half of spots were appointed to three-year terms. Culleton was stripped of his seat in January 2017 after he was declared bankrupt. In March 2017, the High Court ruled that Culleton&#x27;s election to the Senate was invalid in any event because of a criminal conviction in New South Wales. After a court-ordered recount, Culleton was replaced by the second candidate on the WA list, Peter Georgiou.

====Resignations, disendorsements and ineligibility====
Rod Culleton (WA) left the party in December 2016, after months of legal troubles and party infighting to sit as an independent bringing the number of party senators to three. On 3 February 2017, the High Court of Australia ruled that Culleton&#x27;s election was invalid due to a conviction for which he was subject to being sentenced at the time of the election, notwithstanding that the conviction was subsequently annulled. The resulting vacancy was filled by a recount of the votes at the election, which resulted in Peter Georgiou taking the seat and returning the One Nation representation in the Senate to four.

During the 2017 Western Australian state election, several One Nation candidates either quit or were disendorsed. Dane Sorensen provided a copy of the party&#x27;s Western Australian &quot;candidate agreement&quot; form for this election, which all candidates had to sign. It includes an &quot;administration fee&quot; of $250,000 if an elected candidate subsequently leaves the party. One Nation previously formed a &#x27;conservative bloc&#x27; with the Liberal Democratic Party and Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party in the Western Australia Legislative Council.

On 27 October 2017, the full High Court, as Court of Disputed Returns, ruled that Malcolm Roberts had been ineligible to be elected to the Parliament. On 13 November, Senator Fraser Anning took Roberts&#x27; seat after a Senate recount. However, on the same day Anning left the party to become an Independent.

On 14 June 2018, Senator Brian Burston announced his resignation from the party to sit as an independent, following a month-long clash with Hanson centred around the Turnbull Government&#x27;s corporate tax cuts, on which Hanson had reversed her position. This reduced the party to 2 senators, with Hanson remaining the only member of One Nation elected at the 2016 Federal election.

====Hanson wears a burqa into the Senate====
Hanson drew widespread condemnation when she wore the full Islamic dress into Senate Question Time, before calling for the burqa to be banned in Australia. Audible gasps of shock were heard in the parliament. Liberal Party Senator and Attorney-General of Australia, George Brandis condemned Hanson&#x27;s actions, declaring to the parliament that &quot;To ridicule that community, to drive it into a corner, to mock its religious garments is an appalling thing to do. I would ask you to reflect on that&quot;. Senator Brandis received applause and praise from all sides of parliament for his response.

====&quot;it is OK to be white&quot;====
On 15 October 2018, a Senate motion brought by the party stating &quot;it is OK to be white&quot; was defeated 31–28 in a vote. The government expressed regret at the support the vote received, blaming it to an administrative error in which its senators were mistakenly instructed to vote positively. Critics noted that the phrase &quot;it&#x27;s OK to be white&quot; has been associated with white supremacist rhetoric.

====Mark Latham joins One Nation====
Former Labor Party leader Mark Latham joined the party in November 2018 as leader for New South Wales. He successfully contested a seat in the Legislative Council, winning it in March 2019.

====James Ashby controversies====
On 22 May 2017, a new scandal arose when a taped conversation between Hanson and political advisor James Ashby was released. The tape showed that Ashby had supported charging One Nation candidates inflated prices for campaign materials.

In March 2019, One Nation was the subject of a two-part Al Jazeera documentary series asserting that the party was soliciting financial assistance from the National Rifle Association of America and Koch Industries in order to change Australian gun control laws. Al Jazeera used an undercover reporter posing as a gun rights advocate. In response, One Nation leader Pauline Hanson condemned the documentary as a &quot;hit piece&quot; by a Qatar government backed news agency and announced that she had filed a complaint with the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. Similar sentiments were echoed by the One Nation officials, James Ashby and Steve Dickson, who were featured in the documentary. In response to the documentary, the Australian Electoral Commission said that none of the activities shown in the documentary violated section 326 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 since they occurred overseas.

====2019 election and Family Court claims====

At the May 2019 federal election, One Nation polled 5.40% (up 1.12%) for the nationwide Senate primary vote. The party polled higher than their national vote in Queensland, taking 10.27% up 1.08%, of the primary vote in the senate.

The PHON House of Representatives candidate for the Division of O&#x27;Connor, Dean Smith, who won 8.4% (7,252) votes, was in December of the same year a target of recruitment for Neo-Nazi group The Base. In secretly recorded tapes of his &quot;interview&quot; by a recruiter, Smith tells of his hatred of immigrants and his wish to &quot;save the race&quot;. He tells the recruiter that he had become &quot;more and more extreme and passionate about my views&quot;, and disillusioned with One Nation and the possibility of a political solution. However, he was deemed too great a risk for The Base because of his political profile, so was not admitted into their ranks.

Also in 2019, Hanson received widespread condemnation in the Australian media after claiming that domestic violence victims routinely lie to the Family Court. The Law Council of Australia called for the abandonment of a federal parliamentary inquiry into the family law system, citing concerns that the hearings were being used by Hanson for political purposes to undermine domestic violence claims made by women.

====2022 elections and the Albanese Government====
In April 2022, it was &quot;formally confirmed&quot; that during the 2022 South Australian state election that One Nation&#x27;s Sarah Game won a seat within the South Australia legislative council (upper house) making history as One Nation&#x27;s first member of South Australian parliament.

In April 2022, Queensland MP George Christensen who had represented the division of Dawson for the Liberal National party announced he had joined One Nation with the intention of contesting for the Senate in the upcoming Federal election.

One Nation ran 149 candidates in the 2022 federal election, the only seats where they did not run in were inner Melbourne-based Higgins and the rural Queensland seat of Kennedy, held by Bob Katter. One Nation was criticised for running &quot;ghost candidates&quot; in several electorates for the 2022 federal election, who were not campaigning in the lead-up to the election and who had no online presence. Additionally, many did not live in the electorates they were listed as being the candidates for. Despite this, the AEC has said that it is not against the rules. One Nation had promised in the lead-up to the election that it would run candidates in all seats.

In December 2022, One Nation won its first seat in Victorian parliament, with Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell winning a seat during the 2022 Victorian state election, representing the Northern Victoria Region in the Victorian Legislative Council.

====2023 and the Indigenous Voice to Parliament referendum====
On 17 January 2023, New South Wales MP, Tania Mihailuk, announced her intention to join the party, previously representing the electoral district of Bankstown for the Labor Party before becoming an independent. Mihailuk announced that she would run for a seat in the Legislative Council at the 2023 state election.

One Nation contested the 2023 Narracan state supplementary election in Victoria on January 28, One Nation candidate Casey Murphy received 6.04% of the vote.

One Nation increased their total from to two to three seats in the Legislative Council, with leader Mark Latham re-elected for another term, Tania Mihailuk filled the vacant seat left behind by Latham, who had previously resigned to recontest the upper house at the top of One Nations ticket.

One Nation ran in the 2023 Fadden by-election, One Nation ran Sandy Roach, their candidate in the 2022 election, One Nation received 8.90% of the vote, coming in third place.

In August 2023, Pauline Hanson intervened in the New South Wales state branch of the party, and removed Mark Latham as leader of the party in New South Wales. On 22 August 2023, Mark Latham left the party to become an independent; he was joined by his colleague Rod Roberts.

One Nation campaigned heavily against the Indigenous Voice to parliament in the referendum held in October that year, One Nation supported the No vote and was against holding a referendum on the matter. The referendum was defeated in all states and territories with the exception of the Australian Capital Territory.

Tania Mihailuk was announced as the next leader of One Nation in New South Wales in December.

====2024====

One Nation offered to support the Albanese Governments tax cut changes. Pauline Hanson stated that Anthony Albanese had broken his promise on tax cut changes, but was willing to support the changes because going against it would be like &quot;throwing the baby out with the bathwater&quot;.

Then United Australia Party National Director Craig Kelly joined One Nation on 27 February; he took the position of Federal Campaign Director for the party. He left the party in late August.

On 29 February, Independent Ben Dawkins, a member of the Western Australian Legislative Council, announced he would be joining One Nation, making him the first One Nation member in the State since the party lost all its seats in the 2021 Western Australian state election, which the Labor party won in a landslide.

In early August, incumbent MP for Mirani Stephen Andrew announced his resignation from One Nation after they did not endorse him as their candidate for Mirani.

Tania Mihailuk announced her resignation from One Nation on 20 December 2024. Western Australian MLC Ben Dawkins had announced his own resignation three days earlier.

==State and territory branches==
==Ideology==
One Nation&#x27;s policies and ideology have been described as based on ultranationalism, populism, and opposition to high levels of immigration. Its policies have been also described as nationalist, national-conservative, socially conservative, conservative, and protectionist. Its political position has been described as right-wing, extreme right and far-right.

===Early years===
In its early years, One Nation&#x27;s policies were said to be synonymous with opposition to affirmative action for Aboriginal communities. Some key themes of Pauline Hanson&#x27;s 1998 maiden speech were opposition to what she said were increasingly high rates of immigration from Asian countries and an argument for economic protectionist policies. 

During its inception, One Nation rallied against Liberal and Labor immigration and multicultural policies which, it argued, were leading to &quot;the Asianisation of Australia.&quot;

Former Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating denounced Hanson in a speech in 1996, saying that she projected &quot;the ugly face of racism&quot; and was &quot;dangerously divisive and deeply hurtful to many of her fellow Australians.&quot; 

Hanson and One Nation have disputed accusations of racism and argue that the main parties are out of touch with many Australians on the issues of immigration, asylum seekers and multiculturalism, and have ended up adopting some of the policies One Nation initially called for. Milton Osborne noted in 1999 that research indicated Hanson&#x27;s initial supporters did not cite immigration as a major reason for their support for One Nation, but instead they were most concerned about economic issues and unemployment. A 2001 study showed that One Nation had extensive informal ties and received endorsements from far-right movements due to the party requiring &quot;the support of those groups in establishing the party and because of a convergence of interests&quot;.

===Contemporary===
Writer Hans-Georg Betz described One Nation and Pauline Hanson in 2019 as among &quot;the first prominent radical right-wing populist entrepreneurs to mobilize popular resentment against a very specific target — the intellectual elite&quot; and that in the twenty first century where &quot;today&#x27;s army of self-styled commentators and pundits summarily dismissing radical right-wing populist voters as uncouth, uneducated plebeians intellectually incapable of understanding the blessings of progressive identity politics, Hanson&#x27;s anti-elite rhetoric anno 1996 proved remarkably prescient, if rather tame.&quot; Betz also argued that One Nation differs from European right-wing parties by focusing on its own brand of populism which he termed &quot;Hansonism&quot; based on Hanson&#x27;s personality and debates unique to Australian society. 

Political scientist Ian McAllister argues the current version of One Nation from 2017 does not have much in the way of policy beyond an &quot;anti-establishment stance&quot; while others have argued it has changed to focus its policies on opposition to Islam.

Despite the party&#x27;s early image as an anti-immigration party, the party has, since 2016, ran a number of migrant Chinese and Indian candidates in elections.

==Policies==
===Immigration and asylum===
One Nation says that whilst it recognises the positive contributions of immigrants to Australian life, it supports a general reduction in the levels of net migration to &quot;closer to the 20th century average of 70,000&quot;, to stabilise population numbers, citing economic, cultural and environmental arguments against mass migration. The party also calls for a travel ban on certain countries, similar to one enacted by the Trump administration in the United States, in order to combat radical Islam and prevent the immigration of people the party argues are more likely to reject Australian values and promote violent extremism. The party also supports stronger assimilation of immigrants. One Nation also seeks to withdraw Australia from the United Nations Refugee Convention and is opposed to the UN Global Compact on Migration. Due to these statements, One Nation has been described as anti-Islam.

Following the end of lockdowns in Australia as a result of COVID-19 pandemic in Australia, the party has voiced support for establishing a zero-net immigration policy, similar to the one Australia had introduced during the pandemic. One Nation supports permitting only highly skilled migrants from culturally cohesive countries to settle in Australia.

===The economy and employment===
One Nation supports a broadly protectionist platform, saying that it would review free trade agreements and revoke any &quot;that are not in Australia&#x27;s best interest&quot;, they also wish to reimplement import tariffs. It is opposed to foreign ownership of Australian agricultural land and businesses, as well as the privatisation of water assets. Wishing to prioritise jobs for Australian nationals, it would investigate &quot;the abuse of foreign work visas.&quot;

One Nation backed the Turnbull Government&#x27;s controversial 2018 corporate tax cuts.

The party would move foreign-owned multinationals out of the corporation tax system and into a transactions based system, saying that too many of them pay no tax on profits made in Australia.

===Domestic policies===
The party argues for the introduction of Citizens Initiated Referenda (CIR) and states it will review the salaries and pensions paid to Australian politicians. In 2021, the Senate approved a motion tabled by Pauline Hanson which called on the federal government to reject the teaching of critical race theory in Australian schools. It also supports a ban on wearing the burqa in public spaces. One Nation has backed Hanson&#x27;s comments regarding downplaying scientific consensus on climate change. During the debate on the Marriage Amendment (Definition and Religious Freedoms) Act 2017 which would legalise same-sex marriage in Australia, Hanson and other members of One Nation expressed their opposition to same-sex marriage. However, Hanson also stated the party would not take an official stance on same-sex marriage and that One Nation senators would be allowed a free vote on the issue.

One Nation has a broadly Pro-Life platform on the topic of abortion, particularly relating to late term abortions, with them favouring policies such as a gestational limit for abortions, banning sex-selective abortion, and doctors&#x27; rights to allow for them to object to performing such a procedure.

One Nation members and parliamentarians have criticised the increasing use of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander flags alongside the Australian one.

===Law and order===
One Nation claims it will increase rehabilitation facilities for drug addicts and introduce life sentences for drug traffickers, Pauline Hanson has previously voiced her support of medicinal cannabis but strong objection to recreational drug usage and opposition to pill testing. The party supports responsible gun ownership but wants tougher sentences for arms traffickers. The party also supports one law for all Australians and is opposed to any form of sharia law in Australia.

===Welfare and pensions===
One Nation is in favour of a substantial increase in the aged pension and disability support pension. It was reported in 2016 that One Nation had voted with the Liberal government on a number of welfare cuts.
One Nation is also opposed to increasing the age of entitlement to 70 years, and supports a $100 a week increase under the work bonus scheme for pensioners.

In 2024, One Nation cooperated with the Albanese government and minister Bill Shorten in reforming the National Disability Insurance Scheme to crack down on alleged misuse of the system and to reign in the growing costs of the program.

=== COVID-19 vaccines ===
Many politicians, commentators and scientists claim that One Nation senators have spread misinformation and conspiracies on the effectiveness and scientific basis of COVID-19 vaccines. One Nation opposes vaccine mandates, but denies being against vaccinations. However, in 2021, One Nation MLC Mark Latham said that vaccinated people should be exempt from Sydney&#x27;s COVID-19 lockdown.

One Nation introduced legislation in 2021 pertaining to Covid-19 mandates, with the bill proposing banning discrimination on Covid-19 vaccination status in the fields of goods, services, facilities, employment, education, accommodation and sport. It was supported by 5 Liberal-National senators, it was not passed.

=== Climate change ===
One Nation senators are frequent critics of any action on climate change and have called climate science a ‘scam’. One Nation has spread debunked conspiracy theories about climate change not occurring or being part of a plot by the United Nations.

=== Voting system and preferences ===
In 2019, One Nation called for the abolition of full preferential voting in favour of optional preferential voting at House of Representatives elections. The announcement came shortly after Scott Morrison announced that the Liberal Party would preference One Nation behind Labor in several seats for the 2019 federal election. In Australia, optional preferential voting is currently only used for Legislative Assembly elections in New South Wales and for council elections in most warded local government areas in Queensland.

One Nation is also against the use of group voting tickets, which are currently only used for Legislative Council elections in Victoria. The party has strongly criticised Glenn Druery, a &quot;preference whispererer&quot; who founded the Minor Party Alliance. In the lead-up to the 2022 state election, Hanson claimed that Druery was rigging the election in favour of the incumbent state Labor government of Daniel Andrews, after a leaked video showed that Druery was trying to create a crossbench that Labor could work with. Prior to the incident, in 2017, Druery admitted that he had been directing the preferences of micro-parties away from One Nation since 1999.

==Voter base==
Surveys of voters at the 1998 federal election and the 1998 Queensland state election found One Nation voters were more likely than other voters to be male, residents of rural electorates, blue-collar workers and firearm owners. On measurements of political views, One Nation voters were distinguished by their anti-immigrant and anti-Aboriginal sentiments and by their dissatisfaction with or alienation from the political environment. On metrics of union membership, economic insecurity and identification as members of the working class, One Nation voters were nearly identical to Labor voters. However, a clear majority of One Nation voters were former Liberal and National voters rather than former Labor voters.

One Nation has historically performed best in regions where the Labor Party once performed well in, but in recent years have been trending more to the right over policies regarding mining and climate change. The regions where One Nation has seen the most electoral success are the Central Queensland, Darling Downs and Wide Bay–Burnett regions of Queensland and the Hunter Valley region of New South Wales, all of which are working-class regions that have historically relied on coal mining as part of their local economy, and all were once strongholds for the Labor Party.

==Election results==
===Federal===
===New South Wales===


===Victoria===


===Queensland===
===Western Australia===


===South Australia===

===Northern Territory===
===Maps===
==Leaders==
===Federal===
Unlike the Queensland state leadership, the changes of the federal leadership of the party were largely undocumented (besides Hanson&#x27;s terms), due to previously having low media attention and confusion of branch leadership within the party.

The party has faced de-registration change of leadership, and reformatting since its creation. This list comprises the leaders, most distinguished, of the party.

In August 2017, the party&#x27;s constitution was changed so that Hanson would be party President for as long as she may wish, and to choose her successor, who may also continue until resignation.

===New South Wales===
Oldfield was elected to New South Wales parliament in 1999, but left One Nation in 2000, he then formed a splinter party called One Nation NSW, which he led until 2004 when he resigned. Oldfield remained an independent in the legislative council until 2007, when he did not seek re-election.

===Queensland===
===South Australia===
===Australian Capital Territory===
===Tasmania===
===Victoria===
===Western Australia===
==Members of parliament==
===Current MPs===
====Federal====
====Victoria====
* Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell MLC (Northern Victoria, 2022–present)

====South Australia====
* Sarah Game MLC (2022–present)

===Former MPs===
== Donors ==

A 2019 report found that Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation Party had received over $6,000 in disclosed donations from pro-gun groups during the 2011–2018 period, with concerns these donations threatened to compromise Australia&#x27;s safety by undermining gun control laws. The Queensland branch of the party received $17,000 from the agriculture sector (meat and sugar industry) between 2016 and 2021, totaling less than one percent of all publicly declared political donations during that period; the state&#x27;s two major parties (Labor, Liberal National) made up 85% of total publicly declared political donations, receiving $358,270 and $1,451,991, respectively. The North Queensland-based Katter&#x27;s Australian Party received over $280,000.

==See also==
*Hansonism
*Conservatism in Australia
* Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation – South Australia
* Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation – New South Wales
* Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation – Queensland
*True Blue Crew, a far-right group whose members have been involved with Pauline Hanson&#x27;s One Nation
* New Zealand First, similar party in New Zealand.
* Personalist party

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Abbott, Tony; Adams, Phillip; Brett, Judith; Brunton, Ron; Fraser, Malcolm; Goot, Murray; Grattan, Michelle; Kelly, Paul; Kingston, Margo; Lake, Marilyn; McGuinness, P.P.; Reynolds, Henry; Richardson, Graham; Rothwell, Nicolas; Sheridan, Greg; Wooldridge, Michael; (1998), &quot;Two Nations. The Causes and Effects of the Rise of the One Nation Party in Australia&quot;, Bookman Press, Melbourne (Victoria) .
* Balson, Scott (2000), &quot;Inside One Nation. The inside story on a people&#x27;s party born to fail&quot;, Interactive Presentations, Mt Crosby News, Queensland. .
* Campbell, Graeme and Uhlmann, Mark (1995), &quot;Australia Betrayed. How Australian democracy has been undermined and our naive trust betrayed&quot;, Foundation Press, Victoria Park, Western Australia. .
* Davis, Rex and Stimson, Robert (1998), &#x27;Disillusionment and disenchantment at the fringe: explaining the geography of the One Nation Party vote at the Queensland election,&#x27; &quot;People and Place&quot;, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 69–82.
* Dodd, Helen J (1997). &quot;Pauline. The Hanson Phenomenon&quot;, Boolarong Press, Moorooka, Queensland. .
* Ettridge, David (2004), &quot;Consider Your Verdict&quot;, New Holland Publishers, Frenchs Forest, New South Wales. .
* Grant, Bligh (ed.) (1997), &quot;Pauline Hanson. One Nation and Australian Politics&quot;, University of New England Press, Armidale, New South Wales. .
* Hanson, Pauline (2007), &quot;Untamed and Unashamed – Pauline Hanson&#x27;s autobiography&quot;, Jo-Jo Publishing, Docklands, Victoria. .
* Jayasuriya, Laksiri and Pookong, Kee (1999), &quot;The Asianisation of Australia? Some Facts about the Myths&quot;, Melbourne University Press, Carlton South, Victoria. 
* Jupp, James (1998), &#x27;Populism in the land of Oz,&#x27; in Meanjin, Vol.57, No.4, pp. 740–747.
* Kingston, Margo (1999), &quot;Off the Rails. The Pauline Hanson Trip&quot;, Allen and Unwin, St Leonards, New South Wales. .
* Leach, Michael; Stokes, Geoffrey; Ward, Ian; (eds.) (2000), &quot;The Rise and Fall of One Nation&quot;, University of Queensland Press, St Lucia, Queensland. .
* Mackay, Hugh (1999), &quot;Turning Point. Australians Choosing Their Future&quot;, Pan Macmillan, Sydney, New South Wales, Ch. 24, &#x27;Xenophobia and Politics. Why Hanson was good for us.&#x27; .
* Merritt, George J (1997), &quot;Pauline Hanson. The Truth&quot;, St George Publications, Parkholme, South Australia. .
* Pasquarelli, John (1998), &quot;The Pauline Hanson Story by the Man Who Knows&quot;, New Holland Publishers, Frenchs Forest, New South Wales. .

==External links==
*One Nation official website
**New South Wales state division
**Queensland state division
**Western Australia state division
**Victoria state division

*Inside One Nation
*How the Victorian branch imploded</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="0" end="32" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="34" end="38" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="PHON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="42" end="45" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="ONP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="62" end="72" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="One Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585274" start="76" end="92" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation" label="One Nation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="99" end="118" title="Right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628075" start="119" end="147" title="List of political parties in Australia" label="political party in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466220" start="162" end="176" title="Pauline Hanson" label="Pauline Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="214" end="234" title="Australian Parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233439" start="267" end="281" title="David Ettridge" label="David Ettridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238211" start="286" end="300" title="David Oldfield (politician)" label="David Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="361" end="387" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358698" start="424" end="445" title="1996 Australian federal election" label="1996 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="480" end="502" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650722" start="530" end="543" title="Manly Council" label="Manly Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="556" end="562" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q348577" start="611" end="622" title="Tony Abbott" label="Tony Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="688" end="699" title="Independent (politician)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="929" end="945" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659367" start="950" end="974" title="Immigration to Australia" label="immigration in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="1025" end="1046" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="1083" end="1089" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356759" start="1213" end="1233" title="economic rationalism" label="economic rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1238" end="1251" title="globalisation" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="1269" end="1282" title="protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="1340" end="1346" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="1379" end="1392" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="1538" end="1544" title="racist" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="1549" end="1559" title="xenophobic" label="xenophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="1946" end="1965" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658569" start="2010" end="2041" title="Australian Electoral Commission" label="Australian Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271073" start="2094" end="2124" title="1998 Queensland state election" label="1998 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="3191" end="3200" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616815" start="3339" end="3352" title="Liberal Party of Australia (Queensland Division)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624786" start="3361" end="3375" title="National Party of Australia – Queensland" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123140" start="3517" end="3538" title="City Country Alliance" label="City-Country Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357740" start="3561" end="3582" title="1998 Australian federal election" label="1998 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973464" start="3617" end="3622" title="Division of Blair" label="Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="3694" end="3701" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026394" start="3712" end="3728" title="Cameron Thompson (politician)" label="Cameron Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894478" start="3799" end="3812" title="Bernie Ripoll" label="Bernie Ripoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693874" start="3835" end="3847" title="Heather Hill (politician)" label="Heather Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025993" start="3970" end="3980" title="Sue v Hill" label="Sue v Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="3997" end="4020" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521809" start="4183" end="4193" title="Len Harris (politician)" label="Len Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145493" start="4237" end="4251" title="Ian McAllister (political scientist)" label="Ian McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011887" start="5681" end="5716" title="1999 New South Wales state election" label="1999 New South Wales state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238211" start="5718" end="5732" title="David Oldfield (politician)" label="David Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="5752" end="5787" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093008" start="6236" end="6250" title="One Nation NSW" label="One Nation NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967195" start="6489" end="6527" title="2001 Western Australian state election" label="2001 Western Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271074" start="6631" end="6661" title="2001 Queensland state election" label="2001 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q679653" start="6674" end="6706" title="2001 Australian federal election" label="2001 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="6905" end="6940" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968590" start="7269" end="7295" title="Brisbane Magistrates Court" label="Brisbane Magistrates Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="7315" end="7330" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271075" start="8391" end="8421" title="2004 Queensland state election" label="2004 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367071" start="8503" end="8516" title="Rosa Lee Long" label="Rosa Lee Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052932" start="8608" end="8629" title="2004 Australian federal election" label="2004 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154517" start="8831" end="8852" title="2007 Australian federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987592" start="8999" end="9037" title="2005 Western Australian state election" label="2005 Western Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566212" start="9078" end="9114" title="2006 South Australian state election" label="2006 South Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355487" start="9238" end="9245" title="electoral district of Hammond" label="Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355467" start="9258" end="9264" title="electoral district of Goyder" label="Goyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271076" start="9427" end="9457" title="2006 Queensland state election" label="2006 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356018" start="9640" end="9650" title="Electoral district of Tablelands" label="Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367071" start="9695" end="9708" title="Rosa Lee Long" label="Rosa Lee Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271077" start="9748" end="9778" title="2009 Queensland state election" label="2009 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355303" start="9821" end="9830" title="Electoral district of Dalrymple" label="Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271078" start="9840" end="9870" title="2012 Queensland state election" label="2012 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="10175" end="10181" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10186" end="10201" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915375" start="10209" end="10230" title="2013 Australian federal election" label="2013 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355605" start="10329" end="10336" title="Electoral district of Lockyer" label="Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016953" start="10366" end="10396" title="2015 Queensland state election" label="2015 Queensland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822905" start="10443" end="10465" title="Liberal National Party of Queensland" label="Liberal National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982716" start="10473" end="10484" title="Ian Rickuss" label="Ian Rickuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="10798" end="10819" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21546408" start="11014" end="11031" title="Reclaim Australia" label="Reclaim Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063159" start="11050" end="11061" title="James Ashby" label="James Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="11120" end="11141" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q466220" start="11360" end="11374" title="Pauline Hanson" label="Pauline Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848575" start="11421" end="11436" title="Malcolm Roberts (politician)" label="Malcolm Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703252" start="11444" end="11457" title="Brian Burston" label="Brian Burston"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703083" start="11468" end="11480" title="Rod Culleton" label="Rod Culleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429608" start="11529" end="11555" title="Senate results for the Australian federal election, 2016" label="3rd Queensland Senate spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="11831" end="11841" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922735" start="12063" end="12077" title="Peter Georgiou" label="Peter Georgiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703083" start="12136" end="12148" title="Rod Culleton" label="Rod Culleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="12252" end="12263" title="Independent (politician)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="12336" end="12359" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354560" start="12602" end="12609" title="Election recount" label="recount"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="12630" end="12638" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922735" start="12658" end="12672" title="Peter Georgiou" label="Peter Georgiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987594" start="12768" end="12806" title="2017 Western Australian state election" label="2017 Western Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540624" start="13213" end="13237" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Australia)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002421" start="13242" end="13277" title="Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party" label="Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994118" start="13285" end="13322" title="Western Australia Legislative Council" label="Western Australia Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848575" start="13407" end="13422" title="Malcolm Roberts (politician)" label="Malcolm Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42893791" start="13500" end="13513" title="Fraser Anning" label="Fraser Anning"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13622" end="13633" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="14301" end="14330" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47504984" start="15047" end="15071" title="it&amp;#x27;s OK to be white" label="it&amp;#x27;s OK to be white"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="15103" end="15120" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="15176" end="15187" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q982227" start="15195" end="15206" title="Mark Latham" label="Mark Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063159" start="15493" end="15504" title="James Ashby" label="James Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="15688" end="15698" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="15788" end="15825" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="15830" end="15845" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005971" start="15865" end="15892" title="Gun laws in Australia" label="Australian gun control laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="15945" end="15955" title="Right to keep and bear arms" label="gun rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="16160" end="16205" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658569" start="16372" end="16403" title="Australian Electoral Commission" label="Australian Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153731" start="16490" end="16521" title="Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918" label="Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q26271553" start="16607" end="16632" title="2019 Australian federal election" label="May 2019 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="16842" end="16866" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973797" start="16885" end="16910" title="Division of O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Division of O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="17013" end="17021" title="Neo-Nazi" label="Neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83583812" start="17028" end="17036" title="The Base (hate group)" label="The Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="17603" end="17620" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433088" start="17650" end="17662" title="Family Court of Australia" label="Family Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503006" start="17668" end="17692" title="Law Council of Australia" label="Law Council of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633554" start="18040" end="18076" title="2022 South Australian state election" label="2022 South Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111734659" start="18100" end="18110" title="Sarah Game" label="Sarah Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537893" start="18294" end="18312" title="George Christensen" label="George Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079471" start="18337" end="18355" title="division of Dawson" label="division of Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822905" start="18364" end="18386" title="Liberal National Party of Queensland" label="Liberal National party"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091319" start="18542" end="18563" title="2022 Australian federal election" label="2022 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973648" start="18633" end="18640" title="Division of Higgins" label="Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973687" start="18674" end="18681" title="Division of Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932983" start="18691" end="18701" title="Bob Katter" label="Bob Katter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658569" start="19027" end="19030" title="Australian Electoral Commission" label="AEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q115917361" start="19251" end="19269" title="Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell" label="Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528253" start="19296" end="19325" title="2022 Victorian state election" label="2022 Victorian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059112" start="19344" end="19368" title="Northern Victoria Region" label="Northern Victoria Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683250" start="19511" end="19525" title="Tania Mihailuk" label="Tania Mihailuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12481688" start="19598" end="19629" title="electoral district of Bankstown" label="electoral district of Bankstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="19638" end="19649" title="Australian Labor Party (New South Wales Branch)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="19669" end="19680" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="19738" end="19757" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085986" start="19765" end="19784" title="2023 New South Wales state election" label="2023 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116763890" start="19812" end="19854" title="2023 Narracan state supplementary election" label="2023 Narracan state supplementary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118967583" start="20261" end="20284" title="2023 Fadden by-election" label="2023 Fadden by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63155097" start="20677" end="20688" title="Rod Roberts (Australian politician)" label="Rod Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q117281286" start="20771" end="20781" title="2023 Australian Indigenous Voice referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="20978" end="21006" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683250" start="21009" end="21023" title="Tania Mihailuk" label="Tania Mihailuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130081" start="21415" end="21437" title="United Australia Party (2013)" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181115" start="21456" end="21467" title="Craig Kelly" label="Craig Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q117219225" start="21630" end="21641" title="Ben Dawkins" label="Ben Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994118" start="21659" end="21697" title="Western Australian Legislative Council" label="Western Australian Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q29325343" start="21835" end="21873" title="2021 Western Australian state election" label="2021 Western Australian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355667" start="21935" end="21958" title="Electoral district of Mirani" label="incumbent MP for Mirani"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="22365" end="22381" title="ultranationalism" label="ultranationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073467" start="22480" end="22491" title="Australian nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="22493" end="22514" title="National conservatism" label="national-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="22516" end="22537" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="22539" end="22551" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="22557" end="22570" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="22617" end="22627" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="22647" end="22656" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="22770" end="22788" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="22995" end="23017" title="economic protectionism" label="economic protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="23079" end="23086" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="23091" end="23096" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="23247" end="23259" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956162" start="24252" end="24267" title="Hans-Georg Betz" label="Hans-Georg Betz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21848959" start="24913" end="24940" title="Radical right (Europe)" label="European right-wing parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841377" start="25004" end="25013" title="Hansonism" label="Hansonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145493" start="25119" end="25133" title="Ian McAllister (political scientist)" label="Ian McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612707" start="26369" end="26399" title="UN Global Compact on Migration" label="UN Global Compact on Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324153" start="26459" end="26470" title="Criticism of Islam" label="anti-Islam."/>
<link wikidata="Q83873548" start="26531" end="26561" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Australia" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="27811" end="27817" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q466220" start="27846" end="27860" title="Pauline Hanson" label="Pauline Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186753" start="27926" end="27946" title="critical race theory" label="critical race theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="28087" end="28137" title="Climate change denial" label="downplaying scientific consensus on climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q45084218" start="28164" end="28227" title="Marriage Amendment (Definition and Religious Freedoms) Act 2017" label="Marriage Amendment (Definition and Religious Freedoms) Act 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q112242351" start="29934" end="29953" title="Albanese government" label="Albanese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910865" start="29967" end="29979" title="Bill Shorten" label="Bill Shorten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972303" start="29997" end="30033" title="National Disability Insurance Scheme" label="National Disability Insurance Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="31118" end="31132" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099021" start="31221" end="31245" title="full preferential voting" label="full preferential voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099021" start="31259" end="31287" title="optional preferential voting" label="optional preferential voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="31291" end="31315" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436908" start="31363" end="31377" title="Scott Morrison" label="Scott Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q26271553" start="31477" end="31498" title="2019 Australian federal election" label="2019 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="31570" end="31590" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="31604" end="31619" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="31654" end="31658" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772834" start="31661" end="31682" title="List of local government areas in Queensland" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="31687" end="31697" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611276" start="31738" end="31757" title="group voting ticket" label="group voting ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302011" start="31794" end="31813" title="Victorian Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="31827" end="31835" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568784" start="31871" end="31883" title="Glenn Druery" label="Glenn Druery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013980" start="31938" end="31958" title="Minor Party Alliance" label="Minor Party Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528253" start="31982" end="32001" title="2022 Victorian state election" label="2022 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="32034" end="32054" title="Electoral fraud" label="rigging the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216414" start="32108" end="32122" title="Daniel Andrews" label="Daniel Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061728" start="33383" end="33401" title="Central Queensland" label="Central Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166361" start="33403" end="33416" title="Darling Downs" label="Darling Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567791" start="33421" end="33437" title="Wide Bay–Burnett" label="Wide Bay–Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="33449" end="33459" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="33468" end="33481" title="Hunter Valley" label="Hunter Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="33492" end="33507" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="33581" end="33592" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q115917361" start="35011" end="35029" title="Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell" label="Rikkie-Lee Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059112" start="35035" end="35052" title="Northern Victoria Region" label="Northern Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111734659" start="35095" end="35105" title="Sarah Game" label="Sarah Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604512" start="35691" end="35696" title="Queensland Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822905" start="35698" end="35714" title="Liberal National Party of Queensland" label="Liberal National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000749" start="35829" end="35845" title="North Queensland" label="North Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378340" start="35852" end="35882" title="Katter&amp;#x27;s Australian Party" label="Katter&amp;#x27;s Australian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841377" start="35922" end="35931" title="Hansonism" label="Hansonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163006" start="35933" end="35958" title="Conservatism in Australia" label="Conservatism in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113298132" start="35961" end="36011" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – South Australia" label="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100933" start="36014" end="36064" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – New South Wales" label="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314482" start="36067" end="36112" title="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – Queensland" label="Pauline Hanson&amp;#x27;s One Nation – Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48802270" start="36114" end="36128" title="True Blue Crew" label="True Blue Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="36221" end="36238" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q45093720" start="36272" end="36289" title="Business-firm party" label="Personalist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q348577" start="36342" end="36354" title="Tony Abbott" label="Abbott, Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="36401" end="36416" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Fraser, Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837057" start="36432" end="36449" title="Michelle Grattan" label="Grattan, Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151732" start="36451" end="36462" title="Paul Kelly (journalist)" label="Kelly, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760633" start="36464" end="36479" title="Margo Kingston" label="Kingston, Margo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390082" start="36514" end="36529" title="Henry Reynolds (historian)" label="Reynolds, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593180" start="36531" end="36549" title="Graham Richardson" label="Richardson, Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835445" start="36586" end="36605" title="Michael Wooldridge (politician)" label="Wooldridge, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592223" start="36921" end="36937" title="Graeme Campbell (politician)" label="Campbell, Graeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q466220" start="37752" end="37767" title="Pauline Hanson" label="Hanson, Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137034" start="38064" end="38075" title="James Jupp" label="Jupp, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804074" start="38127" end="38134" title="Meanjin" label="Meanjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760633" start="38165" end="38180" title="Margo Kingston" label="Kingston, Margo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83014" wikidata="Q3493090" url="?curid=83014" title="Pitys (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology (or more particularly in Ancient Greek poetry), Pitys () was a nymph who was pursued by Pan.

== Mythology ==
According to a passage in Nonnus&#x27; &quot;Dionysiaca&quot; (ii.108), she was changed into a pine tree by the gods in order to escape him. Pitys is mentioned in Longus&#x27; &quot;Daphnis and Chloe&quot; (ii.7 and 39) and by Lucian of Samosata (&quot;Dialogues of the Dead&quot;, 22.4). 

Pitys was chased by Pan—as was Syrinx, who was turned into reeds to escape the god who then used her reeds for his panpipes. The flute-notes may have frightened the maenads running from his woodland in a &quot;panic.&quot; 

In another version, given by the later Greek writer Libanius, both Pan and the north wind Boreas vied for the girl&#x27;s affections, and tried to make her choose between them. To impress her, Boreas uprooted all the trees with his might. But Pan only laughed, and Pitys choose him instead of Boreas. Angry, Boreas chased Pitys down and threw her off a cliff, killing her. Gaia, pitying the girl, changed her dead body into a pine tree.

The subject is illustrated in paintings of (roughly chronologically) Nicolas Poussin, Jacob Jordaens, François Boucher, William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Annibale Carracci, Andrea Casali, Arnold Bocklin, Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, and Maxfield Parrish.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Daphne
* Oreithyia
* Syrinx
* Arethusa

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="44" end="64" title="Ancient Greek poetry" label="Ancient Greek poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493090" start="67" end="72" title="Pitys (mythology)" label="Pitys"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="82" end="87" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="107" end="110" title="Pan (god)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="155" end="161" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="174" end="184" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q314949" start="292" end="298" title="Longus" label="Longus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318333" start="311" end="328" title="Daphnis and Chloe" label="Daphnis and Chloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="356" end="374" title="Lucian of Samosata" label="Lucian of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q846129" start="451" end="457" title="Syrinx" label="Syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="535" end="543" title="panpipes" label="panpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="585" end="592" title="maenads" label="maenads"/>
<link wikidata="Q263892" start="697" end="705" title="Libanius" label="Libanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q109220" start="735" end="741" title="Boreas (god)" label="Boreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="1152" end="1167" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270658" start="1169" end="1183" title="Jacob Jordaens" label="Jacob Jordaens"/>
<link wikidata="Q180932" start="1185" end="1201" title="François Boucher" label="François Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q483992" start="1203" end="1229" title="William-Adolphe Bouguereau" label="William-Adolphe Bouguereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824" start="1231" end="1248" title="Annibale Carracci" label="Annibale Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615582" start="1250" end="1263" title="Andrea Casali" label="Andrea Casali"/>
<link wikidata="Q123071" start="1265" end="1279" title="Arnold Bocklin" label="Arnold Bocklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="1285" end="1305" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Lawrence Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333928" start="1311" end="1327" title="Maxfield Parrish" label="Maxfield Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q194015" start="1361" end="1367" title="Daphne" label="Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q29654502" start="1370" end="1379" title="Oreithyia" label="Oreithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846129" start="1382" end="1388" title="Syrinx" label="Syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q643456" start="1391" end="1399" title="Arethusa (mythology)" label="Arethusa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83017" wikidata="Q1421201" url="?curid=83017" title="Porphyrion">
<text>In Greek mythology, Porphyrion () was one of the Gigantes (Giants), who according to Hesiod, were the offspring of Gaia, born from the blood that fell when Ouranos (Sky) was castrated by their son Cronus. In some other versions of the myth, the Gigantes were born of Gaia and Tartarus.

==Sources==
According to the mythographer Apollodorus, Porphyrion was (along with Alcyoneus), the greatest of the Giants, and during the Gigantomachy, the battle between the Giants and the Olympian gods, Porphyrion attacked Heracles and Hera, but Zeus caused Porphyrion to become enamoured of Hera, whom Porphyrion then tried to rape, but Zeus struck Porphyrion with his thunderbolt and Heracles killed him with an arrow. According to Pindar, who calls him &quot;king of the Giants&quot;, he was slain by an arrow from the bow of Apollo. Aristophanes&#x27; comedy &quot;The Birds&quot;, contains two brief mentions of Porphyrion. Porphyrion is also mentioned, in the company of other Giants, by the Latin poet Horace.

The late fourth-century AD Latin poet Claudian in his &quot;Gigantomachia&quot; has Gaia, imagining the Giants victorious, propose that &quot;Porphyrion, wreathe thou thy head with Delphi&#x27;s laurel and take Cirrah for thy sanctuary&quot;, and has Porphyrion attempt &quot;to uproot trembling Delos, wishing to hurl it at the sky&quot;. The late fourth or early fifth-century AD Greek poet Nonnus, in his &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;, has Gaia set the Giants against Dionysus, promising Porphyrion Hebe as his wife should the Giants succeed in subduing the god.

==In art==
Porphyrion is named on a sixth-century BC black-figure pyxis (Getty 82.AE.26), where he and the Giant Enceladus oppose Zeus, Heracles and Athena. He is also named on a late fifth-century BC red-figure cup from Vulci (Berlin F2531), and a fifth-century BC red-figure krater (Paris, Petit Palais 868), in both engaged in single combat with Zeus, and a late sixth-century/early fifth-century fragmentary BC red-figure cup (British Museum E 47), where his opponent is lost.

Porphyrion was probably named on the Gigantomachy depicted on the north frieze of the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi (c. 525 BC), and he was one of the many Giants depicted on the second-century BC Pergamon Altar Gigantomachy frieze, where he is shown fighting Zeus.

==Notes==
==References==
* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Claudian, &quot;Claudian with an English translation by Maurice Platnauer&quot;, Volume II, Loeb Classical Library No. 136. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd.. 1922. . Internet Archive. 
* Arafat, K. W., &quot;Classical Zeus: A Study in Art and Literature&quot;, Clarendon Press, Oxford 1990. .
* Cook, Arthur Bernard, &quot;Zeus: A Study in Ancient Religion, Volume III: Zeus God of the Dark Sky (Earthquakes, Clouds, Wind, Dew, Rain, Meteorites), Part I: Text and Notes&quot;, Cambridge University Press 1940. Internet Archive
* Horace, &quot;The Odes and Carmen Saeculare of Horace&quot;. John Conington. trans. London. George Bell and Sons. 1882. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, Massachusetts.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;. Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.
* Lyne, R. O. A. M., &quot;Horace: Behind the Public Poetry&quot;, Yale University Press, 1995. .
* Nonnus, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;; translated by Rouse, W H D, III Books XXXVI–XLVIII. Loeb Classical Library No. 346, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940. Internet Archive
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot;, Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Ridgway, Brunilde Sismondo, &quot;Hellenistic Sculpture II: The Styles of ca. 200-100 B.C.&quot;, University of Wisconsin Press, 2000. .
* Sparks, Brian A., &quot;Aspects of Onesimos&quot; in &quot;Greek Art: Archaic Into Classical : a Symposium Held at the University of Cincinnati April 2–3, 1982&quot;, BRILL, 1985. .* Stewart, Andrew F., &quot;Greek Sculpture: An Exploration&quot;, Yale University Press, 1990.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421201" start="20" end="30" title="Porphyrion" label="Porphyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191192" start="59" end="65" title="Giants (Greek mythology)" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="85" end="91" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="115" end="119" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="156" end="163" title="Ouranos (mythology)" label="Ouranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="197" end="203" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="276" end="284" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="329" end="340" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q653681" start="369" end="378" title="Alcyoneus" label="Alcyoneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="476" end="489" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="524" end="528" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="817" end="823" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="825" end="837" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164079" start="857" end="866" title="The Birds (play)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="997" end="1003" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="1044" end="1052" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="1302" end="1307" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="1399" end="1405" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="1420" end="1430" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1470" end="1478" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="1501" end="1505" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350279" start="1632" end="1637" title="Pyxis (vessel)" label="pyxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845112" start="1679" end="1688" title="Enceladus (giant)" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1702" end="1710" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1715" end="1721" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q931172" start="1787" end="1792" title="Vulci" label="Vulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q476968" start="1843" end="1849" title="krater" label="krater"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1915" end="1919" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191192" start="2085" end="2097" title="Gigantomachy" label="Gigantomachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754028" start="2134" end="2151" title="Siphnian Treasury" label="Siphnian Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="2155" end="2161" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q158058" start="2243" end="2257" title="Pergamon Altar" label="Pergamon Altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="2340" end="2351" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="2614" end="2622" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="2706" end="2728" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797985" start="2960" end="2980" title="Arthur Bernard Cook" label="Cook, Arthur Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="3194" end="3200" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3363" end="3369" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="3377" end="3385" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="3630" end="3651" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="3871" end="3877" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="3885" end="3895" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945630" start="3917" end="3929" title="W. H. D. Rouse" label="Rouse, W H D"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="3955" end="3977" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4095" end="4101" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83019" wikidata="Q3274375" url="?curid=83019" title="Motherfucker">
<text>MotherFucker (), sometimes abbreviated as mofo, mf, or mf&#x27;er, is an English-language vulgarism. It is a form of the profanity &quot;fuck&quot;. The word is highly offensive, and is usually avoided in formal situations. In common usage, it is rarely used to refer to one person having intercourse with a woman who is a mother. Rather, the word usually refers to a mean, despicable, or vicious person; or any particularly difficult or frustrating situation. Conversely, it can be used positively, as a term of admiration, as in the term &quot; motherFucker&quot; (), meaning a fearless and confident person.

==Variants==
Like many widely used offensive terms, &quot;motherFucker&quot; has a large list of minced oaths. &quot;Motherhumper&quot;, &quot;motherfugger&quot;, &quot;mother f&#x27;er&quot;, &quot;mothersucker&quot;, &quot;mothertrucker&quot;, &quot;motherfreaker&quot;, &quot;motherlover&quot;, &quot;mofo&quot;, &quot;fothermucker&quot;, &quot;monkey-fighting&quot;, &quot;motherflower&quot;, &quot;mother flipper&quot;, &quot;motherkisser&quot; and many more are sometimes used in polite company or to avoid censorship. The participle &quot;motherfucking&quot; is often used as an emphatic, in the same way as the less strong &quot;fucking&quot;. The verb &quot;to motherFuck&quot; also exists, although it is less common. Conversely, when paired with an adjective, it can become a term denoting such things as originality and masculinity, as in the related phrase &quot;badass motherFucker.&quot; Use of the term as a compliment is frequent in the jazz community; for example, when Miles Davis addressed his future percussionist Mino Cinelu: &quot;Miles...grabbed his arm and said, &#x27;You&#x27;re a motherFucker.&#x27; Cinelu thanked Miles for the compliment.&quot;

==History and popular culture==
The word dates back at least to the late 19th century. In an 1889 Texas murder case, a witness testified that the victim had called the defendant a &quot;God damned mother-f—king, bastardly son-of-a-bitch&quot; shortly before his death. A later Texas court opinion from 1897 prints the word &quot;mother-fucking&quot; in full. In 1917 a U.S. soldier called his draft board &quot;You low-down Mother Fuckers&quot; in a letter.

In literature, Norman Mailer uses it occasionally, disguised as &quot;motherfugger&quot;, in his 1948 novel &quot;The Naked and the Dead&quot;, and used it in full in his 1967 novel &quot;Why Are We in Vietnam?&quot;. It appears twice in James Purdy&#x27;s 1956 novella &quot;63: Dream Palace&quot;. In Kurt Vonnegut&#x27;s novel &quot;Slaughterhouse-Five&quot; the word is used by one of the soldiers in the story – leading to the novel being often challenged in libraries and schools. Vonnegut joked in a speech, published in the collection &quot;Fates Worse Than Death&quot;, that &quot;Ever since that word was published, way back in 1969, children have been attempting to have intercourse with their mothers. When it will stop no one knows.&quot;

The words &quot;mother for you&quot; or &quot;mother fuyer&quot;, as minced oaths for &quot;motherfucker&quot;, were used in blues and R&amp;B records from the 1930s. A few examples include Memphis Minnie&#x27;s &quot;Dirty Mother For You&quot; (1935), Roosevelt Sykes&#x27; &quot;Dirty Mother For You&quot; (1936), and Dirty Red&#x27;s &quot;Mother Fuyer&quot; (1947). The singer Stick McGhee, whose recording of &quot;Drinking Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee&quot; was a hit in 1949, claimed that he had originally heard the song as &quot;Drinking Wine, Motherfucker&quot;. Later, Johnny &quot;Guitar&quot; Watson had a hit in 1977 with &quot;A Real Mother For Ya&quot;.

In popular music, the first mainstream rock release to include the word was the 1969 album &quot;Kick Out the Jams&quot; by MC5. The title track, a live recording, is introduced by vocalist Rob Tyner shouting &quot;And right now. right now. right now it&#x27;s time to. kick out the jams, motherfuckers!&quot;. This was quickly pulled from stores, and an edited version was released with the words &quot;brothers and sisters&quot; overdubbed on the offending word. At about the same time, the Jefferson Airplane released the album &quot;Volunteers&quot;, the opening track of which, &quot;We Can Be Together&quot;, included the line &quot;up against the wall, motherfucker&quot;, a popular catch phrase among radical groups at the time. This attracted less attention. The word was strongly implied, but not said explicitly, in Isaac Hayes&#x27; huge 1971 hit song &quot;Theme from Shaft&quot;. Arlo Guthrie&#x27;s 1967 piece &quot;Alice&#x27;s Restaurant&quot; used a minced version, &quot;mother rapers.&quot; The band Self used the word strongly in their 2001 hit single &quot;Trunk Fulla Amps&quot; from their 2000 album &quot;Gizmodgery&quot;, in which the track appears twice; appearing normally once uncensored, and as the final track on the album, with its swears replaced with comedic noises. Though rarely broadcast in the US, the word has since become common in popular music, particularly in hip hop.

The word appears in George Carlin&#x27;s &quot;Seven Words You Can&#x27;t Say on Television&quot;. In one HBO special, he comments that at one point, someone asked him to remove it, since, as a derivative of the word &quot;fuck&quot;, it constituted a duplication. He later added it back, claiming that the bit&#x27;s rhythm does not work without it.

The word has become something of a catchphrase for actor Samuel L. Jackson, who frequently utters the word in some films. His use of the word helped him overcome a lifelong stuttering problem.

==Literature==
* &quot;The Motherfucker: A History of the Mother of All Dirty Words&quot; by Jim Dawson, is a history of the word in black culture and in American literature, film, comedy and music.

==See also==

*Incest
*Maternal insult
*Grass Mud Horse (word play on Chinese equivalent)
*Mat (Russian profanity)
*Madarchod
*Seven dirty words
*Mofo

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1521634" start="90" end="99" title="vulgarism" label="vulgarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="121" end="130" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="137" end="141" title="fuck" label="fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305924" start="709" end="720" title="minced oath" label="minced oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="1444" end="1455" title="masculinity" label="masculinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="1600" end="1611" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937469" start="1647" end="1658" title="Mino Cinelu" label="Mino Cinelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="2262" end="2275" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q646361" start="2361" end="2383" title="The Naked and the Dead" label="The Naked and the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997721" start="2435" end="2457" title="Why Are We in Vietnam?" label="Why Are We in Vietnam?"/>
<link wikidata="Q984415" start="2485" end="2496" title="James Purdy" label="James Purdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="2550" end="2563" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q265954" start="2583" end="2602" title="Slaughterhouse-Five" label="Slaughterhouse-Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629062" start="2697" end="2707" title="List of most commonly challenged books in the United States" label="challenged"/>
<link wikidata="Q778896" start="2796" end="2818" title="Fates Worse Than Death" label="Fates Worse Than Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305924" start="3069" end="3080" title="minced oath" label="minced oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3125" end="3130" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="3135" end="3142" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q464728" start="3190" end="3204" title="Memphis Minnie" label="Memphis Minnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q322236" start="3253" end="3268" title="Roosevelt Sykes" label="Roosevelt Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922777" start="3320" end="3329" title="Red Nelson (musician)" label="Dirty Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816868" start="3343" end="3355" title="Mother Fuyer" label="Mother Fuyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649321" start="3381" end="3393" title="Stick McGhee" label="Stick McGhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q708884" start="3570" end="3602" title="Johnny &amp;quot;Guitar&amp;quot; Watson" label="Johnny &amp;quot;Guitar&amp;quot; Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="3700" end="3704" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040417" start="3758" end="3775" title="Kick Out the Jams" label="Kick Out the Jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="3785" end="3788" title="MC5" label="MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478265" start="3851" end="3860" title="Rob Tyner" label="Rob Tyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="4154" end="4172" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088192" start="4198" end="4208" title="Volunteers (Jefferson Airplane album)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499589" start="4300" end="4333" title="Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers" label="up against the wall, motherfucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="4488" end="4499" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q934249" start="4531" end="4547" title="Theme from Shaft" label="Theme from Shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="4555" end="4567" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056843" start="4592" end="4615" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Restaurant" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q688746" start="4681" end="4685" title="Self (band)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q131824482" start="4740" end="4756" title="Trunk Fulla Amps" label="Trunk Fulla Amps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565935" start="4791" end="4801" title="Gizmodgery" label="Gizmodgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="5064" end="5071" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="5094" end="5107" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353155" start="5121" end="5165" title="Seven dirty words" label="Seven Words You Can&amp;#x27;t Say on Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="5297" end="5301" title="fuck" label="fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q172678" start="5483" end="5500" title="Samuel L. Jackson" label="Samuel L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186676" start="5599" end="5609" title="stuttering" label="stuttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639343" start="5713" end="5723" title="Jim Dawson" label="Jim Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="5753" end="5766" title="African American culture" label="black culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="5774" end="5793" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="5835" end="5841" title="Parental incest" label="Incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q846411" start="5843" end="5858" title="Maternal insult" label="Maternal insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962954" start="5860" end="5875" title="Grass Mud Horse" label="Grass Mud Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096843" start="5911" end="5934" title="Mat (Russian profanity)" label="Mat (Russian profanity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106238098" start="5936" end="5945" title="Madarchod" label="Madarchod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353155" start="5947" end="5964" title="Seven dirty words" label="Seven dirty words"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044415" start="5966" end="5970" title="Mofo (disambiguation)" label="Mofo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83021" wikidata="Q1132772" url="?curid=83021" title="Caeneus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Caeneus or Kaineus () was a Lapith hero, ruler of Thessaly, and the father of the Argonaut Coronus. Caeneus was born a girl, Caenis (), the daughter of Elatus, but after Poseidon had sex with Caenis, she was transformed by Poseidon into an invulnerable man. Caeneus participated in the Centauromachy, where he met his demise at the hands of the Centaurs by being pounded into the ground while still alive.

== Family ==
Caeneus&#x27; father was the Lapith king Elatus, from Gyrton in Thessaly. Caeneus&#x27; son was the Argonaut Coronus, who was killed by Heracles while leading a war against the Dorians and their king Aegimius. According to the mythographer Hyginus, Caeneus&#x27; mother was Hippea—the daughter of a Thessalian from Larissa named Antippus—and his brothers were Ischys and the Argonaut Polyphemus. Hyginus also states that, in addition to Coronus, Caeneus had two other sons: Phocus and Priasus, who were also Argonauts. According to Antoninus Liberalis, his father was Atrax, rather than Elatus.

== Mythology ==
===Transformation===
Caeneus was originally a woman named Caenis who was transformed into a man by the sea-god Poseidon. Although possibly as old as the Hesiodic &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; (c. first half of the sixth century BC), the oldest secure mention of this transformation comes from the mythographer Acusilaus (sixth to fifth century BC). According to Acusilaus, after having sex with Poseidon, Elatus&#x27; daughter—here instead called Caene—did not want to have a child by Poseidon or anyone else, due to an unspecified vow or prohibition against it; to prevent this, Poseidon transformed Caene into an invulnerable man, stronger than any other. However, according to the usual version of events, after having sex with Caenis, Poseidon promised he would do whatever Caenis wanted, so Caenis asked to be transformed into an invulnerable man, which Poseidon did.

===Kingship===
Besides the Centauromachy, little is said about Caeneus&#x27; activities after his transformation. According to Acusilaus, Caeneus was the strongest warrior of his day, and became king of the Lapiths. While king, Caeneus angered the gods by an act of impiety, although accounts differ; according to an &quot;Iliad&quot; scholiast, Caeneus set up his spear in the agora and ordered his subjects to worship it, while according to a scholiast on Apollonius of Rhodes&#x27; &quot;Argonautica&quot;, Caeneus himself worshipped his spear rather than the gods. In either case, Caeneus&#x27; actions so offended the gods that, as Acusilaus goes on to say, Zeus sent the Centaurs against him. The Oxyrhynchus Papyrus that supplies Acusilaus&#x27; account says that Caeneus was used by Theophrastos as an example of ruling by the &quot;spear&quot; rather than the &quot;scepter&quot;—that is, by force rather than authority.

Caeneus was also listed as among those who took part in the Calydonian boar hunt by the sixth-century BC Greek lyric poet Stesichorus, as well as by the Roman poet Ovid and the Roman mythographer Hyginus, although no details of his participation are given.

===Centauromachy===
Caeneus&#x27; participation in the Centauromachy—the battle between the Lapiths and the Centaurs at the wedding feast of Pirithous—seems to be the earliest story told about Caeneus. His transformation and other stories are likely later elaborations.

Caeneus fought in the Centauromachy, where most accounts say he met his demise. Because of his invulnerability, none of the Centaurs&#x27; weapons could hurt him, so in order to defeat the Lapith king, they hammered him into the ground with tree trunks and boulders, which succeeded in restraining him alive.

Caeneus&#x27; earliest mention occurs in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;, where Nestor names Caeneus among those &quot;mightiest&quot; of warriors who fought and defeated the Centaurs:
The Hesiodic &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; (c. first half of the sixth century BC) describes &quot;the spear-bearing Lapiths around Caeneus their king&quot; battling the Centaurs who fought with fir trees. 

There is no mention in Homer, or the &quot;Shield&quot;, of the story of Caeneus&#x27; invulnerability, nor the unique manner of his death at the hands of the Centaurs which invulnerability entailed. However, the Centauromachy was a popular theme in Greek art, and depictions of Caeneus show that this story was well known by at least as early as the seventh century BC. Depictions of Centaurs pounding Caeneus into the ground are shown on a mid-seventh-century BC bronze relief from Olympia, and on the François Vase (c. 570–560 BC); the former shows Caeneus being pounded by two Centaurs, both using tree trunks, and the latter shows Caeneus, halfway in the ground, being pounded by three Centaurs, two using boulders and one a tree trunk.

The first preserved literary mention of Caeneus&#x27; death is found in Acusilaus, which says that Caeneus died after the Centaurs beat him &quot;upright&quot; () into the ground and sealed him in with a rock. The fifth-century BC Greek poet Pindar apparently also referred to Caeneus being driven vertically () into the ground.

The third-century BC &quot;Argonautica&quot; of Apollonius of Rhodes, gives a fuller account, saying that Caeneus:
Concerning Caeneus&#x27; fate, Ovid has Nestor say that some thought Caeneus was pushed down directly into Tartarus, but that the seer Mopsus said that Caeneus had been transformed into a bird. According to the &quot;Orphic Argonautica&quot;, Caeneus endured his beating by the Centaurs without bending a knee, and &quot;went down among the dead under the earth while still alive.&quot;

Hyginus listed Caeneus among those who killed themselves. According to Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Aeneas sees the shade of Caeneus while visiting a place in the Underworld called the (Mourning Fields), where those who died for love reside. Virgil locates these fields as part of, or near to, the region containing suicides. There Aeneas sees Caeneus, of whom Virgil says, although once a man, is now a woman again, &quot;turned back by Fate into her form of old&quot;.

==Iconography==
Caeneus is one of the earliest mythological figures in ancient Greek art that can be securely identified. The only event concerning Caeneus found in ancient Greek iconography is his participation in the Centauromachy—no surviving example of Caeneus&#x27; original femininity and transformation is found. However, the Centauromachy was a popular theme in the visual arts, and many examples show depictions of Caeneus battling Centaurs.

The earliest depiction, from the mid–late seventh century BC, is the bronze relief from Olympia, where two Centaurs hammer Caeneus into the ground with tree trunks. He is represented as an armored hoplite, already beaten into the ground to mid-calf. In any depiction of the Centauromachy, this partially-sunken motif makes Caeneus immediately identifiable. That Caeneus is here depicted without a shield (having instead a sword in each hand) implies invulnerability. The heraldic three-figured grouping on this relief, with Caeneus flanked by two Centaurs, becomes canonical.

Caeneus battling Centaurs is the centerpiece of the Centauromacy depicted on the neck of the mid-sixth-century BC François Vase. Here Caeneus, already buried up to his waist, is shown being pounded by three Centaurs using boulders and a tree trunk. This depiction of Caeneus is the first to identify Caeneus by inscription, and the first to introduce a third Centaur opponent. Other depictions appeared on temple friezes from the second half of the fifth century BC, including those on the Temple of Hephaestus at Athens, the Temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae, and the Temple of Poseidon at Sounion.

==In the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;==
The most detailed account of Caeneus&#x27; story is found in the Roman poet Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, which takes up most of book 12, and has Nestor tell Achilles the story of Caeneus&#x27; transformation, the brawl between the Centaurs and the Thessalians at Pirithous&#x27; wedding feast, and Caeneus&#x27; demise. No earlier version of the story explains why Caeneus chose to be transformed into a man; however, the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; does. According to Ovid, Caenis was the most beautiful of maidens, but refused all of her many suitors. One day, as &quot;report declares&quot;, while walking on the beach, she was raped by the sea-god Neptune (the Roman equivalent of Poseidon). Afterwards, when the god promised to grant her any request, Caenis chose to be made a man, so that she would never suffer being raped again:
This Neptune did, transforming the girl into a man, and in addition making Caeneus &quot;proof against all wounds of spear or sword&quot;. After this, Caeneus went away happy, spending &quot;years in every manful exercise&quot;, while roaming the plains of northern Thessaly.

Nestor next describes the wedding feast of Pirithous and Hippodamia, to which the Centaurs and the &quot;Thessalian chiefs&quot; (including Caeneus) were invited. After a drunken Centaur tries to abduct Hippodamia, a brawl breaks out, during which Caeneus killed five Centaurs (Styphelus, Bromus, Antimachus, Elymus, and Pyracmos). Caeneus is then mocked by the Centaur Latreus who says:
When none of their weapons could harm him, the Centaurs buried Caeneus under mountains of trees and rocks, crushing the life out of him. Nestor tells Achilles that no one knew for certain what had happened to Caeneus, and that some thought he was pushed down into Tartarus. However, when a yellow bird emerged from his burial pile, the seer Mopsus said that Caeneus had been transformed (as must happen in any &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; episode) into a bird. The story of Caeneus&#x27; metamorphosis into a bird only occurs here, and, if not an Ovidian invention, is probably a Hellenistic one.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* &quot;Caeneus&quot;, &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132772" start="20" end="27" title="Caeneus" label="Caeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132772" start="31" end="38" title="Caeneus" label="Kaineus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="48" end="54" title="Lapith" label="Lapith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="55" end="59" title="Greek hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="70" end="78" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="102" end="110" title="Argonaut" label="Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828054" start="111" end="118" title="Coronus (mythology)" label="Coronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132772" start="145" end="151" title="Caeneus" label="Caenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253971" start="172" end="178" title="Elatus" label="Elatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="306" end="319" title="Centauromachy" label="Centauromachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="469" end="475" title="Lapith" label="Lapith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253971" start="481" end="487" title="Elatus" label="Elatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880411" start="494" end="500" title="Gyrton (Thessaly)" label="Gyrton"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="540" end="548" title="Argonaut" label="Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828054" start="549" end="556" title="Coronus (mythology)" label="Coronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="576" end="584" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="617" end="624" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q404326" start="640" end="648" title="Aegimius" label="Aegimius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768283" start="714" end="720" title="Hippeia" label="Hippea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178405" start="755" end="762" title="Larissa" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479189" start="800" end="806" title="Ischys" label="Ischys"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="815" end="823" title="Argonaut" label="Argonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627407" start="824" end="834" title="Polyphemus (Argonaut)" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746958" start="914" end="920" title="Phocus" label="Phocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729916" start="925" end="932" title="Priasus" label="Priasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="972" end="991" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817519" start="1008" end="1013" title="Atrax (mythology)" label="Atrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="1163" end="1171" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1205" end="1213" title="Hesiodic" label="Hesiodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233074" start="1220" end="1238" title="Catalogue of Women" label="Catalogue of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q423894" start="1363" end="1372" title="Acusilaus" label="Acusilaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="1954" end="1967" title="Centauromachy" label="Centauromachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="2134" end="2141" title="Lapiths" label="Lapiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2250" end="2255" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="2262" end="2269" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="2305" end="2310" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="2385" end="2405" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="2418" end="2429" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249435" start="2630" end="2649" title="Oxyrhynchus Papyrus" label="Oxyrhynchus Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="2718" end="2730" title="Theophrastos" label="Theophrastos"/>
<link wikidata="Q654379" start="2918" end="2938" title="Calydonian boar hunt" label="Calydonian boar hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885775" start="2969" end="2979" title="Greek lyric" label="lyric poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="2980" end="2991" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="3022" end="3026" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="3257" end="3266" title="Pirithous" label="Pirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3738" end="3743" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3757" end="3762" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="3776" end="3782" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3885" end="3893" title="Hesiodic" label="Hesiodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="3900" end="3918" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q252376" start="4594" end="4607" title="François Vase" label="François Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="5075" end="5081" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="5190" end="5201" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="5211" end="5231" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="5385" end="5393" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772475" start="5413" end="5419" title="Mopsus" label="Mopsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230444" start="5495" end="5513" title="Orphic Argonautica" label="Orphic Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="5737" end="5743" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="5757" end="5763" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="5771" end="5777" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460262" start="5787" end="5792" title="Shade (mythology)" label="shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q118875061" start="5857" end="5872" title="Fields of sorrow" label="Mourning Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="6792" end="6799" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="7585" end="7591" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q756824" start="7662" end="7682" title="Temple of Hephaestus" label="Temple of Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464923" start="7698" end="7724" title="Temple of Apollo Epicurius" label="Temple of Apollo Epicurius"/>
<link wikidata="Q464923" start="7728" end="7734" title="Bassae" label="Bassae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21705206" start="7744" end="7762" title="Temple of Poseidon, Sounion" label="Temple of Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136637" start="7766" end="7773" title="Sounion" label="Sounion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="7889" end="7893" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="7907" end="7920" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="7980" end="7988" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468258" start="8992" end="9002" title="Hippodamia (wife of Pirithous)" label="Hippodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="9587" end="9595" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772475" start="9664" end="9670" title="Mopsus" label="Mopsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="9900" end="9911" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="10078" end="10101" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83022" wikidata="Q291216" url="?curid=83022" title="Caenis">
<text>Antonia Caenis, (died 75 AD) a former slave and secretary of Antonia Minor (mother of the emperor Claudius), was Roman emperor Vespasian&#x27;s &quot;contubernalis&quot;.

==Life==
It could be thought that she had family in Istria, now in Croatia, based on a trip she took there (Suet. Dom. 12.3). In her 30s Caenis, still possibly a slave, was in an unofficial type of relationship with Vespasian, known as &quot;contubernium&quot;, before his marriage. According to Suetonius, after the death of Vespasian&#x27;s wife Flavia Domitilla, Vespasian and Caenis, now a freedwoman, resumed their relationship; she was his wife &quot;in all but name&quot; until her death in AD 75.

According to Cassius Dio, she had a remarkable memory and considerable influence on the emperor&#x27;s administration, carried out official business on his behalf, and apparently made a lot of money from her position. However, Suetonius states that she was treated with disrespect by Vespasian&#x27;s son Domitian, who refused to greet her as one of the family.

==Popular culture==

The life of Caenis and her love-story with Vespasian are portrayed in Lindsey Davis&#x27;s novel &quot;The Course of Honour&quot;.
She is also a character who features regularly in Robert Fabbri&#x27;s &quot;Vespasian&quot; series, in which she is depicted as a long-lost grand-niece of the king of the Caenii, a rebelling tribe in Thracia.

Robert Graves, in his short story &quot;Caenis on Incest&quot;, used her as a kind of foil to present what he then thought to have been the underlying reason for the power-related murders chronicled in &quot;I, Claudius&quot;. The story is included in his compendium &quot;Occupation: Writer&quot;, and he admits to having missed the real reason for the murders in the introduction to that anthology. 

==See also==
*List of slaves
* Claudia Acte
* Galeria Lysistrate
* Marcia (mistress of Commodus)

==References==
==Sources==
*Suetonius, &quot;Lives of the Twelve Caesars&quot;: &quot;Vespasian&quot; 3, 21; &quot;Domitian&quot; 12.3
*Dio Cassius, &quot;Roman History&quot; 66.14
* William Smith (1870), &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q291216" start="0" end="14" title="Caenis" label="Antonia Caenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="61" end="74" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="98" end="106" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="113" end="126" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="127" end="136" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691424" start="150" end="163" title="Contubernium" label="contubernalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="224" end="230" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="239" end="246" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691424" start="414" end="426" title="contubernium" label="contubernium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="468" end="477" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q241102" start="520" end="536" title="Domitilla the Elder" label="Flavia Domitilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="691" end="702" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="983" end="991" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q437516" start="1132" end="1145" title="Lindsey Davis" label="Lindsey Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727845" start="1165" end="1185" title="The Course of Honour" label="The Course of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="1404" end="1417" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="1612" end="1623" title="I, Claudius" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639572" start="1821" end="1835" title="List of slaves" label="List of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q256439" start="1838" end="1850" title="Claudia Acte" label="Claudia Acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q83758109" start="1853" end="1871" title="Galeria Lysistrate" label="Galeria Lysistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517507" start="1874" end="1903" title="Marcia (mistress of Commodus)" label="Marcia (mistress of Commodus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1933" end="1942" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="1950" end="1977" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Lives of the Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="2041" end="2052" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83023" wikidata="Q344931" url="?curid=83023" title="Kronos">
<text>Kronos can refer to:

*Cronus, a Titan, the father of Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Hestia, Demeter, and Hera

== Arts and entertainment ==

=== Film and television ===
*&quot;Kronos &quot;(film), a 1957 science fiction film
*&quot;Captain Kronos – Vampire Hunter&quot;, a 1974 horror film 
*Kronos (Highlander), a fictional character
*In the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial, &quot;The Time Monster&quot;, a creature from outside time that feeds on time itself
*In the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe, another spelling of Qo&#x27;noS, the Klingon home world
*In &quot;Singularity&quot;, an artificial intelligence designed to rid the earth of the plague of humanity in order to save the planet.
*Operation Kronos, a fictional project in the 2004 Disney/Pixar superhero animated film &quot;The Incredibles&quot;

=== Video games ===
*&quot;Battle Worlds: Kronos&quot;, a 2013 video game
*In &quot;Age of Mythology: The Titans&quot;, a character with the ability to time-shift buildings
*In Eve Online, a Marauder Class battleship based on a Gallente Federation Megathron hull
*Kronos II, an Orbital Mining Facility on the rings of Saturn in 2126 in Lone Echo

===Other media===
*Kronos (band), a death metal band from France
*Kronos Quartet, a string quartet founded by violinist David Harrington in 1973

==Businesses and organizations==
* Kronos Digital Entertainment, a video game developer
* Kronos Incorporated, a workforce management software and hardware company
* Khronos Group, an American non-profit member-funded industry consortium maintaining the OpenGL standard
* Kronos Foods, a manufacturer of gyros
* , a chemical company and producer of titanium dioxide based in Dallas 
* Kronos Racing, a Belgian rally team

== Science and technology ==

===Computing===
* Kronos (computer), a 32-bit graphical workstation developed in the Soviet Union in the mid-1980s
* Kronos (malware), banking malware first reported in 2014
* CDC Kronos, an operating system with time-sharing capabilities, written by the Control Data Corporation in the 1970s

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Kronos (spacecraft), a proposed space mission to Saturn
* Kronos (star), a star that is in a wide binary system with &quot;Krios&quot;, and which has eaten some terrestrial planets
* Korg Kronos, a music workstation synthesizer

== Other uses ==
* &quot;&quot;, published between 1975 and 1988

==See also==
* Cronus (disambiguation)
* Chronos (disambiguation)
* Khronos (disambiguation)
* Cronos (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q344931" start="0" end="6" title="Kronos" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="23" end="29" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817140" start="163" end="188" title="Kronos (film)" label="&amp;quot;Kronos &amp;quot;(film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020736" start="225" end="256" title="Captain Kronos – Vampire Hunter" label="Captain Kronos – Vampire Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005790" start="285" end="304" title="Kronos (Highlander)" label="Kronos (Highlander)"/>
<link wikidata="Q621042" start="373" end="389" title="The Time Monster" label="The Time Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="512" end="523" title="Qo&amp;#x27;noS" label="Qo&amp;#x27;noS"/>
<link wikidata="Q45125510" start="558" end="569" title="Singularity (2017 film)" label="Singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323594" start="736" end="742" title="Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="743" end="748" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535153" start="749" end="758" title="superhero film" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="759" end="767" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q213326" start="779" end="794" title="The Incredibles" label="The Incredibles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="829" end="850" title="Battle Worlds: Kronos" label="Battle Worlds: Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="886" end="914" title="Age of Mythology: The Titans" label="Age of Mythology: The Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="979" end="989" title="Eve Online" label="Eve Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q33256940" start="1138" end="1147" title="Lone Echo" label="Lone Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162453" start="1168" end="1181" title="Kronos (band)" label="Kronos (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126131" start="1215" end="1229" title="Kronos Quartet" label="Kronos Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022372" start="1330" end="1358" title="Kronos Digital Entertainment" label="Kronos Digital Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438960" start="1385" end="1404" title="Kronos Incorporated" label="Kronos Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138941" start="1461" end="1474" title="Khronos Group" label="Khronos Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438959" start="1567" end="1579" title="Kronos Foods" label="Kronos Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261945" start="1680" end="1693" title="Kronos Racing" label="Kronos Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042360" start="1765" end="1782" title="Kronos (computer)" label="Kronos (computer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34796452" start="1864" end="1880" title="Kronos (malware)" label="Kronos (malware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035589" start="1923" end="1933" title="CDC Kronos" label="CDC Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438957" start="2086" end="2105" title="Kronos (spacecraft)" label="Kronos (spacecraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40880887" start="2144" end="2157" title="Kronos (star)" label="Kronos (star)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432221" start="2269" end="2280" title="Korg Kronos" label="Korg Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176988" start="2396" end="2419" title="Cronus (disambiguation)" label="Cronus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967307" start="2422" end="2446" title="Chronos (disambiguation)" label="Chronos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402742" start="2449" end="2473" title="Khronos (disambiguation)" label="Khronos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q407374" start="2476" end="2499" title="Cronos (disambiguation)" label="Cronos (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83024" wikidata="Q161809" url="?curid=83024" title="Epipremnum aureum">
<text>Epipremnum aureum, the Pearls and Jade pothos, is a species in the arum family Araceae, native to Mo&#x27;orea in the Society Islands of French Polynesia. The species is a popular houseplant in temperate regions but has also become naturalised in tropical and sub-tropical forests worldwide, including northern South Africa, Australia, Southeast Asia, Indian subcontinent, the Pacific Islands and the West Indies, where it has caused severe ecological damage in some cases.

The plant has a number of common names including golden pothos, Ceylon creeper, hunter&#x27;s robe, ivy arum, silver vine, Solomon Islands ivy, and taro vine. It is also called devil&#x27;s vine or devil&#x27;s ivy because it is very hardy and stays green even when kept in the dark. It is sometimes simply labelled &quot;Pothos,&quot; or mistakenly labelled as a &quot;Philodendron&quot; or &quot;Scindapsus&quot; in plant stores. It is commonly known as a money plant in many parts of Indian subcontinent. It rarely flowers without artificial hormone supplements; the last known spontaneous flowering in cultivation was reported in 1964.

The plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

==History and etymology==

This species has been assigned to a number of genera. In 1880 when it was first described, it was named &quot;Pothos aureus&quot;, which is why it is often commonly referred to as a &quot;pothos&quot;. After an inflorescence was observed in 1962, it was given the new name of &quot;Rhaphidophora aurea&quot;. However, after closer examination of the flower, researchers noticed its heightened similarity to &quot;Epipremnum pinnatum&quot; and synonymised it with that species. Only after closer observation of the entirety of the plant, including the leaves and growth patterns, did researchers again separate it from &quot;E. pinnatum&quot;, and classify it as &quot;E. aureum&quot;.

==Description==

&quot;Epipremnum aureum&quot; is an evergreen vine growing to tall, with stems up to in diameter, climbing using aerial roots which adhere to surfaces. The leaves are alternate, heart-shaped, entire on juvenile plants, but irregularly pinnatifid on mature plants, up to long and broad; juvenile leaves are much smaller, typically under long.

The flowers are produced in a spathe up to long. This plant produces trailing stems when it climbs up trees and these take root when they reach the ground and grow along with it. The leaves on these trailing stems grow up to long and are the ones normally seen on this plant when it is cultivated as a potted plant.

===Shy-flowering nature===
While &quot;E. aureum&quot; is classified as an angiosperm, which typically produce flowers at some point in their life cycle, it is the only reported species in its family (Araceae) that does not readily bloom, if at all. Regardless of where this “shy-flowering” plant is grown, or what the conditions are like, it will apparently not flower due to a genetic impairment of the gibberellin (GA) biosynthetic gene, &quot;EaGA3ox1&quot;. This impairment causes the plant to be unable to develop bioactive GAs, which are responsible for the flowering of plants, via the floral meristem identity gene &quot;EaLFY&quot;. In &quot;E. aureum&quot;, the floral meristem identity gene expression is absent due to the lack of GAs from &quot;EaGA3ox1&quot;. It was found that when GAs were experimentally sprayed onto the plant, flowering was induced. Thus, it is likely safe to assume that none of the plants seen in modern cultivation have truly been grown from seed. However, it is far more efficient to simply multiply an existing plant by dividing it; the species is well-known for its ease of propagation via vegetative growth, developing roots rapidly through cuttings, either rooted in water or grown directly in a well-aerated substrate, such as perlite mixed with vermiculite, or even sphagnum moss. Additional methods of propagation include whole-plant divisions or root divisions, as well as tissue culture propagation.

==Distribution==
Originally, it was endemic to the island of Mo&#x27;orea from the Society Islands. However, it is now wild in many tropical countries. The following ranges are indicated: Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Hainan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, peninsular Malaysia, Sabah, Sarawak, Singapore, Java, Maluku Islands, Nusa Tenggara, Sulawesi, Sumatra, Philippines, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, New Guinea, Queensland, Marshall Islands, Hawaii, Palau, Fiji, Tonga, Cook Islands, and Western Samoa.

== Cultivation and uses ==
In temperate regions, it is a popular houseplant with numerous cultivars selected for leaves with white, yellow, or light green variegation. It is often used in decorative displays in shopping centers, offices, and other public locations largely because it requires little care and is also attractively leafy. In tropical countries, it is found in many parks and gardens, and tends to grow naturally.

As an indoor plant it can reach more than in height if given the adequate support (a trellis or moss pole to climb), but hardly develops adult-sized leaves. The best results are achieved by providing indirect light; it tolerates an intense luminosity, but long periods of direct sunlight burn the leaves. It lives well with a temperature between . Generally, the plant will only need watering when the soil feels dry to the touch (typically once every one to two weeks). The plant should be fertilized every 2-3 months during its growing season, and at a reduced rate the rest of the year. It should be replanted at least every 1-2 years, or sooner if it becomes too root-bound. However, it is a very robust plant, and will survive bad growing conditions. The plant grows rapidly in hydroponic culture.

It can be cultivated from a cutting, however, this can carry various diseases such as Erwinia leaf spot, Pythium root rot, Rhizoctonia root rot (Rhizoctonia foot rot), Pseudomonas leaf spot, Southern blight, and Xanthomonas blight.

The plant can remove indoor pollutants such as formaldehyde, trichloroethene, toluene, xylene, and benzene in controlled circumstances (e.g. a sealed room). A study found that this effect declined as the molecular weight of the polluting substance increased.

The plant is sometimes used in aquariums, placed on top of the aquarium, and allowed to grow roots in the water. This is beneficial to the plant and the aquarium as it absorbs nitrates, using them for growth.

== Propagation ==
The plant can be propagated in soil or in water.

== Cultivars ==
There are several cultivars known in the houseplant community. Common varieties include &#x27;Golden Pothos&#x27;, &#x27;Neon&#x27;, &#x27;N&#x27;Joy&#x27;, &#x27;Pearls n&#x27; Jade&#x27;, &#x27;Marble Queen&#x27;, &#x27;Jade&#x27;, &#x27;Manjula&#x27;, &#x27;Global Green&#x27;, and &#x27;Jessenia&#x27;. 

== Toxicity ==
The plant is listed as toxic to cats and dogs by the ASPCA, because of the presence of insoluble raphides. Care should be taken to ensure the plant is not consumed by pets. Symptoms may include oral irritation, vomiting, and difficulty in swallowing.

Due to the calcium oxalate within the plant, it can be mildly toxic to humans as well. Possible side effects from the consumption of &quot;E. aureum&quot; are atopic dermatitis (eczema) as well as burning and/or swelling of the region inside of and surrounding the mouth. Excessive contact with the plant can also lead to general skin irritation or contact dermatitis.

== Invasive species ==

&quot;Epipremnum aureum&quot; can become a highly invasive species when introduced into tropical countries where it is not native. In Sri Lanka, it overgrows several hectares of the Udawatta Kele Sanctuary in Kandy. Having no natural enemies, it completely overgrows the forest floor as well as the trunks of trees, causing severe ecological disruption. It has also invaded the Kurulukele Forest Reserve in Kegalla, Sri Lanka, and other places where it has been planted as a decorative plant, or to hold steep banks along roads. It was included in the Florida Exotic Pest Control Council&#x27;s 1999 list of invasive species.

A study published in the South African Journal of Botany found the species to be a potential risk of becoming an invasive species along the coasts of South Africa. It suggested a number of different ways to prevent the spreading of the species in the wild, one of which included barring the cultivation of the species outside of a supervised area. Additionally, however, the study pointed out that &quot;E. aureum&quot; cannot propagate on a large scale due to its lack of seed banks as well as its minimal immunity to herbicides. If the plant is maintained in a controlled area, it is not as significant a threat as when it grows freely in the wild.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* Pothos Production Guide - discusses care of this plant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="23" end="45" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="Pearls and Jade pothos"/>
<link wikidata="Q48227" start="79" end="86" title="Araceae" label="Araceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q673400" start="98" end="110" title="Mo&amp;#x27;orea" label="Mo&amp;#x27;orea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="232" end="243" title="Naturalisation (biology)" label="naturalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="524" end="537" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="golden pothos"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="539" end="553" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="Ceylon creeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="555" end="573" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="hunter&amp;#x27;s robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="575" end="583" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="ivy arum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="585" end="596" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="silver vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="598" end="617" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="Solomon Islands ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="623" end="632" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="taro vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="652" end="669" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="devil&amp;#x27;s vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="673" end="689" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="devil&amp;#x27;s ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572055" start="797" end="803" title="Pothos (plant)" label="Pothos"/>
<link wikidata="Q131880" start="845" end="857" title="Philodendron" label="Philodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624761" start="873" end="883" title="Scindapsus" label="Scindapsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161809" start="933" end="944" title="Epipremnum aureum" label="money plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="1176" end="1197" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1438" end="1451" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q549727" start="1640" end="1659" title="Epipremnum pinnatum" label="Epipremnum pinnatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="1976" end="1980" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="2028" end="2036" title="climbing plant" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2086" end="2092" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="2165" end="2175" title="pinnatifid" label="pinnatifid"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="2303" end="2309" title="spathe" label="spathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="2665" end="2675" title="Flowering plant" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q48227" start="2791" end="2798" title="Araceae" label="Araceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q331818" start="2995" end="3029" title="Gibberellin" label="gibberellin (GA) biosynthetic gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="3191" end="3199" title="meristem" label="meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="3861" end="3868" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="3880" end="3891" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="3901" end="3914" title="sphagnum moss" label="sphagnum moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549003" start="4010" end="4024" title="Plant tissue culture" label="tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q673400" start="4100" end="4112" title="Mo&amp;#x27;orea" label="Mo&amp;#x27;orea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5782" end="5800" title="Hydroponics#Static solution culture" label="hydroponic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508875" start="5889" end="5906" title="Erwinia leaf spot" label="Erwinia leaf spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699011" start="5908" end="5924" title="Pythium root rot" label="Pythium root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716477" start="5926" end="5946" title="Rhizoctonia root rot" label="Rhizoctonia root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="5971" end="5992" title="Pseudomonas leaf spot" label="Pseudomonas leaf spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610100" start="5994" end="6009" title="Southern blight" label="Southern blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q140652" start="6015" end="6033" title="Xanthomonas blight" label="Xanthomonas blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="6083" end="6095" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q407936" start="6097" end="6112" title="trichloroethene" label="trichloroethene"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="6114" end="6121" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q208366" start="6123" end="6129" title="xylene" label="xylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="6135" end="6142" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="6967" end="6972" title="ASPCA" label="ASPCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575666" start="7011" end="7018" title="raphide" label="raphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412399" start="7177" end="7192" title="calcium oxalate" label="calcium oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="7325" end="7342" title="atopic dermatitis" label="atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="7515" end="7533" title="contact dermatitis" label="contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876953" start="7742" end="7765" title="Udawatta Kele Sanctuary" label="Udawatta Kele Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203197" start="7769" end="7774" title="Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968268" start="7967" end="7974" title="Kegalla" label="Kegalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132741" start="8212" end="8243" title="South African Journal of Botany" label="South African Journal of Botany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83025" wikidata="Q2374550" url="?curid=83025" title="Tripos">
<text>A Tripos (, plural &#x27;Triposes&#x27;) is an academic examination that originated at the University of Cambridge in Cambridge, England. They include any of several examinations required to qualify an undergraduate student for a bachelor&#x27;s degree or the courses taken by a student to prepare for these. Undergraduate students studying mathematics, for instance, ultimately take the &quot;Mathematical Tripos&quot;, and students of English literature take the &quot;English Tripos&quot;.

In most traditional English universities, a student registers to study one field exclusively, rather than having &quot;majors&quot; or &quot;minors&quot; as in American, Australian, Canadian, or Scottish universities. In practice, however, most degrees may be fairly interdisciplinary in nature, depending on the subject. The multi-part tripos system at Cambridge also allows substantial changes in field between parts; the Natural Sciences Tripos is especially designed to allow a highly flexible curriculum across the sciences.

==Etymology==
The word has an obscure etymology, but possibly could be traced to the three-legged stool candidates once used to sit on when taking oral examinations, known as &quot;tripods&quot;. An apocryphal legend says that students used to receive one leg of a stool in each of their three years of exams, receiving the whole stool at graduation. Another tradition holds that the name derives from the three brackets printed on the back of the voucher.

==History==
Initially, the only way to obtain an honours degree at Cambridge was the Mathematical Tripos examination. John Jebb proposed reforms in 1772, but implementation was blocked by various matters such as lack of expertise in the smaller colleges in a wider range of subjects. Classed examinations in law were introduced in 1816 by James William Geldart, who was then Regius Professor of Civil Law. Although a classical tripos was created in 1822, it was only open to those who already had high honours in mathematics or those who were the sons of peers. This restriction ended around 1850, and triposes in the moral sciences and natural sciences were introduced in the 1860s. From Easter 2023, &quot;overall degree classifications&quot; were introduced to the Tripos system bringing Cambridge in line with other British universities. 

The origin and evolution of the Cambridge Tripos can be found in William Clark&#x27;s &quot;Academic Charisma and the Origin of the Research University&quot;.

==Structure==

A tripos is divided into two parts: &quot;Part I&quot;, which is broadly based, and &quot;Part II&quot;, which allows specialization within the student&#x27;s chosen field. Since a bachelor&#x27;s degree usually takes three years to complete, either Part I or Part II is two years, and the other one year. The details of this can vary from subject to subject. There is also an optional Part III offered in some subjects, such as the Mathematical Tripos; these are not required to complete a bachelor&#x27;s degree. Some &quot;Part III&quot; courses allow the student to graduate with both a master&#x27;s degree and a bachelor&#x27;s degree: for example, scientific Part III courses allow the student to graduate with an M.Sci. degree in addition to the B.A. degree which all Cambridge graduates receive. The Engineering Tripos is divided into four Parts (IA, IB, IIA, IIB), each corresponding to one academic year, and leads to the simultaneous awarding of the B.A. and M.Eng. degrees.

Students are examined formally at the end of each part and are awarded a degree classification for each part. While each part receives its own classification, a student&#x27;s performance in Part II is generally considered definitive for determining their overall ranking within their subject cohort (for example, the historic position of Senior Wrangler in the Mathematical Tripos was determined by Part II performance). Most subjects are examined in all three years; for example, the Natural Sciences Tripos has examinations for Part IA, Part IB, Part II, and in some subjects, Part III. The English, History and ASNaC Triposes have preliminary rather than full examinations at the end of the first year, though History and English have recently scrapped Preliminary exams in the first year and moved to an IA, IB, II structure with classed examinations in all years. 

The student who achieves the highest marks in their Tripos subject, commonly referred to as the &#x27;Tripos topper&#x27;, is awarded with the Winifred Georgina Holgate Pollard Memorial Prize. The prize is widely regarded as the most prestigious academic accolade awarded to students by the University of Cambridge. Each year, the University recognises these top students by publishing their names in the &quot;Reporter&quot;, the University of Cambridge&#x27;s official journal, celebrating their academic excellence.

Degree regulations state that, to be awarded a degree, a student must have passed two honours examinations (i.e., two Tripos examinations) – this could include a Part I and a Part II, two Part I exams, or (in some cases) a Part I and a Part IA. From October 2011, students can only be awarded an honours degree if they have been awarded honours in a Part II or Part III examination; a combination of Part I examinations will allow a student to graduate with an Ordinary degree. All students must complete at least nine terms of residence (three years of study) – making it impossible for students to simply complete two one-year tripos parts. This makes it easy for an undergraduate to switch out of a subject. So a one-year Part I (or Part IA) must be followed by a two-year Part II, and usually vice versa. More exotic combinations are possible, with the permission of the student&#x27;s college and prospective department, but some combinations create a four-year bachelor&#x27;s degree. A few subjects – i.e. Management Studies, Manufacturing Engineering, and Linguistics (prior to October 2010) – exist only as Part II, and can be preceded by any manner of Part I subject.

Students who already possess a bachelor&#x27;s degree or equivalent from another university are generally permitted to skip Part I, and thus can complete a Cambridge bachelor&#x27;s degree in two years or less. Students already holding a BA degree from Cambridge are not permitted to collect a second BA from the university.

A student requesting to graduate (technically, &#x27;admitted to a degree&#x27;) is assessed mainly on two criteria: not only the Triposes they have completed (requirements laid by the statutes and ordinances of Cambridge), as recorded in the &quot;Cambridge University Reporter&quot; (Cambridge&#x27;s gazette newspaper), but also the number of terms kept (at least nine required for a BA; 10 for an undergraduate master&#x27;s degree). A student&#x27;s requests to graduate should also be approved by their college, and be unopposed by the regent house, one of the university&#x27;s governing bodies with vetoing powers.

==List of Triposes==

Below is the list of Triposes offered by the university (Latin numerals in brackets indicate the Parts available):

*Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic Tripos (ASNaC) (I, II) (two year part I)
*Archaeology Tripos (I, IIA, IIB)
*Architecture Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Asian and Middle Eastern Studies (formerly Oriental Studies Tripos) (IA, IB, II)
*Chemical Engineering Tripos (&quot;Chem Eng&quot;) (I, IIA, IIB) (part IIB completion leads to M Eng in addition to BA)
*Classical Tripos (IA, IB, II) (pre IA year available to those without A-level Latin/Greek)
*Computer Science Tripos (&quot;Comp Sci&quot;) (IA, IB, II, III) (part III completion leads to M Eng plus BA)
*Economics Tripos (I, IIA, IIB)
*Education Tripos (I, II) (two year part I)
*Engineering Tripos (IA, IB, IIA, IIB) (part IIB completion leads to M Eng in addition to BA)
*English Tripos (I, II) (two year part I)
*Geographical Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Historical Tripos (I, II) (two year part I)
*Historical Tripos (from 2022) (IA, IB, II)
*History and Modern Languages Tripos (IA, IB, II) (two year part II)
*History and Politics Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*History and Philosophy of Science Tripos (HPS) (IB, II)
*History of Art Tripos (I, IIA, IIB)
*Human, Social, and Political Sciences Tripos (HSPS) (I, IIA, IIB)
*Land Economy Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Law Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Linguistics Tripos (I, IIA, IIB) 
*Management Studies Tripos (&quot;Part II&quot; only; the Management Studies Tripos is a one-year course)
*Manufacturing Engineering Tripos (I, II) (part III completion leads to M Eng in addition to BA)
*Mathematical Tripos (IA, IB, II, III) (part III completion leads to MMath in addition to a BA)
*Medical Sciences Tripos (MedST) (IA, IB)
*Modern and Medieval Languages Tripos (MML) (IA, IB, II)
*Music Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Natural Sciences Tripos (&quot;Nat Sci&quot;) (IA, IB, II, III) (part III completion leads to M Sci in addition to a BA)
*Philosophy Tripos (IA, IB, II)
*Psychological and Behavioural Sciences Tripos (I, IIA, IIB)
*Theological and Religious Studies Tripos (I, IIA, IIB)
*Veterinary Sciences Tripos (VetST) (IA, IB)

===Triposes recently abolished, renamed or restructured===
*Oriental Studies Tripos
*Education Studies Tripos
*Linguistics Tripos (Old Regulations)
*Archaeology and Anthropology Tripos
*Politics, Psychology and Sociology [PPS] Tripos
*Medical and Veterinary Sciences Tripos (MVST); split into separate Medical and Veterinary Sciences Triposes (MedST/VetST) from October 2018.

== See also ==
* Honour Moderations (Oxford)
* Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)
* Wooden spoon (award)
* Wrangler (University of Cambridge)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2374550" start="2" end="8" title="Tripos" label="Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="91" end="114" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="118" end="127" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="230" end="252" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="394" end="413" title="Mathematical Tripos" label="Mathematical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="437" end="455" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="514" end="521" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671286" start="613" end="619" title="academic major" label="majors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267612" start="635" end="641" title="academic minor" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887889" start="654" end="662" title="Universities in the United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129780" start="664" end="674" title="Higher education in Australia" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758340" start="676" end="684" title="Higher education in Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104421" start="689" end="710" title="Universities in Scotland" label="Scottish universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980606" start="918" end="941" title="Natural Sciences Tripos" label="Natural Sciences Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="1063" end="1072" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1206" end="1213" title="Tripod#Etymology" label="tripods"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949120" start="1601" end="1610" title="John Jebb (1736–1786)" label="John Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q18593157" start="1822" end="1843" title="James William Geldart" label="James William Geldart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309473" start="1858" end="1887" title="Regius Professor of Civil Law (Cambridge)" label="Regius Professor of Civil Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="2038" end="2043" title="Peerage" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2683" end="2705" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="2935" end="2954" title="Cambridge Mathematical Tripos" label="Mathematical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="3093" end="3113" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355298" start="3503" end="3511" title="Test (assessment)" label="examined"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450721" start="3829" end="3844" title="Senior Wrangler" label="Senior Wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980606" start="3976" end="3999" title="Natural Sciences Tripos" label="Natural Sciences Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="5178" end="5192" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="honours degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="5343" end="5358" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="Ordinary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025613" start="6636" end="6665" title="Cambridge University Reporter" label="Cambridge University Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186812" start="6690" end="6697" title="gazette" label="gazette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7150" end="7186" title="Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic, University of Cambridge#Tripos" label="Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428982" start="7222" end="7240" title="Department of Archaeology, University of Cambridge" label="Archaeology Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895214" start="7256" end="7275" title="Department of Architecture, University of Cambridge" label="Architecture Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806809" start="7290" end="7295" title="Asian Studies" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211529" start="7300" end="7322" title="Middle Eastern Studies" label="Middle Eastern Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025585" start="7372" end="7399" title="Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge" label="Chemical Engineering Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096128" start="7493" end="7509" title="Classical Tripos" label="Classical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157476" start="7585" end="7608" title="Computer Science Tripos" label="Computer Science Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760301" start="7696" end="7712" title="Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge" label="Economics Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428941" start="7728" end="7744" title="Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge" label="Education Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025593" start="7772" end="7790" title="Faculty of Engineering, University of Cambridge" label="Engineering Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260322" start="7908" end="7927" title="Department of Geography, University of Cambridge" label="Geographical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851432" start="7942" end="7959" title="Faculty of History, University of Cambridge" label="Historical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260336" start="8142" end="8182" title="Department of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Cambridge" label="History and Philosophy of Science Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428982" start="8236" end="8280" title="Faculty of Human, Social, and Political Science, University of Cambridge" label="Human, Social, and Political Sciences Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8303" end="8322" title="Land economy#Land Economy Tripos at the University of Cambridge" label="Land Economy Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429000" start="8337" end="8347" title="Faculty of Law, University of Cambridge" label="Law Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039483" start="8503" end="8535" title="Institute for Manufacturing" label="Manufacturing Engineering Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="8600" end="8619" title="Mathematical Tripos" label="Mathematical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432402" start="8696" end="8719" title="School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge" label="Medical Sciences Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429039" start="8795" end="8807" title="Faculty of Music, University of Cambridge" label="Music Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980606" start="8822" end="8845" title="Natural Sciences (Cambridge)" label="Natural Sciences Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429044" start="8944" end="8961" title="Faculty of Philosophy, University of Cambridge" label="Philosophy Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428932" start="9037" end="9077" title="Faculty of Divinity, University of Cambridge" label="Theological and Religious Studies Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12020091" start="9532" end="9550" title="Honour Moderations" label="Honour Moderations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="9562" end="9598" title="Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)" label="Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637699" start="9601" end="9621" title="Wooden spoon (award)" label="Wooden spoon (award)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464579" start="9624" end="9658" title="Wrangler (University of Cambridge)" label="Wrangler (University of Cambridge)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83027" wikidata="Q1360523" url="?curid=83027" title="Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport">
<text>Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport (Spanish: &quot;Aeropuerto Internacional Luis Muñoz Marín&quot;) , previously known as the Isla Verde International Airport (Spanish: &quot;Aeropuerto Internacional de Isla Verde&quot;), is the primary international airport of Puerto Rico serving the capital municipality of San Juan and its metropolitan area since 1955. Named after Luis Muñoz Marín, the first elected governor of the archipelago and island, the 1,600 acres (647 ha) airport is located in the beachfront resort and residential district of Isla Verde in the municipality of Carolina, about east of the business center of Hato Rey, resort area of Condado, historic quarter of Old San Juan, and secondary airport of SIG. With 12,197,553 million passengers in 2023, SJU is the busiest airport in the Caribbean, where it serves as a major gateway into the region.

The airport is owned by the Puerto Rico Ports Authority and managed by Aerostar Airport Holdings, a public–private partnership which was awarded a lease by the government of Puerto Rico to operate the airport for 40 years beginning in 2013. SJU is the second international airport to be privatized in the United States or its territories, and, as of 2024, is the only currently privatized airport in the nation.

As of 2023, it is the 39th busiest airport by passenger boarding, 28th by international passenger traffic, and 24th by cargo throughput in the United States or its territories. 

==History==
In 1945, aware of the importance of aviation for the development of the economy of Puerto Rico, the island government had pointed out the need to build a newer international airport capable of handling the growing air traffic of San Juan International Airport, in Isla Grande, that had been operating since 1929; as well as responding to the needs of the future. Until then Isla Grande had been the main airport of Puerto Rico. As airlines began switching from propeller aircraft to jets, the Isla Grande airstrip did not have the necessary distance for modern aircraft to land and take off. (The Isla Grande Airport, now named in honor of Maj. Fernando Luis Ribas Dominicci, pilot of the US Air Force F-111, who was killed in action in Libya in 1986, currently has a runway of in length.)

On the other hand, the government had also decided that it should direct the air operations, relying these powers in the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, created in 1942, which later became the Ports Authority. The Committee of Airports of the Planning Board began to study the feasibility of the new airport, submitting in 1944 its plans and studies to the Federal Civil Aeronautics Administration, to determine the most appropriate place.

In 1945, it was determined that the place would be Isla Verde (Carolina), to make the airport a metropolitan facility. Construction was approved by the Puerto Rico Planning Board in 1946, and the project began in 1947. During that same year, the Port Authority of Puerto Rico assumed title to and ownership of the Isla Grande Airport and other regional airports, which had been military installations during World War II.

The design of the new airport was carried out by the firm of Toro-Ferrer, founded by the architects Miguel Ferrer (1914–2004), and architect Osvaldo Toro (1914–1995), which were also known for their designs of the Caribe Hilton Hotel and the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico.

During 1949, the first phase of construction of the Isla Verde Airport was completed: cleaning, filling, leveling and drainage of soils. The second phase also began: paving the runway, taxiways, and platforms.

The certified airlines operating in Puerto Rico in 1950 were Pan American World Airways, Eastern Air Lines, Caribbean Atlantic Airlines, British Airways, Iberia, Dominicana Airlines and Flying Tigers Airline. The latter contracted the movement of migrant workers to the United States, with the Insular Department of Labor, transferring some 5,706 workers to different points of that nation, at a cost of $55 per passage.

On May 22, 1955, the Puerto Rico International Airport was inaugurated, built on a land lot. The facilities, estimated at a cost of $22 million, had a six-story passenger terminal, control tower, long runway (8–26), cargo building, fire and police stations, and a hotel.

Hundreds of people, enthusiastic about the new aerial installation, witnessed the inaugural events presided over by Luis Muñoz Marín. In a part of his eloquent speech, the Governor said: &quot;Impressive is this work in its structure and in its many facilities, but not as impressive as the fact that this center of communications symbolizes the great technical processes that are transforming civilization&quot;.

The first year of operations of the new airport produced an upward movement of passengers to 694,199 and a total of 28 million pounds of cargo was handled.

===Evolution of the airport===
By 1959, major airlines had introduced jets, which significantly reduced flight time and increased flight cruising safety. At the start of operations, the airport had only one runway (8/26), the old control tower on top of the hotel, 3 terminals and a parking lot for 200 cars.

In the early 1960s, several expansion and improvement projects began, starting with the runway extending from in length. Construction of the second runway (10–28) on the south side began in May 1967. The project was completed in 1974 at an approximate cost of $4.2 million. With the introduction of the 747 aircraft, runway 8–26 was reinforced and widened in 1974, and ten years later it was repaved.
On January 17, 1983, the two-leveled vehicular access system was built at a cost of approximately $9.2 million. This access separates the arrivals and departures of passengers at different levels, to eliminate traffic congestion.

On February 18, 1985, the then-Governor of Puerto Rico, Rafael Hernández Colón, converted to law Senate Number 1, officially designating the international airport Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport, in honor of the first governor of Puerto Rico elected by the people.

The airport served as a hub for Pan Am, Trans Caribbean Airways, Eastern Air Lines, and, for a short period, was a focus city for TWA. It was also the center for Puerto Rico&#x27;s international airline, Prinair, from 1966 to 1984, when Prinair went bankrupt.

In 1986, American Airlines together with American Eagle established a base in Puerto Rico to compete with Eastern Air Lines. At its peak in 2001, the American hub saw over 60 daily mainline flights, mostly to the mainland, and over 100 daily American Eagle flights, mostly to other Caribbean islands on ATR 72 aircraft.
With the expansion of Eastern Airlines and American Airlines&#x27; facilities, turning Puerto Rico into their Caribbean hub, eight million passengers traveled through the airport as of the end of 1988. That same year, an investment in expansion and remodeling to the tune of $137 million was announced.

The 1990s marked the beginning of important projects to modernize and expand the facilities and services of the airport in response to the boom in passenger and cargo movement and growth projections.

From 1990 to 2000, several infrastructure works were carried out with an investment of approximately $128 million. Some of these include the expansion of the two-level access road to a maximum of 10 lanes on both levels, the new air traffic control tower (designed by Segundo Cardona FAIA of SCF Architects), a parallel taxiway connecting lanes 8 and 10, a parking garage, and the first and second phase of the Terminal B expansion, modification, and rehabilitation project.

From 2000 to 2005, other major projects were initiated and completed such as the third phase of the rehabilitation, modification and expansion of Terminal B and the new B / C connector at a cost of $35.9 million, the construction of a new building for the Air Rescue unit at a cost of $4.1 million, and remodeling the hotel at a cost of $5 million.

Competition from low-cost carriers, together with the financial crisis and oil price shock of 2008, led American to reduce its San Juan presence and consolidate its Caribbean hub operations at Miami. American eventually closed its San Juan base and retired its ATR fleet in 2013 as part of its Chapter 11 restructuring. That same year, the airport received major upgrades, including the new Terminal A, new pavement and expansions, new light systems, press conference rooms, consolidated security area for Terminals B, C and D as well as new fast food restaurants along its corridors. In 2012, the new Terminal A was opened, which is currently occupied by JetBlue Airways.

The Airport is owned by the Ports Authority but since 2013 it is managed by Aerostar Airport Holdings, in a private public initiative through which a contract was granted to that company to operate the airport for 40 years. This was after observations were made by politicians in and outside of Puerto Rico, and comments were made that privatization was a better solution for the airport. Prior to privatization, management was changed each time a different political party in Puerto Rico took office and this caused disruption, and a lack of a long-term vision for the airport.

In January 2024, Frontier Airlines announced the establishment of a crew base in San Juan 

In the past, the airport has been served by Lufthansa, Condor, Air France, KLM, Martinair, British Airways, British Caledonian, Virgin Atlantic, Norwegian Air Shuttle, Air Europa, Air Caraïbes, PAWA Dominicana, ACES Colombia, BWIA West Indies Airways, Air Antilles, LIAT, ALM Antillean Airlines, Air Jamaica, Viasa, Aeropostal, Mexicana de Aviación, Jet 24, Volaris, Surinam Airways, LACSA, Aerolíneas Argentinas, Dominicana De Aviación, Wardair, Allegiant Air, ATA Airlines, Northwest Airlines, Continental Airlines, National Airlines (N8), AirTran Airways, Ladeco, Aeronaves de Puerto Rico, Coral Air, Aero Virgin Islands and US Airways.

==Operations==


Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport is Puerto Rico&#x27;s main international gateway and its main connection to the mainland United States. Domestic flights fly between Carolina and other local destinations, including Culebra, Mayagüez and Vieques. The airport is accessed from the San Juan district of Hato Rey, the island&#x27;s financial district, via the Teodoro Moscoso Bridge. Old San Juan is accessed via the Baldorioty de Castro Expressway (PR-26). 
The airport serves as the Caribbean hub for Cape Air, Air Sunshine, and Silver Airways, a Focus City for JetBlue and an operating base for Frontier Airlines (as of June 2024). JetBlue is the largest carrier in San Juan, with 51 daily flights on an average day.

==Terminals==
As of August 2020, Luis Muñoz Marín Airport has one main terminal building with four concourses and a separate terminal with one concourse. However, all terminals are connected. Over the years, the airport has switched between letter designations and number designations. In the late 2010s, the airport incorporated both letter and numbers. The letters are used for the concourses and the numbers used for the airlines&#x27; departure areas in Terminals B, C and D, Terminal A having its own ticketing area.

===Terminal A===
In June 2012, Terminal A was opened and occupied solely by JetBlue Airways, making San Juan a focus city. The terminal originally had seven gates but an additional gate was added for regional airlines during the renovations of Terminals B and C.

As of September 2022, JetBlue uses all gates at Terminal A. Gates A1 and A2 have been used by other airlines in the past such as Copa Airlines and Allegiant Air. Seaborne Airlines and Silver Airways had temporarily moved their operations to Terminal A from Terminal D as renovations and partial reopening took place. All JetBlue flights, both domestic and international, depart from Terminal A.

As of June 2024, Terminal A is used by Air Canada, Avelo, JetBlue and Tradewind Aviation.

Terminal A also houses The Lounge San Juan, a VIP airport lounge belonging to Priority Pass as well as Gates A1 through A8.

===Terminal B (Concourse)===

This $40 million dollar and 365,000 square foot, fully self contained facility opened in 1985 and was designed as a sole terminal for Eastern Airlines accommodating 11 wide body gates.

With Eastern Airlines’ demise, the single carrier 11 gate unit terminal originally designed for Eastern Airlines was altered and expanded in three phases to become a state of the art 25 gate facility servicing over 30 domestic and international airlines and a multitude of concessionaires. The expansion of the existing Terminal B, which resulted in a new concourse, then became known as Terminal C. 

When Terminal B was closed for renovations, airlines were temporarily moved to Terminals A, C and D. Terminal B reopened after a $130 million renovation in December 2014, with Delta, United, Southwest, and Spirit as its first tenants (with all operations moved in February 2015).

As of September 2022, Terminal B is also used by Air Canada. All check-in counters for airlines using gates in Terminals B, C and D are all located within the Terminal and Gates B2 through B10 are located within the Concourse.

===Terminal C (Concourse)===

Terminal C was originally built and completed in 1996 as an expansion to Terminal B in an effort to accommodate the growth of American Airlines’ Caribbean Hub. 

Terminal C reopened from its $55 million renovation in March 2016. The letter designation for Terminal C was temporarily discontinued, and the concourse was instead added as an extension to Terminal B. The Terminal B extension was later changed back to Terminal C.

Both Terminals B and C feature high-end retail stores and new restaurants, improved seating as well as automated baggage scanners currently used only by six other airports in the mainland U.S.

An Avianca VIP airport lounge is located at the entrance of Terminal C. This All-Inclusive lounge is operated by Global Lounge Network.

As of June 2024, Terminal C houses gates C2 through C10 and is used by Air Canada, American, Avianca, Copa, Frontier, Iberia, international JetBlue arrivals as well as local charters.

===Terminal D (Concourse)===

The current Terminal D occupies what were formerly known as Terminals D and E and they were previously occupied solely by American Airlines, its regional affiliate, Executive Airlines, which operated flights under the American Eagle brand, and later both British Airways and Iberia. American Airlines&#x27; Admirals Lounge continued to operate until March 22, 2014. The former Terminal E area became unused after American Airlines moved their operations to Terminal C in 2015. The American Eagle flights were moved to the previous Terminal D in the late 2000s before being discontinued in April 2013.

Terminal D reopened on March 14, 2023, and is mostly used for small and regional aircraft operators such as Cape Air, Caribbean Airlines, InterCaribbean Airways and Silver Airways as well as other carriers. The terminal has five gates set up for regional flights and another three gates set up for high-capacity scheduled and charter flights. These scheduled flights include Delta, Frontier, Spirit and United when Terminals B and C are at maximum capacity. The former eastern end of Terminal D has been walled off, and the former Terminal E remains closed off to the public, both still waiting for renovations. The closed terminal areas and baggage claim area still have old American Airlines branding from their hub operations while the former check-in hall has been renovated for access to the airport hotel and parking.

The new terminal has a more open ambience which will be used as a basis for future renovations at Terminals A, B and C. The cost of renovations is estimated to be at around $14 million.
==Airlines and destinations==

===Passenger===

===Cargo===



==Statistics==
===Traffic statistics===


===Top destinations===


==Military==
* United States Air Force
** Air National Guard
*** Puerto Rico Air National Guard
**** Muñiz ANGB
***** 156th Wing

==Accidents and incidents==
* On March 5, 1969, Prinair Flight 277, a de Havilland Heron from St. Thomas, United States Virgin Islands, was attempting to land at the airport when it crashed into mountainous terrain near Luquillo, killing all 19 on board. An NTSB investigation found that an air traffic controller at the airport mistakenly thought the aircraft was near San Juan when it actually was near Fajardo instead. 
* On December 31, 1972, baseball star Roberto Clemente and his companions died when their DC-7 crashed soon after takeoff from Isla Verde during a relief flight bound for Nicaragua. Neither the bodies of the victims (except for the pilot&#x27;s) nor the plane&#x27;s wreckage was ever found.
* On September 26, 1978, an Air Caribbean airlines Beechcraft D185 passenger airplane was landing from Rafael Hernandez Airport in Aguadilla, after a domestic flight, when it crashed into Barrio Obrero, near Residencial Las Casas, killing all 6 on board. The plane fell on top of a bar, injuring several bar clients, including mechanic Luciano Rivera. Wake turbulence from an Eastern Airlines L-1011 which was also landing was found to be the accident&#x27;s main cause.
* On June 27, 1985, an American Airlines DC-10-10 registered N129AA operating Flight 633 to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport with 257 passengers on board aborted take-off from runway 8 after a loud rumbling sound was heard by the crew as the airplane approached V1. Unable to stop the aircraft on the runway, the aircraft ended up nose-first in the lagoon at the end of the runway. A nose gear tire blowout was suspected. There were no fatalities, and aircraft returned to service six months later.
* On July 22, 1986, a Borinquen Air Douglas C-53D registered N27PR crashed into a lagoon on approach. The aircraft was on a cargo flight to Golden Rock Airport, Saint Kitts and Nevis, when the starboard engine failed shortly after take-off and the crew decided to return to Carolina. One of the two crew members was killed, the other was seriously injured.
* On March 1, 1989, a Borinquen Air Douglas C-49J registered N28PR ditched on approach following a failure of the port engine. Although the landing gear was retracted, the crew did not feather the propeller. This resulted in increased drag which made flight impossible. There were no fatalities. The aircraft was on an international cargo flight from Golden Rock Airport, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
* On September 17, 1989, a Tol Air Services Douglas C-47A registered N100DW was damaged beyond economic repair by Hurricane Hugo.
* On May 11, 1997, a British Airways DC-10-30, G-NIUK, operated by Flying Colours Airlines, Flight 4508 (BA4508), operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 129, scheduled flight to Gatwick Airport, was evacuated via the slides after the No. 3 (right) engine caught fire at the San Juan International Airport. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed. The airplane was not damaged. The flightcrew of 3, cabin crew of 11, and 248 passengers were not injured. One passenger was seriously injured during the evacuation.
* On July 9, 1998, an American Airlines Airbus A300B4-605R registered N80057 operating Flight 574 had a fire in the No. 1 engine shortly after takeoff from Luis Munoz Marin International Airport. The airplane sustained minor damage. The captain, first officer, 7 flight attendants, and 215 passengers were not injured. Twenty-eight passengers reported minor injuries during the post-landing emergency evacuation.
* On September 24, 1998, a Trans-Florida Airlines Convair 240-13 registered N91237 had an engine problem on take-off. It attempted to return to the airport, but lost altitude and was forced to land in a lagoon. Though the aircraft was written off, the two crew and one passenger were uninjured.
* On April 4, 2001, a Roblex Aviation Douglas DC-3A registered N19BA ditched in the ocean after suffering a double engine failure while on a local training flight. Both crew members escaped. The aircraft sustained minor damage.
* On May 9, 2004, an American Eagle ATR 72 operating Flight 5401 crashed in San Juan, Puerto Rico after the captain lost control of the aircraft while landing. Seventeen people were injured, but there were no fatalities.
* On March 15, 2012, a Jet One Express cargo Convair 440 operating a flight to St. Maarten crashed near the airport, killing its two occupants. The plane went down in a lagoon after the pilot reported engine trouble.
* On December 2, 2013, an IBC Airways Swearingen SA227-AC Metro III registered N831BC crashed into a terrain near La Alianza, Arecibo, Puerto Rico. The aircraft was on a cargo flight from Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, when the crew lost control of the aircraft for reasons that could not be determined. Both crew members were killed.
* On August 9, 2014, a JetBlue Airbus A321 operating flight 704 to JFK International Airport, New York had to abort takeoff after one of the engines caught fire. All 186 passengers were evacuated from the aircraft. Two women were slightly hurt during evacuation.
* On June 3, 2017, a fatal crash happened at nearby Pinones Beach when an Air America Airlines airplane, on its way from San Juan to Culebra, tried to perform an emergency landing at the airport, going into the beach&#x27;s waters instead. A 15-year-old female died, while a 14-year-old female, a 45-year-old male passenger and the aircraft&#x27;s male pilot were rescued injured but alive.
* On September 22, 2021, a passenger onboard Jetblue Flight 261 arriving from Boston attempted to enter the cockpit after choking a crew member with his own tie. The passenger tried to make a call but failed, proceeded to run towards the front galley, demanding in Spanish to be shot before attempting to enter the cockpit when the First Officer opened the door. The passenger was restrained.

==In popular culture==
* Various scenes of the 1976 La Pandilla teen comedy musical, &quot;La Pandilla en Apuros&quot;, were filmed at the airport.
* The airport is featured in Hunter S. Thompson&#x27;s novel &quot;The Rum Diary.&quot;
* In the 1984 movie &quot;Conexión Caribe&quot;, juvenile music group Los Chicos arrived at the Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport and boarded an Oceanair airplane.
* Music group Menudo recorded the music video for their song &quot;Claridad&quot;, in 1981 at the nearby Isla Verde Beach in Piñones. An Eastern Airlines Lockheed L-1011 aircraft landing at Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport can be seen in the background.
* The airport is seen in several scenes of the 2007 action film &quot;Illegal Tender&quot;, where a Puerto Rican youngster flies to the Island from the mainland United States several times.
* In 2021, the airport was renovated in preparation to host the 2021 Miss World Pageant which was held in San Juan on March 17, 2022.

==See also==

* Mercedita International Airport
* Rafael Hernandez Airport
* Transportation in Puerto Rico
* List of airports in Puerto Rico
* List of the busiest airports in the Caribbean

==References==
==External links==
* OpenStreetMap - Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport
* SkyVector - Luis Munoz Marin International Airport
* Official website 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1360523" start="0" end="38" title="Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport" label="Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="40" end="47" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360523" start="130" end="162" title="Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport" label="Isla Verde International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="164" end="171" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914522" start="233" end="240" title="List of airports in Puerto Rico" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="241" end="262" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="266" end="277" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q263639" start="298" end="310" title="Municipalities of Puerto Rico" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="314" end="322" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414656" start="331" end="348" title="San Juan–Bayamón–Caguas metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q888180" start="373" end="389" title="Luis Muñoz Marín" label="Luis Muñoz Marín"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="401" end="408" title="Election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="409" end="417" title="List of governors of Puerto Rico#Governors under the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527656" start="425" end="447" title="Geography of Puerto Rico" label="archipelago and island"/>
<link wikidata="Q81292" start="459" end="464" title="Acre" label="acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="470" end="472" title="Hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="500" end="510" title="Beach" label="beachfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081504" start="546" end="556" title="Isla Verde, Puerto Rico" label="Isla Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q990293" start="580" end="588" title="Carolina, Puerto Rico" label="Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783649" start="627" end="635" title="Hato Rey" label="Hato Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159133" start="652" end="659" title="Condado (Santurce)" label="Condado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136674" start="681" end="693" title="Old San Juan" label="Old San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444795" start="709" end="723" title="Fernando Luis Ribas Dominicci Airport" label="airport of SIG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="780" end="795" title="List of the busiest airports in the Caribbean#Busiest airports by total passenger boardings" label="busiest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="803" end="812" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258753" start="895" end="922" title="Puerto Rico Ports Authority" label="Puerto Rico Ports Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186358" start="938" end="963" title="Aerostar Airport Holdings" label="Aerostar Airport Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635565" start="967" end="993" title="List of public–private partnerships in Puerto Rico" label="public–private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589303" start="1027" end="1052" title="government of Puerto Rico" label="government of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1154" end="1164" title="privatization" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1172" end="1185" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="1193" end="1204" title="Territories of the United States" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1326" end="1344" title="List of the busiest airports in the United States#Medium hubs" label="passenger boarding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1354" end="1385" title="List of the busiest airports in the United States#Busiest U.S. airports by international passenger traffic" label="international passenger traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454422" start="1399" end="1415" title="List of largest cargo airports in the United States" label="cargo throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444795" start="1700" end="1730" title="Fernando Luis Ribas Dominicci Airport" label="San Juan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2160" end="2172" title="United States Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="2173" end="2178" title="F-111 Aardvark" label="F-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="2208" end="2213" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258753" start="2461" end="2476" title="Puerto Rico Ports Authority" label="Ports Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258751" start="2511" end="2525" title="Puerto Rico Planning Board" label="Planning Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q17675706" start="2625" end="2665" title="Civil Aeronautics Board" label="Federal Civil Aeronautics Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081504" start="2760" end="2770" title="Isla Verde, Puerto Rico" label="Isla Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826161" start="3193" end="3204" title="Toro-Ferrer" label="Toro-Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039457" start="3346" end="3365" title="Caribe Hilton Hotel" label="Caribe Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644852" start="3374" end="3387" title="Supreme Court Building (Puerto Rico)" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="3677" end="3703" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="3705" end="3722" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039332" start="3724" end="3751" title="Caribair (Puerto Rico)" label="Caribbean Atlantic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="3753" end="3768" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="3770" end="3776" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290891" start="3778" end="3797" title="Dominicana de Aviación" label="Dominicana Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q248637" start="3802" end="3823" title="Flying Tiger Line" label="Flying Tigers Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q888180" start="4426" end="4442" title="Luis Muñoz Marín" label="Luis Muñoz Marín"/>
<link wikidata="Q550191" start="5880" end="5902" title="Rafael Hernández Colón" label="Rafael Hernández Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833661" start="6137" end="6160" title="Trans Caribbean Airways" label="Trans Caribbean Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="6227" end="6230" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471572" start="6301" end="6308" title="Prinair" label="Prinair"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="6367" end="6384" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="6399" end="6413" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="6661" end="6667" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q48703022" start="7451" end="7466" title="Segundo Cardona" label="Segundo Cardona"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632200" start="7475" end="7489" title="SCF Architects" label="SCF Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="8202" end="8207" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="8665" end="8680" title="JetBlue Airways" label="JetBlue Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186358" start="8759" end="8784" title="Aerostar Airport Holdings" label="Aerostar Airport Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="9399" end="9408" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q312517" start="9410" end="9416" title="Condor (airline)" label="Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="9418" end="9428" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="9430" end="9433" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q426851" start="9435" end="9444" title="Martinair" label="Martinair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="9446" end="9461" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q918817" start="9463" end="9481" title="British Caledonian" label="British Caledonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="9483" end="9498" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215392" start="9500" end="9521" title="Norwegian Air Shuttle" label="Norwegian Air Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q332980" start="9523" end="9533" title="Air Europa" label="Air Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q406992" start="9535" end="9547" title="Air Caraïbes" label="Air Caraïbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118299" start="9549" end="9564" title="PAWA Dominicana" label="PAWA Dominicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819046" start="9566" end="9579" title="ACES Colombia" label="ACES Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q797197" start="9581" end="9605" title="BWIA West Indies Airways" label="BWIA West Indies Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q406779" start="9607" end="9619" title="Air Antilles" label="Air Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q129906267" start="9621" end="9625" title="LIAT" label="LIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190812" start="9627" end="9649" title="ALM Antillean Airlines" label="ALM Antillean Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q407402" start="9651" end="9662" title="Air Jamaica" label="Air Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477148" start="9664" end="9669" title="Viasa" label="Viasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826405" start="9671" end="9681" title="Aeropostal" label="Aeropostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q53085" start="9683" end="9703" title="Mexicana de Aviación (1921–2010)" label="Mexicana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188782" start="9705" end="9711" title="Jet 24" label="Jet 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q431757" start="9713" end="9720" title="Volaris" label="Volaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059033" start="9722" end="9737" title="Surinam Airways" label="Surinam Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q19259875" start="9739" end="9744" title="Avianca Costa Rica" label="LACSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83535" start="9746" end="9767" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290891" start="9769" end="9791" title="Dominicana de Aviacion" label="Dominicana De Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q428008" start="9793" end="9800" title="Wardair" label="Wardair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="9802" end="9815" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q298738" start="9817" end="9829" title="ATA Airlines" label="ATA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="9831" end="9849" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="9851" end="9871" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q899774" start="9873" end="9895" title="National Airlines (N8)" label="National Airlines (N8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="9897" end="9912" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042552" start="9914" end="9920" title="Ladeco" label="Ladeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877635" start="9922" end="9946" title="Aeronaves de Puerto Rico" label="Aeronaves de Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802515" start="9948" end="9957" title="Coral Air" label="Coral Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688168" start="9959" end="9978" title="Aero Virgin Islands" label="Aero Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="9983" end="9993" title="US Airways" label="US Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q620090" start="10234" end="10241" title="Benjamín Rivera Noriega Airport" label="Culebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408306" start="10243" end="10251" title="Eugenio María de Hostos Airport" label="Mayagüez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321656" start="10256" end="10263" title="Antonio Rivera Rodríguez Airport" label="Vieques"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="10298" end="10306" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701090" start="10375" end="10397" title="Teodoro Moscoso Bridge" label="Teodoro Moscoso Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85844346" start="10465" end="10470" title="PR-26" label="PR-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="10510" end="10513" title="airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034273" start="10518" end="10526" title="Cape Air" label="Cape Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033625" start="10528" end="10540" title="Air Sunshine" label="Air Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554309" start="10546" end="10560" title="Silver Airways" label="Silver Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="10579" end="10586" title="JetBlue" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="10613" end="10630" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="10684" end="10692" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="11335" end="11350" title="JetBlue" label="JetBlue Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="11370" end="11380" title="Airline hub" label="focus city"/>
<link wikidata="Q849404" start="11652" end="11665" title="Copa Airlines" label="Copa Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="11670" end="11683" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476678" start="11685" end="11702" title="Seaborne Airlines" label="Seaborne Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554309" start="11707" end="11721" title="Silver Airways" label="Silver Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="11958" end="11968" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045045" start="11970" end="11975" title="Avelo Airlines" label="Avelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="11977" end="11984" title="Jetblue Airways" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957869" start="11989" end="12007" title="Tradewind Aviation" label="Tradewind Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349657" start="12060" end="12074" title="airport lounge" label="airport lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110849" start="12088" end="12101" title="Priority Pass" label="Priority Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="12929" end="12934" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="12936" end="12942" title="United Airlines" label="United"/>
<link wikidata="Q503308" start="12944" end="12953" title="Southwest Airlines" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190598" start="12959" end="12965" title="Spirit Airlines" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="13083" end="13093" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q308911" start="13917" end="13924" title="Avianca" label="Avianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349657" start="13929" end="13943" title="airport lounge" label="airport lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="14122" end="14132" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="14134" end="14142" title="American Airlines" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q308911" start="14144" end="14151" title="Avianca" label="Avianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q849404" start="14153" end="14157" title="Copa Airlines" label="Copa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="14159" end="14167" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="14169" end="14175" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="14191" end="14198" title="JetBlue Airways" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="14388" end="14405" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061897" start="14431" end="14449" title="Executive Airlines" label="Executive Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="14484" end="14498" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="14521" end="14536" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034273" start="14976" end="14984" title="Cape Air" label="Cape Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036118" start="14986" end="15004" title="Caribbean Airlines" label="Caribbean Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698234" start="15006" end="15028" title="InterCaribbean Airways" label="InterCaribbean Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554309" start="15033" end="15047" title="Silver Airways" label="Silver Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="16024" end="16047" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="16051" end="16069" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258672" start="16074" end="16104" title="Puerto Rico Air National Guard" label="Puerto Rico Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944515" start="16110" end="16120" title="Muñiz Air National Guard Base" label="Muñiz ANGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550631" start="16127" end="16137" title="156th Wing" label="156th Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715028" start="16187" end="16205" title="Prinair Flight 277" label="Prinair Flight 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q176111" start="16209" end="16227" title="de Havilland Heron" label="de Havilland Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="16233" end="16273" title="St. Thomas, United States Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas, United States Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984618" start="16359" end="16367" title="Luquillo, Puerto Rico" label="Luquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="16397" end="16401" title="NTSB" label="NTSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q542833" start="16544" end="16551" title="Fajardo, Puerto Rico" label="Fajardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q684020" start="16600" end="16616" title="Roberto Clemente" label="Roberto Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q847409" start="16652" end="16656" title="DC-7" label="DC-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715366" start="16657" end="16664" title="1972 Puerto Rico DC-7 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="16676" end="16683" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="16733" end="16742" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697787" start="16882" end="16904" title="Air Caribbean (Puerto Rico)" label="Air Caribbean airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q814006" start="16905" end="16920" title="Beech 18" label="Beechcraft D185"/>
<link wikidata="Q130710790" start="16957" end="16981" title="Rafael Hernandez Airport" label="Rafael Hernandez Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q397826" start="16985" end="16994" title="Aguadilla, Puerto Rico" label="Aguadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q97861115" start="17021" end="17036" title="Air Caribbean Flight 309" label="when it crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315422" start="17062" end="17083" title="Residencial Las Casas" label="Residencial Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="17348" end="17365" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="17366" end="17374" title="DC-10-10" label="DC-10-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="17375" end="17385" title="Aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="17417" end="17456" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q986260" start="17594" end="17596" title="V1 speed" label="V1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945162" start="17853" end="17866" title="Borinquen Air" label="Borinquen Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="17867" end="17879" title="Douglas C-53" label="Douglas C-53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933813" start="17971" end="17990" title="Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport" label="Golden Rock Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="18224" end="18236" title="Douglas C-49" label="Douglas C-49"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933813" start="18539" end="18558" title="Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport" label="Golden Rock Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814076" start="18610" end="18626" title="Tol Air Services" label="Tol Air Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="18627" end="18639" title="Douglas C-47" label="Douglas C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="18697" end="18711" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="18734" end="18749" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="18750" end="18758" title="DC-10-30" label="DC-10-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463381" start="18780" end="18803" title="Flying Colours Airlines" label="Flying Colours Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="18885" end="18900" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437" start="19295" end="19308" title="Airbus A300B4" label="Airbus A300B4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833523" start="19695" end="19717" title="Trans-Florida Airlines" label="Trans-Florida Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="19718" end="19732" title="Convair 240" label="Convair 240-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353208" start="19985" end="20000" title="Roblex Aviation" label="Roblex Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="20001" end="20013" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="20212" end="20226" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="20227" end="20233" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="20457" end="20468" title="Convair 440" label="Convair 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="20491" end="20502" title="St. Maarten" label="St. Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628804" start="20655" end="20666" title="IBC Airways" label="IBC Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393122" start="20667" end="20696" title="Swearingen SA227-AC Metro III" label="Swearingen SA227-AC Metro III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062676" start="20817" end="20830" title="Las Américas International Airport" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="20991" end="20998" title="JetBlue" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278675" start="20999" end="21010" title="Airbus A321" label="Airbus A321"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="21035" end="21060" title="JFK International Airport" label="JFK International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="21667" end="21674" title="Jetblue" label="Jetblue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464279" start="22068" end="22079" title="La Pandilla" label="La Pandilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331264" start="22107" end="22128" title="La Pandilla en Apuros" label="La Pandilla en Apuros"/>
<link wikidata="Q219780" start="22193" end="22211" title="Hunter S. Thompson" label="Hunter S. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q840085" start="22231" end="22244" title="The Rum Diary (novel)" label="The Rum Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159569" start="22278" end="22293" title="Conexión Caribe" label="Conexión Caribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682604" start="22322" end="22332" title="Los Chicos" label="Los Chicos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076175" start="22402" end="22410" title="Oceanair" label="Oceanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555767" start="22435" end="22441" title="Menudo (band)" label="Menudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="22584" end="22590" title="L-1011" label="L-1011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588167" start="22745" end="22771" title="Illegal Tender (film)" label="&amp;quot;Illegal Tender&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107042242" start="22935" end="22950" title="Miss World 2021" label="2021 Miss World"/>
<link wikidata="Q652578" start="23022" end="23053" title="Mercedita International Airport" label="Mercedita International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q130710790" start="23056" end="23080" title="Rafael Hernandez Airport" label="Rafael Hernandez Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997833" start="23083" end="23112" title="Transportation in Puerto Rico" label="Transportation in Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914522" start="23115" end="23146" title="List of airports in Puerto Rico" label="List of airports in Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643046" start="23149" end="23194" title="List of the busiest airports in the Caribbean" label="List of the busiest airports in the Caribbean"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83030" wikidata="Q14623353" url="?curid=83030" title="The Nature of the Firm">
<text>&quot;The Nature of the Firm&quot; (1937) is an article by Ronald Coase. It offered an economic explanation of why individuals choose to form partnerships, companies, and other business entities rather than trading bilaterally through contracts on a market. The author was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1991 in part due to this paper. Despite the honor, the paper was written when Coase was an undergraduate and he described it later in life as &quot;little more than an undergraduate essay.&quot;

The article argues that firms emerge because they are better equipped to deal with the transaction costs inherent in production and exchange than individuals are. Economists such as Oliver Williamson, Douglass North, Oliver Hart, Bengt Holmström, Arman Alchian and Harold Demsetz expanded on Coase&#x27;s work on firms, transaction costs and contracts. Economists and political scientists have used insights from Coase&#x27;s work to explain the functioning of organizations in general, not just firms. Coase&#x27;s work strongly influenced the New Economics of Organization (New Institutional Economics).

Coase&#x27;s article distinguished between markets as a coordination mechanism and firms as a coordination mechanism.

==Summary==
Given that production could be carried on without any organization, Coase asks, &#x27;Why and under what conditions should we expect firms to emerge?&#x27; Since modern firms can only emerge when an entrepreneur of some sort begins to hire people, Coase&#x27;s analysis proceeds by considering the conditions under which it makes sense for an entrepreneur to seek hired help instead of contracting out for some particular task.

The traditional economic theory of the time suggested that, because the market is &quot;efficient&quot; (that is, those who are best at providing each good or service most cheaply are already doing so), it should always be cheaper to contract out than to hire.

Coase noted, however, that there are a number of transaction costs to using the market; the cost of obtaining a good or service via the market is actually more than just the price of the good. Other costs, including search and information costs, bargaining costs, keeping trade secrets, and policing and enforcement costs, can all potentially add to the cost of procuring something via the market. This suggests that firms will arise when they can arrange to produce what they need internally, and somehow avoid these costs.

There is a natural limit to what can be produced internally, however. Coase notices &quot;decreasing returns to the entrepreneur function&quot;, including increasing overhead costs and increasing propensity for an overwhelmed manager to make mistakes in resource allocation. This is a countervailing cost to the use of the firm.

Coase argues that the size of a firm (as measured by how many contractual relations are &quot;internal&quot; to the firm and how many &quot;external&quot;) is a result of finding an optimal balance between the competing tendencies of the costs outlined above. In general, making the firm larger will initially be advantageous, but the decreasing returns indicated above will eventually kick in, preventing the firm from growing indefinitely.

Other things being equal (ceteris paribus), a firm will tend to be larger:

* the less the costs of organizing and the slower these costs rise with an increase in the transactions organized.
* the less likely the entrepreneur is to make mistakes and the smaller the increase in mistakes with an increase in the transactions organized.
* the greater the lowering (or the less the rise) in the supply price of factors of production to firms of larger size.

The first two costs will increase with the spatial distribution of the transactions organized and the dissimilarity of the transactions. This explains why firms tend to either be in different geographic locations or to perform different functions. Additionally, technology changes that mitigate the cost of organizing transactions across space will cause firms to be larger—the advent of the telephone and cheap air travel, for example, would be expected to increase the size of firms. On a related note the use of the internet and related modern information and communication technologies seem to lead to the existence of so-called virtual organizations.

Coase does not consider non-contractual relationships, as between friends or family.

== Reactions ==
In 1991, Coase was awarded the Sveriges Riksbank (Bank of Sweden) Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. His paper provided a breakthrough on the significance of transaction costs and property rights for the institutional structure and functioning of the economy.

The paper has had an outsized impact on the field of microeconomics, particularly in essentially inventing the body of research that deals with the theory of the firm. According to Google Scholar, the paper has been cited more than 59,000 times as of September 2024.

This article was famously referred by Yochai Benkler in his article &quot;Coase&#x27;s Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm&quot;, where he links Coase&#x27;s essay to the emergence of commons-based peer production communities using the Internet. In particular, Benkler considers the commons-based peer production a third alternative coordination mechanism for economic transactions besides the dichotomy composed of markets and hierarchies. In the article&#x27;s title, ‘penguin’ refers to the logo of the Linux operating system, invoking the challenge it poses to Coase&#x27;s work by working through different mechanisms than those present in markets and firms. Resolving this challenge, according to Benkler, lies in substituting the role of transaction costs in Coase&#x27;s work with the concept of information opportunity costs when explaining the emergence of commons-based peer production.  

The World Bank&#x27;s 2019 World Development Report on &quot;The Changing Nature of Work&quot; suggests that firms and production processes become less vertically integrated as technology makes it cheaper to resort to the open market to complete portions of the production process.

==See also==

*Economic analysis of law
*&quot;The Problem of Social Cost&quot;
*Theory of the firm

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* The Legal Structure of the Firm, Accounting, Economics, and Law, Vol. 1 : Iss. 1, Article 5, by Jean-Philippe Robé, 2011 Jean-Philippe Robé

* Oliver Williamson Biography - The Library of Economics and Liberty by David R. Henderson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14623353" start="6" end="28" title="The Nature of the Firm" label="The Nature of the Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="59" end="71" title="Ronald Coase" label="Ronald Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="235" end="243" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="285" end="326" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="613" end="630" title="Transaction cost" label="transaction costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q232062" start="708" end="725" title="Oliver E. Williamson" label="Oliver Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q243193" start="727" end="741" title="Douglass North" label="Douglass North"/>
<link wikidata="Q432890" start="743" end="754" title="Oliver Hart (economist)" label="Oliver Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q354897" start="756" end="771" title="Bengt Holmström" label="Bengt Holmström"/>
<link wikidata="Q240448" start="773" end="786" title="Armen Alchian" label="Arman Alchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585807" start="791" end="805" title="Harold Demsetz" label="Harold Demsetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420933" start="1071" end="1130" title="New institutional economics" label="New Economics of Organization (New Institutional Economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="1397" end="1402" title="Firm" label="firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="1463" end="1475" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="1927" end="1939" title="Outsourcing" label="contract out"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="2004" end="2021" title="transaction costs" label="transaction costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q841666" start="2171" end="2177" title="Search cost" label="search"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="2227" end="2239" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q572079" start="3280" end="3295" title="ceteris paribus" label="ceteris paribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="4229" end="4237" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="4257" end="4299" title="Information and Communication technology" label="information and communication technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909857" start="4343" end="4363" title="virtual organization" label="virtual organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q982240" start="5055" end="5069" title="Yochai Benkler" label="Yochai Benkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116275" start="5211" end="5240" title="commons-based peer production" label="commons-based peer production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116275" start="5310" end="5339" title="commons-based peer production" label="commons-based peer production"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="5533" end="5538" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="5843" end="5859" title="opportunity cost" label="opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5932" end="5942" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558192" start="5955" end="5979" title="World Development Report" label="World Development Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q295354" start="6226" end="6250" title="Economic analysis of law" label="Economic analysis of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758440" start="6258" end="6284" title="The Problem of Social Cost" label="The Problem of Social Cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853178" start="6292" end="6310" title="Theory of the firm" label="Theory of the firm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6480" end="6498" title="Jean-Philippe Robé" label="Jean-Philippe Robé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83031" wikidata="Q1132777" url="?curid=83031" title="Crotopus">
<text>Crotopus or Krotopos (), in Greek mythology, was the eighth king of Argos.

== Family ==
Crotopus was the son of Agenor and father of Psamathe and Sthenelas.

== Mythology ==
According to myth, Crotopus condemned to death his own daughter Psamathe, after she gave birth to a child who was Apollo &#x27;s son. Crotopus&#x27;s city of Argos was consequently punished by Apollo with a plague. There are various versions, but it is in Conon&#x27;s account that the king must expiate this himself by self-exile:

Crotopus was a terrifying father to Psamathe, and she exposed the child, but the child was found and grew up as a shepherd&#x27;s boy named Linus, until Crotopus&#x27;s sheepdogs tore the boy apart. As Psamathe grieved over the loss of her child, Crotopus discovered about the secret child, and under the assumption she had acted like a harlot and was lying about Apollo, sentenced her to death. In retribution Apollo brought an unspecified plague ( ) upon Argos.

;Festival for Linos

An oracle prescribed the veneration of the mother and child, and the Argives held a Festival of Argis (Lamb festival) during the month of Arneios, involving women and girls singing the dirge to Linus (Linos) and the ritualized killing of dogs.

;Tripodiscium
Despite this, the plague persisted. The oracle was consulted once again, and this time Crotopus was to banish himself from his own city of Argos and found a city in the Megarid; Crotopus settled here, in the city which would be named Tripodiscium (Greek: Tripodiskion).

;Variant tellings
Other versions, such as given by Pausanias and Statius interpolate the labors of a hero from Argos named Coroebus. In those versions, Apollo first sends a monster (called Poena that snatches babies from the Argives. It is slain by this hero, who must then perform the penance of building the tripod city (which in Conon&#x27;s version was carried out by Crotopus).

== Reign ==
According to Eusebius, Crotopus reigned for 21 years and during his time, Phaethon&#x27;s burning of Ethiopia and Deucalion&#x27;s flood in Thessaly occurred. Crotopus succeeded his uncle Iasus as King of Argos upon Agenor&#x27;s death while Sthenelas, his son replaced him on the throne.

==Modern allusions==
A species of butterfly, Euselasia Crotopus is possibly named after him.

==Explanatory notes==
==References==
;Citations
;Bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1132777" start="0" end="8" title="Crotopus" label="Crotopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132777" start="12" end="20" title="Crotopus" label="Krotopos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="28" end="43" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="68" end="73" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q429064" start="113" end="119" title="Agenor, son of Triopas" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q129168" start="134" end="142" title="Psamathe (Crotopus)" label="Psamathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25714658" start="147" end="156" title="Sthenelus" label="Sthenelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="289" end="295" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q709305" start="431" end="436" title="Conon (mythographer)" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833059" start="648" end="653" title="Linus of Argos" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1132" end="1139" title="Ancient Greek calendars#Argos" label="Arneios"/>
<link wikidata="Q645572" start="1422" end="1429" title="Megarid" label="Megarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1575" end="1584" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="1589" end="1596" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q129168" start="1647" end="1655" title="Coroebus (Argos)" label="Coroebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992411" start="1713" end="1718" title="Poena" label="Poena"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="1933" end="1941" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q203480" start="1994" end="2009" title="Phaethon" label="Phaethon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2021" end="2029" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207715" start="2034" end="2050" title="Deucalion" label="Deucalion&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="2060" end="2068" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q126947819" start="2108" end="2113" title="Iasus" label="Iasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392631" start="2136" end="2142" title="Agenor" label="Agenor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83033" wikidata="Q634304" url="?curid=83033" title="Psychopomp">
<text>Psychopomps (from the Greek word , , literally meaning the &#x27;guide of souls&#x27;) are creatures, spirits, angels, demons, or deities in many religions whose responsibility is to escort newly deceased souls from Earth to the afterlife.

Their role is not to judge the deceased, but simply to guide them. Appearing frequently on funerary art, psychopomps have been depicted at different times and in different cultures as anthropomorphic entities, horses, deer, dogs, whip-poor-wills, ravens, crows, vultures, owls, sparrows, and cuckoos. In the case of birds, these are often seen in huge masses, waiting outside the home of the dying.

==Overview==

===Ancient religion===

Classical examples of a psychopomp are the ancient Egyptian god Anubis, the deity Pushan in Hinduism, the Greek ferryman Charon, the goddess Hecate, and god Hermes, the Roman god Mercury, the Norse Valkyries, the Aztec Xolotl, the Slavic goddess Morana and the Etruscan Vanth.

=== Modern religion ===
Heibai Wuchang, literally &quot;Black and White Impermanence&quot;, are two deities in Chinese folk religion in charge of escorting the spirits of the dead to the underworld.

In Japanese mythology, the &quot;shinigami&quot; have been described as psychopomps.

The form of Shiva as Tarakeshwara in Hinduism performs a similar role, although leading the soul to moksha rather than an after-life. Additionally, in the Bhagavata Purana, the Visnudutas and Yamadutas are also messengers for their respective masters, Vishnu and Yama. Their role is illustrated vividly in the story of Ajamila. In many beliefs, a spirit being taken to the underworld is violently ripped from its body.

In the Persian tradition, Daena, the Zoroastrian self-guide, appears as a beautiful young maiden to those who deserve to cross the Chinvat Bridge or a hideous old hag to those who do not.

The polytheistic concept of a specific deity of death is rejected by Abrahamic monotheism, which regards God as the only master of death and life. However, archangel Samael can be regarded as the Jewish psychopomp, whose role in Talmudic and post-Talmudic theology is as the Angel of death.
In Christianity, Saint Peter, Michael the Archangel and Jesus are thought of as psychopomps either as leading the dead to heaven or, as in the case of Peter, allowing them through the gates. In Islam, Azrael plays the role of the angel of death who carries the soul up to the heavens, acting by the permission of God.

In many cultures, the shaman also fulfils the role of the psychopomp. This may include not only accompanying the soul of the dead, but also at birth to help introduce the newborn child&#x27;s soul into the world. This also accounts for the contemporary title of &quot;midwife to the dying&quot; or &quot;End of Life Doula&quot;, which is another form of psychopomp work.

In Filipino culture, ancestral spirits (&quot;anito&quot;) function as psychopomps. When the dying call out to specific dead persons (e.g. parents, partners), the spirits of the latter are supposedly visible to the former. The spirits, who traditionally wait at the foot of the death-bed, retrieve (Tagalog: &quot;sundô&quot;) the soul soon after death and escort it into the after-life.

In Akan religion, Amokye is the woman who fishes souls out of the river and welcomes them to Asamando, the Akan realm of the dead. A deceased person is buried with amoasie (loincloths), jewelry and beads which they then pay to Amokye for admitting them to Asamando.

Many mythologies and superstitions simply have a personification of death as psychopomp. Such personifications frequently present death as a reaper, even ascribing it the title Grim Reaper.

===Psychology===
In Jungian psychology, the psychopomp is a mediator between the unconscious and conscious realms. It is symbolically personified in dreams as a wise man or woman, or sometimes as a helpful beast.

==See also==

* Life replacement narratives, Korean myths in which psychopomps are persuaded into sparing a person&#x27;s life.

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==

*Geoffrey Dennis, &quot;Abraham&quot;, &quot;Elijah&quot;, &quot;Lailah&quot;, &quot;Sandalphon&quot;, &quot;Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, Magic, and Mysticism&quot;, Llewellyn, 2007.
*Eliade, Mircea, &quot;Shamanism&quot;, 1964, Chapters 6 and 7, &quot;Magical Cures: the Shaman as Psychopomp&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="0" end="11" title="Psychopomp" label="Psychopomps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048977" start="102" end="108" title="Non-physical entity" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="111" end="116" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="119" end="124" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="130" end="137" title="deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="332" end="344" title="funerary art" label="funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="425" end="449" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268205" start="471" end="485" title="whip-poor-will" label="whip-poor-will"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="722" end="735" title="Ancient Egyptian religion" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="743" end="749" title="Anubis" label="Anubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q738799" start="761" end="767" title="Pushan" label="Pushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="771" end="779" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="785" end="790" title="ancient Greek religion" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612" start="800" end="806" title="Charon (mythology)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="820" end="826" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="836" end="842" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="848" end="853" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="858" end="865" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="871" end="876" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131087" start="877" end="885" title="Valkyrie" label="Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q391184" start="892" end="897" title="Aztec mythology" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q279639" start="898" end="904" title="Xolotl" label="Xolotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="910" end="916" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q936979" start="925" end="931" title="Morana (goddess)" label="Morana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="940" end="948" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235270" start="949" end="954" title="Vanth" label="Vanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11179331" start="981" end="995" title="Heibai Wuchang" label="Heibai Wuchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="1029" end="1041" title="Impermanence" label="Impermanence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="1068" end="1089" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q814158" start="1160" end="1178" title="Japanese mythology" label="Japanese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q479033" start="1190" end="1199" title="shinigami" label="shinigami"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="1255" end="1260" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952396" start="1264" end="1276" title="Tarakeshwara" label="Tarakeshwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1280" end="1288" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="1343" end="1349" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q682958" start="1398" end="1414" title="Bhagavata Purana" label="Bhagavata Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047608" start="1435" end="1443" title="Yamaduta" label="Yamaduta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="1495" end="1501" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="1506" end="1510" title="Yama" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699527" start="1562" end="1569" title="Ajamila" label="Ajamila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130378" start="1670" end="1677" title="Persian mythology" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011804" start="1689" end="1694" title="Daena" label="Daena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1700" end="1711" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q246443" start="1794" end="1808" title="Chinvat Bridge" label="Chinvat Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="1856" end="1868" title="polytheistic" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="1921" end="1930" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576009" start="1957" end="1960" title="God in Abrahamic religions" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q779725" start="2018" end="2024" title="Samael" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2048" end="2054" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="2160" end="2171" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="2173" end="2194" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael the Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2199" end="2204" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2337" end="2342" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q490838" start="2344" end="2350" title="Azrael" label="Azrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="2484" end="2490" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455226" start="2766" end="2783" title="Death doula" label="End of Life Doula"/>
<link wikidata="Q934605" start="2837" end="2853" title="Culture of the Philippines" label="Filipino culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549810" start="2880" end="2885" title="anito" label="anito"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="3133" end="3140" title="Filipino language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493154" start="3226" end="3239" title="Akan religion" label="Akan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q110250474" start="3241" end="3247" title="Amokye" label="Amokye"/>
<link wikidata="Q131803011" start="3667" end="3678" title="Grim Reaper" label="Grim Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="3701" end="3719" title="Jungian psychology" label="Jungian psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="3762" end="3773" title="Unconscious mind" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q97182161" start="3911" end="3938" title="Life replacement narratives" label="Life replacement narratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590" start="4256" end="4270" title="Mircea Eliade" label="Eliade, Mircea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83034" wikidata="Q287865" url="?curid=83034" title="AC3">
<text>AC3 or AC-3 may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Dolby AC-3, Dolby Digital audio codec
* AC-3 algorithm (Arc Consistency Algorithm 3), one of a series of algorithms used for the solution of constraint satisfaction problems
* (35414) 1998 AC3, a minor planet
* AC-3, an IEC utilization category

==Transportation==
* Comte AC-3, a 1920s Swiss bomber/transport aircraft
* Southern Pacific class AC-3, a class of steam locomotive

==Video games==
* &quot;Ace Combat 3&quot;, part of the &quot;Ace Combat&quot; series of video games
* &quot;Armored Core 3&quot;, part of the &quot;Armored Core&quot; series of video games
* &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed III&quot;, part of the &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed&quot; series of video games

== Other ==

* Apple Campus 3, Apple&#x27;s third large Silicon Valley campus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q287865" start="0" end="3" title="AC3" label="AC3"/>
<link wikidata="Q287865" start="7" end="11" title="AC3" label="AC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q622624" start="56" end="66" title="Dolby AC-3" label="Dolby AC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q287886" start="96" end="110" title="AC-3 algorithm" label="AC-3 algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q612159" start="232" end="248" title="(35414) 1998 AC3" label="(35414) 1998 AC3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497133" start="280" end="300" title="utilization category" label="utilization category"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157710" start="323" end="333" title="Comte AC-3" label="Comte AC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570296" start="377" end="404" title="Southern Pacific class AC-3" label="Southern Pacific class AC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300289" start="459" end="471" title="Ace Combat 3" label="Ace Combat 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452892" start="544" end="558" title="Armored Core 3" label="Armored Core 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q40166" start="633" end="658" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q117805825" start="750" end="764" title="Apple Campus 3" label="Apple Campus 3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83036" wikidata="Q15721" url="?curid=83036" title="Python (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Python (; &quot;gen&quot;. Πύθωνος) was the serpent, sometimes represented as a medieval-style dragon, living at the center of the Earth, believed by the ancient Greeks to be at Delphi.

==Mythology==
Python, sometimes written Pytho, presided at the Delphic oracle, which existed in the cult center for its mother, Gaia, &quot;Earth&quot;, Pytho being the place name that was substituted for the earlier &quot;Krisa&quot;. Greeks considered the site to be the center of the Earth, represented by a stone, the &quot;omphalos&quot; or navel, which Python guarded.

Python became the chthonic enemy of the later Olympian deity Apollo, who slew it and took over Python&#x27;s former home and oracle. These were the most famous and revered in the ancient Greek and Roman worlds. Like many monsters, Python was known as Gaia&#x27;s son and prophesied as Gaia&#x27;s son. 
In turn, Apollo had to eliminate him before he could establish a temple in Delphi.

==Versions and interpretations==

There are various versions of Python&#x27;s birth and death at the hands of Apollo. In the &quot;Homeric Hymn to Apollo&quot;, now thought to have been composed in 522 BCE when the archaic period in Greek history was giving way to the Classical period, a small detail is provided regarding Apollo&#x27;s combat with the serpent, in some sections identified as the deadly drakaina, or her parent. The god searching for a place to establish his shrine, reached Delphi and saw the Python, who was a bane to the people. He slew the serpent and declared himself as the owner of the Oracular shrine.

The version related by Hyginus holds that when Zeus lay with the goddess Leto, and she became pregnant with Artemis and Apollo, Hera was jealous and sent Python to pursue Leto throughout the lands, to prevent her from giving birth to the twin gods. Thus, when Apollo was born and was four days old he pursued Python, making his way straight for Mount Parnassus where the serpent dwelled and chased it to the oracle of Gaia at Delphi; there he dared to penetrate the sacred precinct and kill it with his arrows beside the rock cleft where the priestess sat on her tripod. Robert Graves, who habitually read into primitive myths a retelling of archaic political and social turmoil, saw in this the capture by Hellenes of a pre-Hellenic shrine. &quot;To placate local opinion at Delphi,&quot; he wrote in &quot;The Greek Myths&quot;, &quot;regular funeral games were instituted in honor of the dead hero Python, and her priestess was retained in office.&quot;

According to an epigram from 159 BC, it seems that Python in particular meant to rape Leto. Clearchus of Soli wrote that while Python was pursuing them, Leto stepped on a stone and, holding Apollo in her hands, cried (&quot;híe paî&quot;, meaning &quot;shoot, child&quot;) to him, who was holding a bow and arrows. 

The politics are conjectural, but the myth reports that Zeus ordered Apollo to purify himself for the sacrilege and instituted the Pythian Games, over which Apollo was to preside, as penance for his act.

Erwin Rohde wrote that the Python was an earth spirit, who was conquered by Apollo, and buried under the &quot;omphalos&quot; and that it is a case of one god setting up his temple on the grave of another.

The priestess of the oracle at Delphi became known as the Pythia, after the place-name Pytho, which Greeks explained as named after the rotting (πύθειν) of the slain serpent&#x27;s corpse in the strength of Hyperion (day) or Helios (the sun).

Karl Kerenyi notes that the older tales mentioned two dragons who were perhaps intentionally conflated. A female dragon named Delphyne (; cf. , &quot;womb&quot;), and a male serpent Typhon (; from , &quot;to smoke&quot;), the adversary of Zeus in the Titanomachy, who the narrators confused with Python. Python was the good daemon (ἀγαθὸς δαίμων) of the temple as it appears in Minoan religion, but she was represented as a dragon, as often happens in Northern European folklore as well as in the East.

This myth has been described as an allegory for the dispersal of the fogs and clouds of vapor that arise from ponds and marshes (Python) by the rays of the Sun (the arrows of Apollo).

==See also==
* Analogy of the Sun
* Apollo Belvedere
* Dragons in Greek mythology
* Pythia
* &quot;Python&quot;, a genus of the family Pythonidae, which the genus was named after
* Saint George and the Dragon
* Serpent (symbolism)
* Yamata no Orochi

==Notes==
==References==

* Burkert, Walter, &quot;Greek Religion&quot; 1985.
* Deane, John Bathurst, &quot;The Worship of the Serpent&quot;, 1833. Cf. Chapter V., p. 329. 
* Farnell, Lewis Richard, &quot;The Cults of the Greek States&quot;, 1896.
* Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy, &quot;Python; a study of Delphic myth and its origins&quot;, 1959.
* Goodrich, Norma Lorre, &quot;Priestesses&quot;, 1990.
* Guthrie, William Keith Chambers, &quot;The Greeks and their Gods&quot;, 1955.
* Hall, Manly Palmer, &quot;The Secret Teachings of All Ages&quot;, 1928. Ch. 14 cf. Greek Oracles,www, PRS
* Harrison, Jane Ellen, &quot;Themis: A Study of the Social Origins of Greek Religion&quot;, 1912. cf. Chapter IX, p. 329 especially, on the slaying of the Python.
* Kerenyi, Karl, (1951) 1980. &quot;The Gods of the Greeks&quot; especially pp 135–6. 
* Homeric Hymn to Pythian Apollo
* 
* Rohde, Erwin, &quot;Psyche&quot;, 1925.
* Smith, William; &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). &quot;Python&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="20" end="26" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="36" end="39" title="genitive case" label="gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q721221" start="64" end="71" title="Serpent (symbolism)" label="serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="100" end="108" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="115" end="121" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="151" end="156" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="198" end="204" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="270" end="284" title="Pythia" label="Delphic oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="335" end="339" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="480" end="499" title="Axis mundi#Places" label="center of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q761739" start="535" end="543" title="omphalos" label="omphalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="601" end="609" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="644" end="650" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="834" end="838" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="895" end="901" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="1101" end="1123" title="Homeric Hymn" label="Homeric Hymn to Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330255" start="1375" end="1383" title="Drakaina (mythology)" label="drakaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1622" end="1629" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1646" end="1650" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="1672" end="1676" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="1707" end="1714" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="1727" end="1731" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="1944" end="1959" title="Mount Parnassus" label="Mount Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="2170" end="2183" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="2306" end="2314" title="Greeks" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736433" start="2649" end="2666" title="Clearchus of Soli" label="Clearchus of Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q180362" start="2976" end="2985" title="sacrilege" label="sacrilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="3005" end="3018" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="3079" end="3090" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Erwin Rohde"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="3317" end="3323" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179209" start="3493" end="3501" title="Hyperion (mythology)" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="3511" end="3517" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="3530" end="3542" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Karl Kerenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q903606" start="3656" end="3664" title="Delphyne" label="Delphyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="3712" end="3718" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220878" start="3781" end="3792" title="Titanomachy" label="Titanomachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157625" start="3854" end="3860" title="Daemon (classical mythology)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="3908" end="3914" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q731887" start="4234" end="4252" title="Analogy of the Sun" label="Analogy of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="4255" end="4271" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401491" start="4274" end="4300" title="Dragons in Greek mythology" label="Dragons in Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="4303" end="4309" title="Pythia" label="Pythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271218" start="4312" end="4330" title="Python (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Python&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q184018" start="4354" end="4364" title="Pythonidae" label="Pythonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509393" start="4400" end="4427" title="Saint George and the Dragon" label="Saint George and the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721221" start="4430" end="4449" title="Serpent (symbolism)" label="Serpent (symbolism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054437" start="4452" end="4468" title="Yamata no Orochi" label="Yamata no Orochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="4498" end="4513" title="Walter Burkert" label="Burkert, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q961830" start="4720" end="4743" title="Joseph Fontenrose" label="Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q930085" start="4950" end="4968" title="Manly Palmer Hall" label="Hall, Manly Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q437675" start="5058" end="5078" title="Jane Ellen Harrison" label="Harrison, Jane Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="5222" end="5235" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Kerenyi, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="5345" end="5357" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Rohde, Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="5387" end="5401" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="5409" end="5462" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83042" wikidata="Q1164073" url="?curid=83042" title="Homo economicus">
<text>The term Homo economicus, or economic man, is the portrayal of humans as agents who are consistently rational and narrowly self-interested, and who pursue their subjectively defined ends optimally. It is a wordplay on &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, used in some economic theories and in pedagogy.

In game theory, &quot;Homo economicus&quot; is often (but not necessarily) modelled through the assumption of perfect rationality. It assumes that agents always act in a way that maximize utility as a consumer and profit as a producer, and are capable of arbitrarily complex deductions towards that end. They will always be capable of thinking through all possible outcomes and choosing that course of action which will result in the best possible result.

The rationality implied in &quot;Homo economicus&quot; does not restrict what sort of preferences are admissible. Only naive applications of the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; model assume that agents know what is best for their long-term physical and mental health. For example, an agent&#x27;s utility function could be linked to the perceived utility of other agents (such as one&#x27;s husband or children), making &quot;Homo economicus&quot; compatible with other models such as &quot;Homo reciprocans,&quot; which emphasizes human cooperation.

As a theory on human conduct, it contrasts to the concepts of behavioral economics, which examines cognitive biases and other irrationalities, and to bounded rationality, which assumes that practical elements such as cognitive and time limitations restrict the rationality of agents.

== History of the term ==

The term &quot;economic man&quot; was used for the first time in the late nineteenth century by critics of John Stuart Mill&#x27;s work on political economy. Below is a passage from Mill&#x27;s work that critics referred to:

[Political economy] does not treat the whole of man&#x27;s nature as modified by the social state, nor of the whole conduct of man in society. It is concerned with him solely as a being who desires to possess wealth, and who is capable of judging the comparative efficacy of means for obtaining that end.

Later in the same work, Mill stated that he was proposing &quot;an arbitrary definition of man, as a being who inevitably does that by which he may obtain the greatest amount of necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries, with the smallest quantity of labour and physical self-denial with which they can be obtained.&quot;

Adam Smith, in &quot;The Theory of Moral Sentiments&quot;, had claimed that individuals have sympathy for the well-being of others. On the other hand, in &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, Smith wrote:

It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.

This comment is perfectly in line with the notion of &quot;Homo economicus&quot; and the idea, propounded by Smith in &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot; and, in the 20th century, by the likes of Ayn Rand (in &quot;The Virtue of Selfishness&quot;, for example), that pursuing one&#x27;s individual self-interest promotes social well-being. In Book V, Chapter I, Smith argues, &quot;The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations, of which the effects are perhaps always the same, or very nearly the same, has no occasion to exert his understanding or to exercise his invention in finding out expedients for removing difficulties which never occur. He naturally loses, therefore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become.&quot; This could be seen as prefiguring one part of Marx&#x27;s theory of alienation of labor; and also as a pro-worker argument against the division of labor and the restrictions it places upon freedom of occupation. But even so, taken in the context of the work as a whole, Smith clearly intends it in a pro-capitalism, pro-bourgeoisie, way: &quot;removing difficulties&quot;, such as reducing the time needed for travel and trade, through &quot;expedients&quot;, such as steam-engine ships, here means the typical argument that capitalism brings freedom of entrepreneurship and innovation, which then bring prosperity. Thus, Smith is not unreasonably called &quot;The Father of Capitalism&quot;; early on, he theorized many of today&#x27;s most widespread and deep-seated pro-capitalism arguments.

The early role of Homo Economicus within neoclassical theory was summarised to include a general objective of discovering laws and principles to accelerate further growth within the national economy and the welfare of ordinary citizens. These laws and principles were determined by two governing factors, natural and social. It had been found to be the foundation of neoclassical theory of the firm which assumed that individual agents would act rationally amongst other rational individuals. In which Adam Smith explains that the actions of those that are rational and self-interested under homo economicus promotes the general good overall which was understood as the efficient allocation of material wealth. However, social scientists had doubted the actual importance of income and wealth to overall happiness in societies. 

The term &#x27;Homo economicus&#x27; was initially critiqued for its portrayal of the economic agent as a narrowly defined, money-making animal, a characterization heavily influenced by the works of Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill. Authors from the English Historical School of Economics sought to demote this model from its broad classification under the &#x27;genus homo&#x27;, arguing that it insufficiently captured the complex ethical and behavioral dimensions of human decision-making. Their critique emphasized the need for a more nuanced understanding of human agency beyond the mere pursuit of economic rationality.

Economists in the late 19th century—such as Francis Edgeworth, William Stanley Jevons, Léon Walras, and Vilfredo Pareto—built mathematical models on these economic assumptions. In the 20th century, the rational choice theory of Lionel Robbins came to dominate mainstream economics. The term &quot;economic man&quot; then took on a more specific meaning: a person who acted rationally on complete knowledge out of self-interest and the desire for wealth.

== Model ==

&quot;Homo economicus&quot; is a term used for an approximation or model of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; that acts to obtain the highest possible well-being for themself given available information about opportunities and other constraints, both natural and institutional, on their ability to achieve their predetermined goals. This approach has been formalized in certain social sciences models, particularly in economics.

&quot;Homo economicus&quot; is usually seen as &quot;rational&quot; in the sense that well-being as defined by the utility function is optimized given perceived opportunities. That is, the individual seeks to attain very specific and predetermined goals to the greatest extent with the least possible cost. Note that this kind of &quot;rationality&quot; does not say that the individual&#x27;s actual goals are &quot;rational&quot; in some larger ethical, social, or human sense, only that they try to attain them at minimal cost. Only naïve applications of the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; model assume that this hypothetical individual knows what is best for their long-term physical and mental health and can be relied upon to always make the right decision for themself. See rational choice theory and rational expectations for further discussion; the article on rationality widens the discussion.

As in social science, these assumptions are at best approximations. The term is often used derogatorily in academic literature, perhaps most commonly by sociologists, many of whom tend to prefer structural explanations to ones based on rational action by individuals.

The use of the Latin form &quot;Homo economicus&quot; is certainly long established; Persky traces it back to Pareto (1906) but notes that it may be older. The English term &quot;economic man&quot; can be found even earlier, in John Kells Ingram&#x27;s &quot;A History of Political Economy&quot; (1888). The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary (O.E.D.)&quot; cites the use of &quot;Homo oeconomicus&quot; by C. S. Devas in his 1883 work &quot;The Groundwork of Economics&quot; in reference to Mill&#x27;s writings, as one of a number of phrases that imitate the scientific name for the human species:

According to the &quot;OED&quot;, the human genus name &quot;Homo&quot; is

Note that such forms should logically keep the capital for the &quot;genus&quot; name—&quot;i.e.,&quot; &quot;Homo economicus&quot; rather than &quot;homo economicus.&quot; Actual usage is inconsistent.

Amartya Sen has argued there are grave pitfalls in assuming that rationality is limited to selfish rationality. Economics should build into its assumptions the notion that people can give credible commitments to a course of conduct. He demonstrates the absurdity with the narrowness of the assumptions by some economists with the following example of two strangers meeting on a street.

== Criticisms ==
&quot;Homo economicus&quot; bases its choices on a consideration of its own personal &quot;utility function&quot;.

The system established by the concept of the homo economicus has become the basis for the concepts used in economics.&quot;Self-interest is the main motivation of human beings in their transactions&quot; is a theoretical structure in the concept of homo economicus. Over the years, economists have studied and discussed institutional economics, behavioural economics, political economy, economic anthropology and ecological economics. The economic man solution is considered to be inadequate and flawed.

===Economists===
Economists Thorstein Veblen, John Maynard Keynes, Herbert A. Simon, and many of the Austrian School criticise &quot;Homo economicus&quot; as an actor with too great an understanding of macroeconomics and economic forecasting in his decision making. They stress uncertainty and bounded rationality in the making of economic decisions, rather than relying on the rational man who is fully informed of all circumstances impinging on his decisions. They argue that perfect knowledge never exists, which means that all economic activity implies risk. Austrian economists rather prefer to use as a model tool the &quot;Homo agens&quot;.

Empirical studies by Amos Tversky questioned the assumption that investors are rational. In 1995, Tversky demonstrated the tendency of investors to make risk-averse choices in gains, and risk-seeking choices in losses. The investors appeared as very risk-averse for small losses but indifferent for a small chance of a very large loss. This violates economic rationality as usually understood. Further research on this subject, showing other deviations from conventionally defined economic rationality, is being done in the growing field of experimental or behavioral economics. Some of the broader issues involved in this criticism are studied in decision theory, of which rational choice theory is only a subset.

Behavioral economists Richard Thaler and Daniel Kahneman have criticized the notion of economic agents possessing stable and well-defined preferences that they consistently act upon in a self-interested manner. Using insights from psychological experiments found explanations for anomalies in economic decision-making that seemed to violate rational choice theory. Writing a column in the Journal of Economic Perspectives under the title &quot;Anomalies&quot;, Thaler wrote features on the many ways observed economic behavior in markets deviated from theory. One such anomaly was the endowment effect by which individual preferences are framed based on reference positions (Kahneman et al., 1990). In an experiment in which one group was given a mug and the other was asked how much they were willing to pay (WTP) for the mug, it was found that the price that those endowed with the mug where willingness to accept (WTA) greatly exceeded that of the WTP. This was seen as falsifying the Coase theorem in which for every person the WTA equals the WTP that is the basis of the efficient-market hypothesis. From this they argued the endowment effect acts on us by making it painful for us to give up the endowment. Kahneman also argued against the rational-agent model in which agents make decisions with all of the relevant context including weighing all possible future opportunities and risks. Evidence supports the claim that decisions are often made by &quot;narrow framing&quot; with investors making portfolio decisions in isolation from their entire portfolio (Nicholas Barberis et al., 2003). Shlomo Benartzi and Thaler found that investors also tended to use unreasonable time periods in evaluating their investments. 

In Kahneman-Tversky’s criticism of the Homo Economicus model, many mainstream economists had utilised deductive logic to further progress the Homo Economicus idea as opposed to Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in which they had applied inductive logic. Further findings of their experiments that opposed Homo Economicus had found that individuals will constantly adjust their choices according to changes in their income and market prices. Furthermore, Kahneman and Tversky had conducted experiments exploring prospect theory where results from several experiments concluded that individuals will generally put higher importance on avoiding loss over making a gain.
&quot;Homo economicus&quot; assumptions have been criticized not only by economists on the basis of logical arguments, but also on empirical grounds by cross-cultural comparison. Economic anthropologists such as Marshall Sahlins, Karl Polanyi, Marcel Mauss and Maurice Godelier have demonstrated that in traditional societies, choices people make regarding production and exchange of goods follow patterns of reciprocity which differ sharply from what the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; model postulates. Such systems have been termed gift economy rather than market economy. Criticisms of the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; model put forward from the standpoint of ethics usually refer to this traditional ethic of kinship-based reciprocity that held together traditional societies. Philosophers Amartya Sen and Axel Honneth are noted for their criticisms of the normative assumptions made by the self-interested utility function.

Swiss economist Bruno Frey, points to the excessive emphasis on extrinsic motivation (rewards and punishments from the social environment) as opposed to intrinsic motivation. For example, it is difficult if not impossible to understand how &quot;Homo economicus&quot; would be a hero in war or would get inherent pleasure from craftsmanship. Frey and others argue that too much emphasis on rewards and punishments can &quot;crowd out&quot; (discourage) intrinsic motivation: paying a boy for doing household tasks may push him from doing those tasks &quot;to help the family&quot; to doing them simply for the reward.

===Sociologists===

Another weakness is highlighted by economic sociologists, who argue that &quot;Homo economicus&quot; ignores an extremely important question, i.e. the origins of tastes and the parameters of the utility function by social influences, training, education, and the like. The exogeneity of tastes (preferences) in this model is the major distinction from &quot;Homo sociologicus,&quot; in which tastes are taken as partially or even totally determined by the societal environment. Comparisons between economics and sociology have resulted in a corresponding term &quot;Homo sociologicus&quot;, introduced by German sociologist Ralf Dahrendorf in 1958, to parody the image of human nature given in some sociological models that attempt to limit the social forces that determine individual tastes and social values. (The alternative or additional source of these would be biology.) Hirsch &quot;et al.&quot; say that &quot;Homo sociologicus&quot; is largely a &quot;tabula rasa&quot; upon which societies and cultures write values and goals; unlike &quot;economicus&quot;, &quot;sociologicus&quot; acts not to pursue selfish interests but to fulfill social roles (though the fulfillment of social roles may have a selfish rationale—e.g. politicians or socialites). This &quot;individual&quot; may appear to be all society and no individual.

The as of 2015 emerging science of &quot;neuroeconomics&quot; suggests that there are serious shortcomings in the conventional theories of economic rationality. Rational economic decision making has been shown to produce high levels of cortisol, epinephrine and corticosteroids, associated with elevated levels of stress. It seems that the dopaminic system is only activated upon achieving the reward, and otherwise the &quot;pain&quot; receptors, particularly in the prefrontal cortex of the left hemisphere of the brain show a high level of activation. Serotonin and oxytocin levels are minimised, and the general immune system shows a level of suppression. Such a pattern is associated with a generalised reduction in the levels of trust. Unsolicited &quot;gift giving&quot;, considered irrational from the point of view of &quot;Homo economicus&quot;, by comparison, shows an elevated stimulation of the pleasure circuits of the whole brain, reduction in the levels of stress, optimal functioning of the immune system, reduction in cortico-steroids and epinephrine and cortisol, activation of the substantia nigra, the striatum and the nucleus accumbens (associated with the placebo effect), all associated with the building of social trust. Mirror neurons result in a win-win positive sum game in which the person giving the gift receives a pleasure equivalent to the person receiving it. This confirms the findings of anthropology which suggest that a &quot;gift economy&quot; preceded the more recent market systems where win-lose or risk-avoidance lose-lose calculations apply.

===Psychologists and anthropologists===
Critics, learning from the broadly defined psychoanalytic tradition, criticize the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; model as ignoring the inner conflicts that real-world individuals suffer, as between short-term and long-term goals (&quot;e.g.,&quot; eating chocolate cake and losing weight) or between individual goals and societal values. Such conflicts may lead to &quot;irrational&quot; behavior involving inconsistency, psychological paralysis, neurosis, and psychic pain. Further irrational human behaviour can occur as a result of habit, laziness, mimicry and simple obedience.
According to Sergio Caruso, one should distinguish between the purely &quot;methodological&quot; version of &quot;Homo economicus&quot;, aimed at practical use in the economic sphere (e.g. economic calculus), and the&quot; anthropological&quot; version, aimed at depicting a certain type of man, or even human nature in general. The former has proved unrealistic, liable to be corrected resorting to economic psychology. Depicting different types of &quot;economic man&quot; (each depending on the social context) is possible with the help of cultural anthropology, and social psychology if only those types are contrived as socially and/or historically determined abstractions (such as Weber&#x27;s, Korsch&#x27;s, and Fromm&#x27;s concepts of &quot;Idealtypus&quot;, &quot;historical specification&quot;, and &quot;social character&quot;). Marxist theoretician Gramsci admitted of the &quot;Homo economicus&quot; as a useful abstraction on the ground of economic theory, provided that we grant there be as many &quot;homines oeconomici&quot; as the modes of production. However the concept of &quot;Homo economicus&quot; puts aside all other aspects of human nature (such as &quot;Homo faber&quot;, &quot;Homo loquens&quot;, &quot;Homo ludens&quot;, &quot;Homo reciprocans&quot;, and so on).

== Response to criticism ==
In advanced-level theoretical economics, scholars have modifyied models enough to more realistically depict real-life decision-making. For example, models of individual behavior under bounded rationality and of people suffering from envy can be found in the literature.

== See also ==
== Notes ==

== References ==
* J.S. Mill, &#x27;On the Definition of Political Economy, and on the Method of Investigation Proper to It&#x27; (1836) London and Westminster Review
* J.S. Mill, &quot;Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy&quot; (2nd ed. Longmans, Green, Reader &amp; Dyer 1874) (read online )
* A.K. Sen, ‘Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioural Foundations of Economic Theory’ (1977) 6 Philosophy and Public Affairs 317
== External links ==
*Self-Interest, Homo Islamicus and Some Behavioral Assumptions in Islamic Economics and Finance (DOC) by Dr. Mohammad Omar Farooq
* Requiem for Homo Economicus Edward J. O&#x27;Boyle, Mayo Research Institute, a refutation of reductionism in free will using tenets of natural law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1164073" start="29" end="41" title="Homo economicus" label="economic man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="73" end="79" title="Agency (philosophy)" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="101" end="109" title="Rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621223" start="123" end="138" title="Rational egoism" label="self-interested"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335500" start="187" end="196" title="Optimal decision" label="optimally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="224" end="236" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="257" end="274" title="economic theories" label="economic theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="282" end="290" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="296" end="307" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164073" start="403" end="422" title="Homo economicus" label="perfect rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274096" start="472" end="488" title="Utility maximization problem" label="maximize utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="494" end="502" title="Consumption (economics)" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="507" end="513" title="economic profit" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="519" end="527" title="Production (economics)" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119351" start="1237" end="1253" title="Homo reciprocans" label="Homo reciprocans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1284" end="1295" title="Cooperation#In humans" label="cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q647525" start="1360" end="1380" title="behavioral economics" label="behavioral economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="1397" end="1413" title="cognitive biases" label="cognitive biases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412340" start="1424" end="1439" title="irrationalities" label="irrationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="1448" end="1467" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="1717" end="1733" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="2463" end="2473" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438448" start="2484" end="2514" title="The Theory of Moral Sentiments" label="The Theory of Moral Sentiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="2623" end="2644" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417770" start="3688" end="3720" title="Marx&amp;#x27;s theory of alienation" label="Marx&amp;#x27;s theory of alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378581" start="5517" end="5555" title="English historical school of economics" label="English Historical School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q355607" start="5938" end="5955" title="Francis Edgeworth" label="Francis Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q312546" start="5957" end="5979" title="William Stanley Jevons" label="William Stanley Jevons"/>
<link wikidata="Q13509" start="5981" end="5992" title="Léon Walras" label="Léon Walras"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="5998" end="6013" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Vilfredo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139524" start="6096" end="6118" title="rational choice theory" label="rational choice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q335199" start="6122" end="6136" title="Lionel Robbins" label="Lionel Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180497" start="6429" end="6434" title="Economic model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="6444" end="6456" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="6616" end="6627" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="6731" end="6746" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="6771" end="6780" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="6898" end="6914" title="utility function" label="utility function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139524" start="7561" end="7583" title="rational choice theory" label="rational choice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q853949" start="7588" end="7609" title="rational expectations" label="rational expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="7649" end="7660" title="rationality" label="rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="7838" end="7850" title="sociology" label="sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="8064" end="8070" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q972178" start="8182" end="8199" title="John Kells Ingram" label="John Kells Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="8268" end="8293" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082641" start="8358" end="8369" title="Charles Stanton Devas" label="C. S. Devas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="8575" end="8578" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="OED"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="8832" end="8843" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049066" start="9765" end="9785" title="ecological economics" label="ecological economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q73646" start="9885" end="9901" title="Thorstein Veblen" label="Thorstein Veblen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="9903" end="9922" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="9924" end="9940" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Herbert A. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="9958" end="9973" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="10135" end="10146" title="uncertainty" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="10151" end="10170" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10487" end="10497" title="Homo agens" label="Homo agens"/>
<link wikidata="Q474333" start="10527" end="10539" title="Amos Tversky" label="Amos Tversky"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="10571" end="10579" title="investor" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q647525" start="11063" end="11083" title="behavioral economics" label="behavioral economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="11154" end="11169" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139524" start="11180" end="11202" title="rational choice theory" label="rational choice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q371212" start="11244" end="11258" title="Richard Thaler" label="Richard Thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q233950" start="11263" end="11278" title="Daniel Kahneman" label="Daniel Kahneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415187" start="11309" end="11323" title="economic agent" label="economic agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q140813" start="12016" end="12030" title="willingness to pay" label="willing to pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050037" start="12210" end="12223" title="Coase theorem" label="Coase theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q724931" start="12298" end="12325" title="efficient-market hypothesis" label="efficient-market hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23662139" start="12822" end="12837" title="Shlomo Benartzi" label="Shlomo Benartzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q345300" start="13828" end="13844" title="Marshall Sahlins" label="Marshall Sahlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q318029" start="13846" end="13858" title="Karl Polanyi" label="Karl Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q295393" start="13860" end="13872" title="Marcel Mauss" label="Marcel Mauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q960473" start="13877" end="13893" title="Maurice Godelier" label="Maurice Godelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264987" start="14025" end="14036" title="reciprocity (cultural anthropology)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="14148" end="14160" title="gift economy" label="gift economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="14407" end="14418" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735" start="14423" end="14435" title="Axel Honneth" label="Axel Honneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064031" start="14474" end="14495" title="The Idea of Justice" label="normative assumptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q124970" start="14559" end="14569" title="Bruno Frey" label="Bruno Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="14607" end="14627" title="extrinsic motivation" label="extrinsic motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="14696" end="14716" title="intrinsic motivation" label="intrinsic motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="14870" end="14883" title="artisan" label="craftsmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164073" start="15540" end="15557" title="Homo sociologicus" label="Homo sociologicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76959" start="15806" end="15821" title="Ralf Dahrendorf" label="Ralf Dahrendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q223802" start="16143" end="16154" title="tabula rasa" label="tabula rasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="16429" end="16438" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045712" start="16560" end="16574" title="neuroeconomics" label="neuroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="16755" end="16763" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="16765" end="16776" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="16781" end="16795" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="16987" end="17004" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="17074" end="17083" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="17088" end="17096" title="oxytocin" label="oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="17620" end="17636" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319792" start="17642" end="17650" title="striatum" label="striatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="17659" end="17676" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="17698" end="17712" title="placebo effect" label="placebo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="17765" end="17778" title="Mirror neuron" label="Mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432170" start="17792" end="17799" title="win-win" label="win-win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432170" start="17800" end="17817" title="positive sum game" label="positive sum game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="17983" end="17995" title="gift economy" label="gift economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="18189" end="18203" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647525" start="19126" end="19145" title="economic psychology" label="economic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="19269" end="19290" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="19296" end="19313" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="19413" end="19425" title="Max Weber" label="Weber&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q60208" start="19427" end="19440" title="Karl Korsch" label="Korsch&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="19446" end="19458" title="Erich Fromm" label="Fromm&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="19589" end="19596" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="20233" end="20252" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188739" start="20282" end="20286" title="envy" label="envy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="20367" end="20376" title="J.S. Mill" label="J.S. Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="20663" end="20671" title="Amartya Sen" label="A.K. Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="21057" end="21066" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="21083" end="21094" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83045" wikidata="Q191715" url="?curid=83045" title="WarnerMedia">
<text>Warner Media, LLC (doing business as WarnerMedia) was an American multinational mass media and entertainment conglomerate owned by AT&amp;T. It was headquartered at the 30 Hudson Yards complex in New York City.

It was established as Time Warner in 1990 and was known by that name for most of its history, following a merger between Time Inc. and Warner Communications. The company had film, television and cable operations. Its assets included WarnerMedia Studios &amp; Networks (which consisted of the entertainment assets of Turner Broadcasting, HBO, and Cinemax as well as Warner Bros., which itself consisted of the film, animation, television studios, the company&#x27;s home entertainment division and Studio Distribution Services, its joint venture with Universal Pictures Home Entertainment, DC Comics, New Line Cinema, and, together with CBS Entertainment Group, a 50% interest in The CW); WarnerMedia News &amp; Sports (consisted of the news and sports assets of Turner Broadcasting, including CNN, Turner Sports, and AT&amp;T SportsNet); WarnerMedia Sales &amp; Distribution (consisted of digital media company Otter Media); and WarnerMedia Direct (consisted of the HBO Max streaming service).
Despite spinning off Time Inc. in 2014, the company retained the Time Warner name until 2018, when the company was renamed WarnerMedia after it was acquired by AT&amp;T. On October 22, 2016, AT&amp;T officially announced that they intended on acquiring Time Warner for $85.4 billion (or $108.7 billion when including assumed Time Warner debt), valuing the company at $107.50 per share. The proposed merger was confirmed on June 12, 2018, after AT&amp;T won an antitrust lawsuit that the U.S. Justice Department filed in 2017 to attempt to block the acquisition, and was completed two days later, when the company became a subsidiary of AT&amp;T. The company&#x27;s final name was adopted a day later. Under AT&amp;T, the company moved to launch a streaming service built around the company&#x27;s content, known as HBO Max. WarnerMedia refolded Turner&#x27;s entertainment-based networks under a singular umbrella unit on August 10, 2020, through a consolidation of the WarnerMedia Entertainment and Warner Bros. Entertainment assets into a new unit, WarnerMedia Studios &amp; Networks Group. On May 17, 2021, nearly three years after the acquisition, AT&amp;T decided to leave the entertainment business by announcing that it had proposed to sell its ownership of WarnerMedia in a merger with Discovery, Inc. to form a new publicly traded company, Warner Bros. Discovery. The deal closed on April 8, 2022.

The company&#x27;s previous assets included Time Inc., TW Telecom, AOL, Time Warner Cable, AOL Time Warner Book Group, and Warner Music Group; these operations were either sold to others or spun off as independent companies. As of 2024, the company is ranked No. 130 in the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 list of the largest U.S. corporations by total revenue.

== Background ==
=== Warner Communications (1972–1990) ===
On February 10, 1972, the entertainment assets of the Kinney National Company were reincorporated as Warner Communications due to a financial scandal involving price fixing in its parking operations. Warner Communications served as the parent company for Warner Bros. Pictures, the Warner Music Group (WMG), Warner Books and Warner Cable during the 1970s and 1980s. It also owned DC Comics and &quot;Mad&quot; magazine. The European publishing division, which produced magazines and comics, was known as Williams Publishing; thanks to a prior acquisition (from Gilberton World-Wide Publications), it had European-language branches in the United Kingdom, Denmark, Finland, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. Most of these publishers were sold off around 1979.

During its time as Warner Communications, the company made several further acquisitions. In 1979, Warner formed a joint venture with credit card company American Express called Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment. This company owned such cable channels as MTV, Nickelodeon, The Movie Channel, and VH1 (which was launched in 1985 on the channel space left by Turner&#x27;s Cable Music Channel). Warner bought out American Express&#x27;s half in 1984 and sold the venture a year later to the original iteration of Viacom, which renamed it MTV Networks (now known as Paramount Media Networks). In 1982, Warner purchased Popular Library from CBS Publications.

==== Financial issues and corporate transition ====
By the mid to late 1980s, Warner began to face financial difficulties. From 1976 to 1984, Warner Communications owned Atari, Inc., but suffered substantial losses due to the video game crash of 1983, and spun them off in 1984. Taking advantage of Warner Communications&#x27; financial situation, Time Inc. announced on March 4, 1989, that the two companies were to merge.

During the summer of 1989, Paramount Communications (then Gulf+Western) launched a $12.2 billion hostile bid to acquire Time Inc. in an attempt to end a stock-swap merger deal between Time Inc. and Warner Communications. Time Inc. raised its bid to $14.9 billion in cash and stock. Paramount responded by filing a lawsuit in a Delaware court to block the Time Warner merger. The court ruled twice in favor of Time Inc., forcing Paramount to drop both the Time Inc. acquisition and the lawsuit, and allowing the two companies to merge, which was completed on January 10, 1990.

== History ==

=== Time Warner (1990–1992) and Time Warner Entertainment (1992–2001) ===
US West partnered with Time Warner Entertainment in 1993 to form what was later known as TW Telecom, initially known as Time Warner Communications (also utilized as the brand name for cable operation previously under the ATC name), in order to bring telephone via fiber to the masses. US West also took a 26% stake in the entertainment portion of the company, calling that division Time Warner Entertainment. US West&#x27;s stake eventually passed to acquired cable company MediaOne, then to AT&amp;T Broadband in 1999 when that company acquired MediaOne, then finally to Comcast in 2001 when that company bought the AT&amp;T Broadband division. Comcast sold their stake in the company in 2003, relegating the name to a subdivision under Time Warner Cable.

On October 10, 1996, Time Warner Entertainment acquired Turner Broadcasting System, which was established by Ted Turner in 1965. Not only did this result in the company re-entering the cable television industry as a national programmer, but Warner Bros. also regained the rights to their pre-1950 film library, which by then had been owned by Turner (the films are still technically held by Turner, but Warner Bros. is responsible for sales and distribution), while Turner gained access to Warner Bros.&#x27; post-1950 library, as well as other Warner Bros.-owned properties. The Turner deal also brought two separate film companies, New Line Cinema and Castle Rock Entertainment, both of which were integrated into Warner Bros. The Turner deal also gave Time Warner Entertainment access to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM)&#x27;s pre-May 1986 library.

Time Warner Entertainment completed its purchase of Six Flags Theme Parks in 1993 after buying half of the company in 1991, saving it from financial trouble. The company was later sold to Oklahoma-based theme park operator Premier Parks under certain terms and conditions on April 1, 1998.

Dick Parsons, already a director on the board since 1991, was hired as Time Warner Entertainment president in 1995, although the division operational heads continued to report directly to chairman and CEO Gerald Levin.

In 1991, HBO and Cinemax became the first premium pay services to offer multiplexing to cable customers, with companion channels supplementing the main networks. In 1993, HBO became the world&#x27;s first digitally transmitted television service. In 1995, CNN introduced CNN.com which later became a leading destination for global digital news, both online and mobile. In 1996, Warner Bros. spearheaded the introduction of the DVD, which gradually replaced VHS tapes as the standard format for home video in the late 1990s and early to mid-2000s. In 1999, HBO became the first national cable television network to broadcast a high–definition version of its channel.

=== AOL Time Warner (2001–2003) ===
In January 2000, America Online (AOL) stated its intentions to purchase Time Warner Entertainment for $183 billion. Due to the larger market capitalization of AOL, their shareholders would own 55% of the new company while Time Warner Entertainment shareholders owned only 45%, so in actual practice AOL had merged with Time Warner Entertainment, even though Time Warner Entertainment had far more assets and revenues. Time Warner Entertainment had been looking for a way to embrace the digital revolution, while AOL wanted to anchor its stock price with more tangible assets.

The deal, officially filed on February 11, 2000, employed a merger structure in which each original company merged into a newly created entity. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) cleared the deal on December 14, 2000, and gave final approval on January 11, 2001; the company completed the merger later that day. The deal was approved on the same day by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and had already been cleared by the European Commission (EC) on October 11, 2000.

AOL Time Warner Inc., as the company was then called, was supposed to be a merger of equals with top executives from both sides. Gerald Levin, who had served as chairman and CEO of Time Warner Entertainment, was CEO of the new company. AOL co-founder Steve Case served as Executive Chairman of the board of directors, Robert W. Pittman (president and COO of AOL) and Dick Parsons (president of Time Warner) served as Co-Chief Operating Officers, and J. Michael Kelly (the CFO from AOL) became the chief financial officer.

According to AOL President and COO Bob Pittman, the slow-moving Time Warner Entertainment would now take off at Internet speed, accelerated by AOL: &quot;All you need to do is put a catalyst to [Time Warner Entertainment], and in a short period, you can alter the growth rate. The growth rate will be like an Internet company.&quot; The vision for Time Warner Entertainment&#x27;s future seemed clear and straightforward; by tapping into AOL, Time Warner Entertainment would reach deep into the homes of tens of millions of new customers. AOL would use Time Warner Entertainment&#x27;s high-speed cable lines to deliver to its subscribers Time Warner Entertainment&#x27;s branded magazines, books, music, and movies. This would have created 130 million subscription relationships.

However, the growth and profitability of the AOL division stalled due to advertising and loss of market share to the growth of high-speed broadband providers. The value of the AOL division dropped significantly, not unlike the market valuation of similar independent internet companies that drastically fell, and forced a goodwill write-off, causing AOL Time Warner to report a loss of $99 billion in 2002 — at the time, the largest loss ever reported by a company. The total value of AOL stock subsequently went from $226 billion to about $20 billion.

An outburst by Vice-Chairman Ted Turner at a board meeting prompted Steve Case to contact each of the directors and push for CEO Gerald Levin&#x27;s ouster. Although Case&#x27;s coup attempt was rebuffed by Parsons and several other directors, Levin became frustrated with being unable to &quot;regain the rhythm&quot; at the combined company and handed in his resignation in the fall of 2001, effective in May 2002. Although Co-COO Bob Pittman was the strongest supporter of Levin and largely seen as the heir-apparent, Dick Parsons was instead chosen as CEO. Time Warner Entertainment CFO J. Michael Kelly was demoted to COO of the AOL division and replaced as CFO by Wayne Pace. AOL Chairman and CEO Barry Schuler was removed from his position and placed in charge of a new &quot;content creation division&quot;, being replaced on an interim basis by Pittman, who was already serving as the sole COO after Parsons&#x27; promotion.

Many of the expected synergies between AOL and other Time Warner Entertainment divisions never materialized, as most Time Warner Entertainment divisions were considered independent fiefs that rarely cooperated prior to the merger. A new incentive program that granted options based on the performance of AOL Time Warner, replacing the cash bonuses for the results of their own division, caused resentment among Time Warner Entertainment division heads who blamed the AOL division for failing to meet expectations and dragging down the combined company. AOL Time Warner COO Pittman, who expected to have the divisions working closely towards convergence instead found heavy resistance from many division executives, who also criticized Pittman for adhering to optimistic growth targets for AOL Time Warner that were never met. Some of the attacks on Pittman were reported to come from the print media in the Time, Inc. division under Don Logan. Furthermore, CEO Parsons&#x27; democratic style prevented Pittman from exercising authority over the &quot;old-guard&quot; division heads who resisted Pittman&#x27;s synergy initiatives.

Pittman resigned as AOL Time Warner COO after July 4, 2002, being reportedly burned out by the AOL special assignment and almost hospitalized, unhappy about the criticism from Time Warner executives, and seeing nowhere to move up in firm as Parsons was firmly entrenched as CEO. Pittman&#x27;s departure was seen as a great victory to Time Warner executives who wanted to undo the merger. In a sign of AOL&#x27;s diminishing importance to the media conglomerate, Pittman&#x27;s responsibilities were divided between two Time Warner Entertainment veterans; Jeffrey Bewkes who was CEO of Home Box Office, and Don Logan who had been CEO of Time. Logan became chairman of the newly created media and communications group, overseeing America Online, Time, Time Warner Cable, the AOL Time Warner Book Group, and the Interactive Video unit, relegating AOL to being just another division in the conglomerate. Bewkes became chairman of the entertainment and networks group, comprising HBO, Cinemax, New Line Cinema, The WB, TNT, Turner Networks, Warner Bros., and Warner Music Group. Both Logan and Bewkes, who had initially opposed the merger, were chosen because they were considered the most successful operational executives in the conglomerate and they would report to AOL Time Warner CEO Richard Parsons. Logan, generally admired at Time Warner Entertainment and reviled by AOL for being a corporate timeserver who stressed incremental steady growth and not much of a risk-taker, moved to purge AOL of Pittman allies.

=== Time Warner (2003–2018) ===

AOL Time Warner Chairman Steve Case took on added prominence as the co-head of a new strategy committee of the board, making speeches to divisions on synergism and the promise of the Internet. However, under pressure from institutional investor vice-president Gordon Crawford who lined up dissenters, Case stated in January 2003 that he would not stand for re-election as executive chairman in the upcoming annual meeting, making CEO Richard Parsons the chairman-elect. In July 2003, the company dropped the &quot;AOL&quot; from its name, and spun off Time-Life&#x27;s ownership under the legal name Direct Holdings Americas, Inc. On November 24, 2003, Time Warner announced they would sell the Warner Music Group, which hosted a variety of acts such as Madonna and Prince, to an investor group led by Edgar Bronfman Jr. and Thomas H. Lee Partners, in order to cut its debt down to US $20 billion. Case resigned from the Time Warner board on October 31, 2005. Jeff Bewkes, who eventually became CEO of Time Warner in 2008, described the 2001 merger with AOL as &#x27;the biggest mistake in corporate history&#x27;.

In 2005, Time Warner was among 53 entities that contributed the maximum of $250,000 to the second inauguration of President George W. Bush. On December 27, 2007, newly installed Time Warner CEO Jeffrey Bewkes discussed possible plans to spin off Time Warner Cable and sell off AOL and Time Inc. This would leave a smaller company made up of Turner Broadcasting, Warner Bros. and HBO. On February 28, 2008, co-chairmen and co-CEOs of New Line Cinema Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne resigned from the 40-year-old movie studio in response to Jeffrey Bewkes&#x27; demand for cost-cutting measures at the studio, which he intended to dissolve into Warner Bros.

In 2009, Time Warner spun out its Time Warner Cable division (it is now part of Charter Communications), and later AOL, as independent companies; AOL was later purchased by Verizon in 2015.

In the first quarter of 2010, Time Warner purchased additional interests in HBO Latin America Group for $217 million, which resulted HBO owning 80% of the equity interests of HBO LAG. In 2010, HBO purchased the remainder of its partners&#x27; interests in HBO Europe (formerly HBO Central Europe) for $136 million, net of cash acquired. In August 2010, Time Warner agreed to acquire Shed Media, a television production company, for £100 million. Its distribution operation, Outright Distribution, was folded into Warner Bros. International Television Production. On August 26, 2010, Time Warner acquired Chilevisión. WarnerMedia already operated in the country with CNN Chile.

In May 2011, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment Group acquired Flixster, a movie discovery application company. The acquisition also includes Rotten Tomatoes, a movie review aggregator.

In June 2012, Time Warner acquired Alloy Entertainment, a publisher and television studio whose works are aimed at teen girls and young women. On August 6, 2012, Time Warner acquired Bleacher Report, a sports news website. The property was placed under the control of the Turner Sports division.

On March 6, 2013, Time Warner intended to spin off its publishing division Time Inc. as a separate, publicly traded company. The transaction was completed on June 6, 2014.

In January 2014, Time Warner, Related Companies, and Oxford Properties Group announced that the then Time Warner intended to relocate the company&#x27;s corporate headquarters and its New York City-based employees to 30 Hudson Yards in the Hudson Yards neighborhood in Chelsea, Manhattan, and has accordingly made an initial financial commitment. Time Warner sold its stake in the Columbus Circle building for $1.3 billion to Related and two wealth funds. The move would be completed in 2019.

In June 2014, Rupert Murdoch made a bid for Time Warner at $85 per share in stock and cash ($80 billion total) which Time Warner&#x27;s board of directors turned down in July. Time Warner&#x27;s CNN unit would have been sold to ease antitrust issues of the purchase. On August 5, 2014, Murdoch withdrew his offer to purchase Time Warner.

=== AT&amp;T acquisition; as WarnerMedia (2018–2021) ===

On October 20, 2016, it was reported that AT&amp;T was in talks to acquire Time Warner. The proposed deal would give AT&amp;T significant holdings in the media industry. AT&amp;T&#x27;s competitor Comcast had previously acquired NBCUniversal in a similar bid to increase its media holdings, in concert with its ownership of television and internet providers. On October 22, 2016, AT&amp;T reached a deal to buy Time Warner for $85.4 billion. The merger would bring Time Warner&#x27;s properties under the same umbrella as AT&amp;T&#x27;s telecommunication holdings, including satellite provider DirecTV. The deal faced criticism for the possibility that AT&amp;T could use Time Warner content as leverage to discriminate against or limit access to the content by competing providers.

On February 15, 2017, Time Warner shareholders approved the merger. On February 28, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) chairman Ajit Pai refused to review the deal, leaving the review to the Department of Justice (DOJ). On March 15, 2017, the merger was approved by the European Commission (EC). On August 22, 2017, the merger was approved by the Mexican Comisión Federal de Competencia. On September 5, 2017, the merger was approved by the Chilean Fiscalía Nacional Económica.

In the wake of the U.S. presidency of Donald Trump, Time Warner&#x27;s ownership of CNN was considered a potential source of scrutiny for the deal, as Trump had repeatedly criticized the network for how it covered his administration, and stated during his campaign that he planned to block the acquisition because of the potential impact of the resulting consolidation. Following his election, however, his transition team stated that the government planned to evaluate the deal without prejudice.

On November 8, 2017, reports of a meeting between AT&amp;T CEO Randall L. Stephenson and Makan Delrahim, assistant Attorney General of the Department of Justice&#x27;s Antitrust Division, indicated that AT&amp;T had been recommended to divest DirecTV or Turner Broadcasting, seek alternative antitrust remedies, or abandon the acquisition. Some news outlets reported that AT&amp;T had been ordered to specifically divest CNN, but these claims were denied by both Stephenson and a government official the following day, with the latter criticizing the reports as being an effort to politicize the deal. Stephenson also disputed the relevance of CNN to the antitrust concerns surrounding the acquisition, as AT&amp;T did not already own a national news channel.

On November 20, 2017, the Department of Justice filed an antitrust lawsuit over the acquisition; Delrahim stated that the deal would &quot;greatly harm American consumers&quot;. AT&amp;T asserted that this suit was a &quot;radical and inexplicable departure from decades of antitrust precedent&quot;. On December 22, 2017, the merger agreement deadline was extended to June 21, 2018, under a vote of confidence.

On June 12, 2018, District Judge Richard J. Leon ruled in favor of AT&amp;T, thus allowing the acquisition to go ahead with no conditions or remedies. Leon argued that the Department of Justice provided insufficient evidence that the proposed transaction would result in lessened competition. He also warned the government that attempting to obtain an appeal or stay on the ruling would be manifest unjust, as it would cause &quot;certain irreparable harm to the defendants&quot;.

On June 14, 2018, AT&amp;T announced that it had closed the acquisition of Time Warner. Jeff Bewkes stepped down as CEO of Time Warner while retaining ties with the company as senior advisor of AT&amp;T. John Stankey, who headed the AT&amp;T/Time Warner integration team, took over as CEO. On the next day, AT&amp;T renamed the company as WarnerMedia (legally Warner Media, LLC).
On July 12, 2018, the Department of Justice filed a notice of appeal with the D.C. Circuit to reverse the District Court&#x27;s approval. Although the Department of Justice reportedly contemplated requesting an injunction to stop the deal from closing after the District Court&#x27;s ruling, the department ultimately did not file the motion because WarnerMedia&#x27;s operation as a separate group from the rest of AT&amp;T would make the business relatively easy to unwind should the appeal be successful. The next day, however, AT&amp;T CEO Randall Stephenson told CNBC that the appeal would not affect its plans to integrate WarnerMedia into AT&amp;T, or services already launched. In a brief filed by the Justice Department, it was argued that the decision to approve the acquisition ran &quot;contrary to fundamental economic logic and the evidence&quot;.

On August 7, 2018, AT&amp;T acquired the remaining controlling stake in Otter Media from the Chernin Group for an undisclosed amount. The company operated as a division of WarnerMedia.

On August 29, 2018, Makan Delrahim told Recode that if the government were to win the appeal, AT&amp;T would only sell Turner and if they lost the appeal then the February 2019 expiration of a consent decree AT&amp;T reached with the Justice Department shortly before the deal closed would allow AT&amp;T to do what they want with Turner. The appeal was expected to have zero impact on the integration. By September 2018, nine state Attorneys General sided with AT&amp;T on the case.

On October 10, 2018, WarnerMedia announced that it would launch an over-the-top streaming service in late 2019, featuring content from its entertainment brands. On December 14, 2018, Kevin Reilly, president of TNT and TBS, was promoted to chief content officer of all WarnerMedia digital and subscription activities, including HBO Max, reporting to both Turner&#x27;s president David Levy and WarnerMedia&#x27;s CEO John Stankey. The U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington D.C. unanimously upheld the lower court&#x27;s ruling in favor of AT&amp;T on February 26, 2019, stating it did not believe the merger with Time Warner would have a negative impact on either consumers or competition. The Justice Department declined to appeal the decision further, thus allowing the consent decree to expire.

On March 4, 2019, AT&amp;T announced a major reorganization of its broadcasting assets to effectively break-up the Turner Broadcasting System. Its assets were dispersed across two new camps, WarnerMedia Entertainment and WarnerMedia News &amp; Sports. WarnerMedia Entertainment would consist of HBO, TBS, TNT, TruTV, and the direct-to-consumer video service HBO Max. WarnerMedia News &amp; Sports would have CNN Worldwide, Turner Sports (later known briefly as Warner Bros. Discovery Sports, and TNT Sports from 2023), and the AT&amp;T SportsNet regional networks led by CNN president Jeff Zucker. Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Boomerang, their respective production studios, as well as Turner Classic Movies and Otter Media would be moved directly under Warner Bros. Gerhard Zeiler moved from being president of Turner International to chief revenue officer of WarnerMedia, and would oversee the consolidated advertising and affiliation sales. David Levy and HBO chief Richard Plepler stepped down as part of the reorganization, which was described by &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; as being intended to end &quot;fiefdoms&quot;. Turner Podcast Network, formed within Turner Content Distribution in 2017, became WarnerMedia Podcast Network by May 2019.

In May 2019, Kevin Reilly signed a four-year extension of his contract with the company, which additionally made him president of TruTV (alongside the other three WarnerMedia Entertainment basic cable networks), and chief content officer of direct-to-consumer for the new streaming service. On May 31, 2019, Otter Media was transferred from Warner Bros. to WarnerMedia Entertainment, and Otter&#x27;s COO Andy Forssell became the executive vice president and general manager of the streaming service, while still reporting to Otter CEO Tony Goncalves — who would lead development. On July 9, 2019, it was announced that the new streaming service would be known as HBO Max, which was launched on May 27, 2020.

In September 2019, Stankey was promoted to AT&amp;T president and chief operating officer. By April 1, 2020, former Hulu chief Jason Kilar took over as WarnerMedia CEO.

In August 2020, the company had a significant restructuring laying off around 800 employees including around 600 from Warner and 150+ from HBO. At WarnerMedia&#x27;s Atlanta base, marketing and cable operations teams were particularly affected.

On August 10, 2020, WarnerMedia restructured several of its units in a major corporate revamp that resulted in TBS, TNT and TruTV being brought back under the same umbrella as Cartoon Network/Adult Swim, Boomerang and TCM, under a consolidation of WarnerMedia Entertainment and Warner Bros. Entertainment&#x27;s respective assets that formed the combined WarnerMedia Studios &amp; Networks Group unit. Casey Bloys—who has been with WarnerMedia since 2004 (as director of development at HBO Independent Productions), and was eventually elevated to President of Programming at HBO and Cinemax in May 2016—added oversight of WarnerMedia&#x27;s basic cable networks and HBO Max to his purview. In October 2020, it was announced that the company was planning to execute over a 1,000 job cuts in order to reduce costs. WarnerMedia plans to reduce costs by at least 20% in order to deal with the profit shortage caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

As a result of planned cost cutting programs, the sale of Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment was proposed, but ultimately abandoned due to COVID-19 related growth in the Gaming industry, as well as a positive reception to upcoming DC Comics, Lego &quot;Star Wars,&quot; and &quot;Harry Potter&quot; titles from fans and critics.

Crunchyroll was sold to Sony&#x27;s Funimation for in December 2020, with the acquisition closing in August 2021.

On December 21, 2020, WarnerMedia acquired You.i TV, an Ottawa, Ontario-based developer of tools for building cross-platform video streaming apps. The company&#x27;s products have been the basis of various WarnerMedia streaming platforms, including AT&amp;T TV Now and the Turner channels&#x27; apps, and would be used as part of international expansion of HBO Max.

=== Spin-off from AT&amp;T and merger with Discovery, Inc. (2021–2022) ===

On May 16, 2021, it was reported that AT&amp;T was in talks with Discovery, Inc.—which primarily operated television channels and platforms devoted to non-fiction and unscripted content—for it to merge with WarnerMedia, forming a publicly traded company that would be divided between its shareholders. The proposed spin-off and merger was officially announced the next day, which is to be structured as a Reverse Morris Trust. AT&amp;T shareholders would receive a 71% stake in the merged company, which is expected to be led by Discovery&#x27;s current CEO David Zaslav.

Electronic Arts, who were a bidder in the proposed sale of Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment, purchased the mobile gaming studio Playdemic from WBIE for in June 2021.

In September 2021, WarnerMedia sold TMZ to Fox Corporation in a deal worth about $50 million, with TMZ being operated under the Fox Entertainment division.

In November 2021, Discovery and WarnerMedia discussed a plan to combine the two streaming services, HBO Max and Discovery+, into one streaming service in two phases: an initial phase that allows for quick bundling of the services and a second phase that allows for a common service on one tech platform. In the same month, it was announced that Discovery would rename itself Warner Bros. and reclassify and convert its stock into stock of WBD.

On December 22, 2021, it was announced that the deal was approved by the European Commission and it was scheduled to be completed on April 8, 2022, subject to approval by Discovery shareholders and additional closing conditions.

On January 5, 2022, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that WarnerMedia and ViacomCBS (now known as Paramount Global) were exploring a possible sale of either a majority stake or all of The CW, and that Nexstar Media Group was considered a leading bidder. The reports indicated that WarnerMedia and ViacomCBS could include a contractual commitment that would require any new owner to buy new programming from those companies, allowing them to reap some continual revenue through the network. The network&#x27;s then-president and CEO Mark Pedowitz at the time confirmed talks of a potential sale in a memo to CW staffers, but added that &quot;It&#x27;s too early to speculate what might happen.&quot;

On January 26, 2022, it was reported that the merger between WarnerMedia and Discovery, Inc. was expected to close sometime during the second quarter of 2022.

On February 1, 2022, it was reported that AT&amp;T was going to spin off WarnerMedia in a $43 billion deal. Also on the same month, it was announced that the WarnerMedia and Discovery merger was approved by the Brazilian antitrust regulator Cade.

On February 9, 2022, it was announced that the deal was approved by the United States Department of Justice. A day later, it was announced that Discovery&#x27;s shareholders would board on meeting on March 11 to vote on the WarnerMedia merger. The deal was approved by Discovery shareholders on the same date.

On February 23, 2022, it was announced that the WarnerMedia-Discovery merger would close on April 8. On March 25, it was announced that AT&amp;T would spin off WarnerMedia on April 8, marking AT&amp;T&#x27;s official exit from the entertainment business.

On April 5, it was announced that Kilar; Ann Sarnoff, Chair and CEO of WarnerMedia Studios and Networks Group; as well as Andy Forssell, executive vice president and general manager of HBO Max; were stepping down from their roles. The next day, chief financial officer Jennifer Biry, chief human resources officer Jim Cummings, chief revenue officer Tony Goncalves, communications and chief inclusion officer Christy Haubegger, WarnerMedia general counsel Jim Meza and chief technology officer Richard Tom were confirmed to be stepping down. The merger was completed on April 8.

After its merger with Discovery, Inc. to become Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD), WarnerMedia became defunct on April 8 but its corporate name is still used, such as on products of WBD&#x27;s subsidiaries like on the DVDs of Cartoon Network and Adult Swim shows and movies.

== Units ==
WarnerMedia&#x27;s businesses operated under the following five primary divisions:
* WarnerMedia Studios &amp; Networks, encompassed the company&#x27;s television series and motion picture development, production and programming. The division&#x27;s primary unit was the Warner Bros.&#x27; film, television and animation studio – which also contained Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment and Warner Bros. Home Entertainment, the comic book company DC Entertainment, and youth or specialty-centric cable networks (Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Boomerang and Turner Classic Movies). Other assets included HBO (as well as its sister channel Cinemax), the remaining former Turner networks (TBS, TNT and TruTV), and with Paramount Global, a 50% stake in The CW Television Network.
* WarnerMedia News &amp; Sports, encompassed the company&#x27;s worldwide broadcast news and sports operations, including CNN, the Turner Sports subsidiary, and the AT&amp;T SportsNet family of regional sports networks.
* WarnerMedia Sales &amp; Distribution oversaw WarnerMedia&#x27;s U.S. advertising sales, distribution and content licensing. The division also contained digital media company Otter Media (Fullscreen and Rooster Teeth).
* WarnerMedia Direct was responsible for the product, marketing, consumer engagement and global rollout of the company&#x27;s direct-to-consumer streaming service HBO Max.
* WarnerMedia International oversaw certain international variations of the company&#x27;s domestic television channels, with a few region-specific channels. This group was also responsible for local execution of all of WarnerMedia&#x27;s linear businesses, commercial activities, legacy streaming services such as HBO Portugal, HBO Go in certain countries which not yet served by HBO Max and regional programming for HBO Max.

==Leadership==
* Jason Kilar (Chief Executive Officer)
** Michael Bass, Amy Entelis and Ken Jautz (Interim Co-Heads, CNN)
** Jennifer S. Biry (Chief Financial Officer)
** James Cummings (Executive Vice President &amp; Chief Human Resources Officer)
** Andy Forssell (Executive Vice President &amp; General Manager, HBO Max)
** Tony Goncalves (Executive Vice President &amp; Chief Revenue Officer)
** Christy Haubegger (Executive Vice President, Communications &amp; Chief Inclusion Officer)
** James Meza (Executive Vice President &amp; General Counsel)
** Ann Sarnoff (Chair and CEO, WarnerMedia Studios &amp; Networks Group)
** Richard Tom (Chief Technology Officer)
** Gerhard Zeiler (President, WarnerMedia International)

== References ==
==External links==
* (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="0" end="17" title="WarnerMedia" label="Warner Media, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="19" end="36" title="Trade name" label="doing business as"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="37" end="48" title="WarnerMedia" label="WarnerMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="66" end="79" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="80" end="90" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q625568" start="95" end="108" title="show business" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="109" end="121" title="conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="131" end="139" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264266" start="169" end="184" title="30 Hudson Yards" label="30 Hudson Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="196" end="209" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="234" end="245" title="WarnerMedia" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411739" start="333" end="342" title="Time Inc." label="Time Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="407" end="412" title="cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="528" end="547" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="549" end="552" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="558" end="565" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="577" end="589" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="658" end="704" title="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment" label="the company&amp;#x27;s home entertainment division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="762" end="799" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="801" end="810" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="812" end="827" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969410" start="848" end="871" title="CBS Entertainment Group" label="CBS Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="891" end="897" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="1005" end="1008" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="1010" end="1023" title="Turner Sports" label="Turner Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366558" start="1029" end="1047" title="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet" label="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1050" end="1086" title="List of WarnerMedia subsidiaries#WarnerMedia Sales and Distribution" label="WarnerMedia Sales &amp;amp; Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403171" start="1123" end="1134" title="Otter Media" label="Otter Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="1178" end="1185" title="HBO MAX" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="1214" end="1226" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spinning off"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="1666" end="1675" title="competition law" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="1693" end="1716" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q107035379" start="1953" end="1970" title="List of streaming media services" label="streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="2500" end="2515" title="Discovery, Inc." label="Discovery, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q107074885" start="2555" end="2577" title="Warner Bros. Discovery" label="Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672563" start="2669" end="2679" title="TW Telecom" label="TW Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2681" end="2684" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="2686" end="2703" title="Time Warner Cable" label="Time Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567078" start="2705" end="2731" title="Hachette Book Group" label="AOL Time Warner Book Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="2737" end="2755" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="2888" end="2911" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q13452796" start="3082" end="3105" title="Kinney National Company" label="Kinney National Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="3283" end="3304" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="3310" end="3328" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="3336" end="3348" title="Grand Central Publishing" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="3353" end="3365" title="Warner Cable" label="Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="3408" end="3417" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="3422" end="3446" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107452142" start="3532" end="3551" title="Williams Publishing" label="Williams Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561425" start="3589" end="3622" title="Gilberton (publisher)" label="Gilberton World-Wide Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3682" end="3689" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3691" end="3698" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3700" end="3706" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3708" end="3720" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3722" end="3727" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3746" end="3752" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3758" end="3764" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="3972" end="3988" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156334" start="3996" end="4031" title="Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment" label="Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="4075" end="4078" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="4080" end="4091" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264751" start="4093" end="4110" title="The Movie Channel" label="The Movie Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="4116" end="4119" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="4177" end="4183" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015644" start="4191" end="4210" title="Cable Music Channel" label="Cable Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="4309" end="4337" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="original iteration of Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4356" end="4368" title="Paramount Media Networks#Background" label="MTV Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229707" start="4436" end="4451" title="Popular Library" label="Popular Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791139" start="4457" end="4473" title="CBS Publications" label="CBS Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="4646" end="4657" title="Atari, Inc." label="Atari, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q643802" start="4702" end="4726" title="video game crash of 1983" label="video game crash of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411739" start="4824" end="4833" title="Time Inc." label="Time Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="4928" end="4952" title="Paramount Communications" label="Paramount Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111140" start="4959" end="4971" title="Gulf+Western" label="Gulf+Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="4998" end="5009" title="hostile bid" label="hostile bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875944" start="5567" end="5574" title="US West" label="US West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672563" start="5656" end="5666" title="TW Telecom" label="TW Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805409" start="6041" end="6049" title="MediaOne" label="MediaOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654507" start="6059" end="6077" title="AT&amp;amp;T Broadband" label="AT&amp;amp;T Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="6139" end="6146" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="6381" end="6407" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="6434" end="6444" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="6959" end="6974" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q622848" start="6979" end="7004" title="Castle Rock Entertainment" label="Castle Rock Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="7041" end="7053" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="7116" end="7135" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127324768" start="7224" end="7245" title="Six Flags" label="Six Flags Theme Parks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7395" end="7408" title="Six Flags#History of Premier Parks" label="Premier Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549359" start="7668" end="7680" title="Gerald M. Levin" label="Gerald Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="7700" end="7707" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="8403" end="8417" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="8608" end="8633" title="Time Warner Entertainment" label="Time Warner Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="9111" end="9135" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="9320" end="9353" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="9397" end="9416" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549359" start="9573" end="9585" title="Gerald Levin" label="Gerald Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q562917" start="9695" end="9705" title="Steve Case" label="Steve Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="9716" end="9734" title="Executive Chairman" label="Executive Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348924" start="9762" end="9779" title="Robert W. Pittman" label="Robert W. Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149305" start="9811" end="9823" title="Richard Parsons (businessman)" label="Dick Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q157499" start="11071" end="11079" title="goodwill (accounting)" label="goodwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="11080" end="11089" title="write-off" label="write-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="11332" end="11342" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293013" start="13171" end="13180" title="Don Logan" label="Don Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806643" start="15471" end="15480" title="Time-Life" label="Time-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="15614" end="15632" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="15673" end="15680" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="15685" end="15691" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q328520" start="15721" end="15739" title="Edgar Bronfman Jr." label="Edgar Bronfman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="15744" end="15766" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376418" start="15879" end="15890" title="Jeff Bewkes" label="Jeff Bewkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="16159" end="16173" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="16281" end="16298" title="Time Warner Cable" label="Time Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q600815" start="17483" end="17494" title="Chilevisión" label="Chilevisión"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931771" start="17545" end="17554" title="CNN Chile" label="CNN Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943520" start="17617" end="17625" title="Flixster" label="Flixster"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="17696" end="17711" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649438" start="17776" end="17795" title="Alloy Entertainment" label="Alloy Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906353" start="17924" end="17939" title="Bleacher Report" label="Bleacher Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="18013" end="18026" title="Turner Sports" label="Turner Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760100" start="18241" end="18258" title="Related Companies" label="Related Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042805" start="18264" end="18287" title="Oxford Properties Group" label="Oxford Properties Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264266" start="18428" end="18443" title="30 Hudson Yards" label="30 Hudson Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55885925" start="18451" end="18476" title="Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project" label="Hudson Yards neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069129" start="18480" end="18498" title="Chelsea, Manhattan" label="Chelsea, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968" start="18592" end="18607" title="Columbus Circle" label="Columbus Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="18719" end="18733" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="19144" end="19152" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="19299" end="19306" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151005" start="19322" end="19330" title="Acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="19331" end="19343" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="19697" end="19704" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="19971" end="20004" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699790" start="20020" end="20028" title="Ajit Pai" label="Ajit Pai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="20083" end="20104" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="20162" end="20181" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151999" start="20247" end="20278" title="Comisión Federal de Competencia" label="Comisión Federal de Competencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="20409" end="20421" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="20585" end="20603" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="his administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q979750" start="20933" end="20954" title="Randall L. Stephenson" label="Randall L. Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29474280" start="20959" end="20973" title="Makan Delrahim" label="Makan Delrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889730" start="21009" end="21056" title="United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division" label="Department of Justice&amp;#x27;s Antitrust Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="22062" end="22070" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326740" start="22077" end="22092" title="Richard J. Leon" label="Richard J. Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61985799" start="22730" end="22742" title="John Stankey" label="John Stankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="22928" end="22949" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="22984" end="22996" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403171" start="23841" end="23852" title="Otter Media" label="Otter Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q15069859" start="23862" end="23875" title="Peter Chernin" label="Chernin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q29474280" start="23975" end="23989" title="Makan Delrahim" label="Makan Delrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16672310" start="23995" end="24001" title="Recode" label="Recode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="24388" end="24405" title="Attorney general" label="Attorneys General"/>
<link wikidata="Q829548" start="24507" end="24519" title="Over-the-top media service" label="over-the-top"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="24520" end="24537" title="Streaming media" label="streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="24874" end="24914" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7366558" start="25763" end="25781" title="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet" label="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175319" start="25821" end="25832" title="Jeff Zucker" label="Jeff Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q94626" start="26003" end="26017" title="Gerhard Zeiler" label="Gerhard Zeiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206012" start="26072" end="26093" title="chief revenue officer" label="chief revenue officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871501" start="26205" end="26220" title="Richard Plepler" label="Richard Plepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="26294" end="26317" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397336" start="26508" end="26520" title="Kevin Reilly (executive)" label="Kevin Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q709644" start="26625" end="26630" title="TruTV" label="TruTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="27159" end="27166" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="28540" end="28557" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319420" start="28618" end="28656" title="Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment" label="Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="28795" end="28804" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="28806" end="28810" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="28817" end="28826" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="28844" end="28856" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="28894" end="28905" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="28918" end="28922" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="28930" end="28940" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="29065" end="29071" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="29073" end="29080" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="29517" end="29532" title="Discovery, Inc." label="Discovery, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5428822" start="29603" end="29614" title="Factual television" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318197" start="29857" end="29877" title="Reverse Morris Trust" label="Reverse Morris Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377226" start="30010" end="30022" title="David Zaslav" label="David Zaslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="30025" end="30040" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="30234" end="30237" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q60238941" start="30241" end="30256" title="Fox Corporation" label="Fox Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378247" start="30326" end="30343" title="Fox Entertainment" label="Fox Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="30455" end="30462" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q103813557" start="30467" end="30477" title="Discovery+" label="Discovery+"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="30873" end="30892" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="31056" end="31079" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="31140" end="31156" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="31226" end="31232" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020906" start="31243" end="31262" title="Nexstar Media Group" label="Nexstar Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769202" start="31574" end="31587" title="Mark Pedowitz" label="Mark Pedowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057831" start="32143" end="32147" title="Administrative Council for Economic Defense" label="Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="32222" end="32257" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q64819784" start="32758" end="32769" title="Ann Sarnoff" label="Ann Sarnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="32962" end="32985" title="chief financial officer" label="chief financial officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10624502" start="33001" end="33030" title="chief human resources officer" label="chief human resources officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206012" start="33045" end="33066" title="chief revenue officer" label="chief revenue officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096978" start="33102" end="33125" title="Chief diversity officer" label="chief inclusion officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113647" start="33126" end="33143" title="Christy Haubegger" label="Christy Haubegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="33157" end="33172" title="general counsel" label="general counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287861" start="33186" end="33210" title="chief technology officer" label="chief technology officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074885" start="33345" end="33367" title="Warner Bros. Discovery" label="Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="33518" end="33533" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="33538" end="33548" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="33851" end="33863" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="33870" end="33874" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156642" start="33876" end="33886" title="Warner Bros. Television Studios" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="33891" end="33900" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319420" start="33931" end="33969" title="Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment" label="Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="33974" end="34005" title="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment" label="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="34030" end="34046" title="DC Comics" label="DC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="34095" end="34110" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="34112" end="34122" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q157906" start="34124" end="34133" title="Boomerang (TV network)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="34138" end="34159" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="34184" end="34187" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="34219" end="34226" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="34250" end="34256" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="34267" end="34270" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="34272" end="34275" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q709644" start="34280" end="34285" title="TruTV" label="TruTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="34297" end="34313" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="34330" end="34355" title="The CW" label="The CW Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="34479" end="34482" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="34488" end="34501" title="Turner Sports" label="Turner Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366558" start="34522" end="34540" title="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet" label="AT&amp;amp;T SportsNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403171" start="34753" end="34764" title="Otter Media" label="Otter Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927647" start="34766" end="34776" title="Fullscreen (company)" label="Fullscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="34781" end="34794" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="34960" end="34967" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556580" start="35298" end="35304" title="HBO Go" label="HBO Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q371312" start="35414" end="35425" title="Jason Kilar" label="Jason Kilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q58416693" start="35469" end="35480" title="Amy Entelis" label="Amy Entelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387870" start="35485" end="35494" title="Ken Jautz" label="Ken Jautz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="35514" end="35517" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="35712" end="35719" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q64819784" start="35954" end="35965" title="Ann Sarnoff" label="Ann Sarnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q94626" start="36069" end="36083" title="Gerhard Zeiler" label="Gerhard Zeiler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83047" wikidata="Q2043578" url="?curid=83047" title="Electryone">
<text>In Greek mythology, Electryone (Ancient Greek: Ἠλεκτρυώνην) or Alectrona (Doric form) was a daughter of Helios and Rhodos, and sister to the Heliadae. She died a virgin and was worshipped as a heroine on the island of Rhodes.

She was possibly a goddess of the sunrise, or of man&#x27;s waking sense. The Doric form of her name is akin to the Greek word for &quot;rooster&quot; (Alectrona, the feminine genitive of Αλεκτορ, Alektor, the ancient Greek word for &quot;rooster&quot;), while the Attic form Electryone is akin to the word for &quot;amber&quot; (Ἠλέκτρα, Elektra), as in the amber color of sunrise.

A marble tablet from the 3rd century BC found in Ialyssus contains an inscription about the regulations for visitors to the temple of Alectrona.

==Genealogy==








==Notes==
==References==
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Graves, Robert; &quot;The Greek Myths&quot;, Penguin Books Ltd. (1960 edition). 42. c, 4.
* Numismatic Chronicle, Volume 18
* Smith, William; &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). &quot;Electryo&#x27;ne&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043578" start="20" end="30" title="Electryone" label="Electryone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="32" end="45" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043578" start="63" end="72" title="Electryone" label="Alectrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="74" end="79" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="104" end="110" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q641286" start="115" end="121" title="Rhodos" label="Rhodos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215951" start="141" end="149" title="Heliadae" label="Heliadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="193" end="197" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="218" end="224" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="246" end="253" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043578" start="424" end="431" title="Electryone" label="Alektor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="437" end="450" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="466" end="473" title="rooster" label="rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043578" start="566" end="573" title="Electryone" label="Elektra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="586" end="591" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="592" end="597" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q193294" start="601" end="608" title="sunrise" label="sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018156" start="660" end="668" title="Ialysos" label="Ialyssus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="806" end="822" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q672803" start="830" end="852" title="Bibliotheca historica" label="The Library of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="873" end="896" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="914" end="936" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="1311" end="1325" title="Robert Graves" label="Graves, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615716" start="1333" end="1348" title="The Greek Myths" label="The Greek Myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="1437" end="1451" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="1459" end="1512" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83049" wikidata="Q193482" url="?curid=83049" title="Neve Campbell">
<text>Neve Adrianne Campbell (; born October 3, 1973) is a Canadian actress. After working in Canadian and American television, Campbell emerged as a scream queen for her starring roles in horror and thriller films. She has also appeared in blockbusters and independent features.

Following a series of minor credits, Campbell had a starring role in the drama series &quot;Catwalk&quot; (1992–1993) and the television film &quot;The Canterville Ghost&quot; (1996). She subsequently relocated to the United States to star as Julia Salinger in the Fox teen drama series &quot;Party of Five&quot; (1994–2000), which became her breakthrough role. She rose to international prominence for her leading role as Sidney Prescott in Wes Craven&#x27;s slasher film &quot;Scream&quot; (1996), which spawned the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise, in which she reprised her role in each film except the sixth. She also headlined the horror film &quot;The Craft&quot; (1996), the thriller film &quot;Wild Things&quot; (1998), and the drama film &quot;Panic&quot; (2000). 

Campbell starred in, produced, and wrote the story for Robert Altman&#x27;s drama film &quot;The Company&quot; (2003). After a hiatus, she returned to television with a recurring role on the drama series &quot;Medium&quot; (2007) and starring roles on the action series &quot;The Philanthropist&quot; (2009) and the miniseries &quot;&quot; (2012). She appeared in the action film &quot;Skyscraper&quot; (2018) and the drama film &quot;Clouds&quot; (2020), and had starring roles on the political thriller series &quot;House of Cards&quot; (2016–2017) and the crime drama series &quot;The Lincoln Lawyer&quot; (2022–present).

== Early life ==
Campbell was born in Guelph, Ontario, Canada, on October 3, 1973. Campbell&#x27;s Dutch mother, Marnie (&quot;née&quot; Neve), is a yoga instructor and psychologist from Amsterdam. She descends from Sephardic Jews who immigrated to the Netherlands and converted to Catholicism. Her Scottish father, Gerry Campbell, immigrated to Canada from his native Glasgow, and taught high school drama classes at Lorne Park Secondary School in Mississauga, Ontario. Campbell&#x27;s maternal grandparents ran a theatre company in the Netherlands, and her paternal grandparents were also performers. Campbell has an older brother, Christian Campbell, and two younger half-brothers, Alex Campbell and Damian McDonald. Her parents divorced when she was two.

At age six, she saw a performance of &quot;The Nutcracker&quot; and decided she wanted to take ballet classes, enrolling at the Erinvale School of Dance. She later moved into residence at the National Ballet School of Canada, training there and appearing in performances of &quot;The Nutcracker&quot; and &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot;. After accumulating numerous dance-related injuries, she retired from ballet and took up acting at age 15, performing in &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot; at the Canon Theatre in Toronto while attending John F. Ross Collegiate Vocational Institute in Guelph, where she trained in acting and worked in theatre. One of her classmates was actress Tara Strong.

Campbell&#x27;s early work included a 1980s Eaton&#x27;s department store Christmas commercial and a 1991 Coca-Cola commercial; she promoted the latter&#x27;s sponsorship on Bryan Adams&#x27; Waking Up the Nation Tour (1991–1992).

== Career ==
=== 1990s ===

Campbell made an uncredited cameo appearance on the series &quot;My Secret Identity&quot; in 1991. The next year, she played the minor role of Laura Capelli on an episode of &quot;The Kids in the Hall&quot; and landed her first starring role as Daisy in the Canadian drama series &quot;Catwalk&quot;. She subsequently made several guest appearances on various Canadian television shows, such as &quot;Are You Afraid of the Dark?&quot; and &quot;Kung Fu: The Legend Continues&quot;, both occurring in 1994.

With a desire to perform in Hollywood, Campbell went to Los Angeles to find a talent manager to represent her and ended up going on several auditions while she was doing so. One of these auditions was for &quot;Party of Five&quot;, which cast her in the role of orphaned teenager Julia Salinger, whereupon Campbell permanently relocated to the United States to play the role. &quot;Party of Five&quot; premiered in 1994 and went on to receive critical acclaim, winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Drama in 1996. Campbell&#x27;s performance on the series was lauded by critics and audiences alike; the series is considered her breakthrough role.

After appearing on &quot;Party of Five&quot; for six seasons, Campbell did not renew her contract for a seventh season so she could pursue film work, which led the series&#x27; end in 2000. Her first widely released film was &quot;The Craft&quot; (1996). The movie was a surprise success, earning $55 million against a budget of $15 million. Her work in &quot;The Craft&quot; was noticed by director Wes Craven, who specifically asked her to audition for the role of Sidney Prescott in 1996&#x27;s &quot;Scream&quot;, believing that the actress could be &quot;innocent&quot;, but also handle herself once emotional and psychical conflicts arose. &quot;Scream&quot; was released to major commercial and critical success, earning over $173 million at the worldwide box office which made it the highest-grossing slasher film until the release of &quot;Halloween&quot; in 2018. Her performance received significant critical praise. &quot;Variety&quot; magazine described Campbell as &quot;charismatic&quot;, and the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; called both her acting and the character &quot;iconic&quot;. For her performance, she won the Fangoria Chainsaw Award for Best Actress and the Saturn Award for Best Actress.

In 1997, Campbell reprised the role of Sidney in &quot;Scream 2&quot;, which earned over $170 million and, like the first installment, was critically acclaimed. Patrick Mullen of Medium website stated that &quot;I&#x27;ve always appreciated Neve Campbell in the lead just as much. She plays the role so straight while everyone else winks at the camera. It may sound like it wouldn&#x27;t work, but it actually does. Sidney Prescott is a more compelling heroine than you usually get in a horror movie.&quot; She won the MTV Movie Award for Best Female Performance for her work in &quot;Scream 2&quot;.

In 1998, Campbell had roles in &quot;Hairshirt&quot; and &quot;54&quot; and voiced Kiara in the Disney animated musical film &quot;The Lion King II: Simba&#x27;s Pride&quot;. She also appeared in the erotic thriller film &quot;Wild Things&quot;. She took on the role in &quot;Wild Things&quot; to avoid being typecast based on her &quot;Party of Five&quot; role. &quot;Glamour&quot; praised Campbell&#x27;s character in the film, describing it as one of &quot;the most well-rounded, fascinating, and exciting characters to ever grace the screen&quot;. In 2022, a retrospective review of &quot;Wild Things&quot; in &quot;The New York Times&quot; written by Abbey Bender described her character as a &quot;femme fatale&quot; and called Campbell&#x27;s acting a &quot;calculated performance of self-assured femininity inspires fear, arousal and awe in equal measure&quot;.

=== 2000s ===
Campbell went on to appear in several films that received a limited theatrical release but were well reviewed by critics, including the film &quot;Panic&quot;. Roger Ebert wrote that she &quot;takes a tricky role and enriches it, brings it human dimension instead of being content with the &quot;sexpot&quot; assignment.&quot; Campbell starred again as Sidney Prescott in &quot;Scream 3&quot; (2000), which earned over $160 million but marked a temporary end for the franchise following mixed reviews. In his review of &quot;Scream 3&quot;, Roger Ebert wrote: &quot;The camera loves her. She could become a really big star and then giggle at clips from this film at her AFI tribute.&quot; In retrospect, the parallels between &quot;Scream 3&quot;&#x27;s themes of abuse and the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases came to light. In 2002, she starred in &quot;Last Call&quot;, for which she won a Prism Award for Performance in TV Movie or Miniseries.

Campbell co-wrote, produced and starred in the 2003 film &quot;The Company&quot;, which is about Chicago&#x27;s Joffrey Ballet. The idea for the film was conceived by Campbell in her teens. The following year, she led the independent film &quot;When Will I Be Loved&quot; (2004), which was praised by critics; Roger Ebert wrote that Campbell gave a performance that was &quot;carnal, verbally facile, physically uninhibited and charged with intelligence. Not many actresses could have played this character, and fewer still could give us the sense she&#x27;s making it up as she goes along.&quot; In March 2006, Campbell made her West End theatre debut in a version of Arthur Miller&#x27;s &quot;Resurrection Blues&quot; at the Old Vic theatre. The play received mixed reviews. &quot;Resurrection Blues&quot; was directed by Robert Altman, with whom Campbell had previously worked in &quot;The Company&quot;.Later in 2006, Campbell performed again in the West End in &quot;Love Song&quot; to mixed reviews. The latter half of the 2000s saw sporadic work from Campbell, due to a hiatus; most notably, in June 2009, she had a starring role on NBC&#x27;s short-lived series &quot;The Philanthropist&quot;. She later explained the hiatus by saying it &quot;got to a level, also, where the kinds of things that I was being offered were not the things I wanted to do. I was constantly being offered horror films, because I was known for horror films, or bad romantic comedies.&quot; On her overall career progression, she has stated that &quot;I think I went from being a young girl / ingénue to a woman, which was great for me.&quot;

=== 2010s ===
In 2011, Campbell starred in &quot;The Glass Man&quot;, which received a limited release. Also in 2011, 11 years after the previous installment, Campbell made her comeback to the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise in &quot;Scream 4&quot; (2011), which received positive reviews and earned over $97 million. For her performance, she was nominated for Best Actress at the Scream Awards in 2011. On reprising the role of Sidney Prescott in future works, Campbell stated that &quot;It would have to be something really special and really different. They&#x27;d have to be really convincing about who they decided to bring on as director, and I&#x27;d still have to do a bit of soul-searching on that one.&quot;

Campbell next starred in the drama film &quot;Singularity&quot;, which premiered at Cannes Film Festival in May 2012. She also appeared in the 2012 miniseries &quot;&quot;, and starred in the 2013 Lifetime crime film &quot;An Amish Murder&quot;. Campbell went on to appear in guest or recurring roles in several television series, including the NBC supernatural drama &quot;Medium&quot;, the Fox animated sitcom &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, the ABC medical drama &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;, the AMC period drama &quot;Mad Men&quot;, the NBC sitcom &quot;Welcome to Sweden&quot;. In 2015, she played Katherine Oppenheimer in two episodes of the WGN period drama series &quot;Manhattan&quot;.

On June 30, 2015, it was announced that Campbell would star as Texas-based political consultant LeAnn Harvey in the Netflix television drama &quot;House of Cards&quot;, beginning in the fourth season. On the role of Harvey, the actress said in an interview with &quot;Business Insider&quot; that &quot;I knew that what I wanted was a cable show with a good cast, and good writing, and it was respected, and an ensemble where I&#x27;m not carrying it, and then this came along. And then I couldn&#x27;t have asked for anything better.&quot; Campbell was particularly praised by &quot;GQ&quot; magazine for her performance, who called her the &quot;best thing&quot; of the season and wrote that &quot;she was exactly the competitor that the show&#x27;s anti-heroes needed&quot;. In 2016, Campbell was honoured with the National Award of Excellence by the Association of Canadian Radio and Television Artists (ACTRA).

On June 22, 2017, it was reported that Campbell would star in Rawson Marshall Thurber&#x27;s action film &quot;Skyscraper&quot;. She played Sarah Sawyer. The film was released on July 13 the following year to box office success, grossing over $304 million worldwide; in spite of this, the film earned mixed reviews. Campbell co-starred as Valerie Gannon in the 2018 independent drama film &quot;Hot Air&quot;. In 2019, Campbell starred as Rebecca Fine, a single mother struggling with a serious illness, in the Canadian drama film &quot;Castle in the Ground&quot;. The film had its world premiere at the 2019 Toronto International Film Festival and received generally positive reviews.

=== 2020s ===
It was announced in 2019 that Campbell would star as author Laura Sobiech in the biographical musical drama film &quot;Clouds&quot;, which is based on the true story of Zach Sobiech. She detailed her experience in playing the role, saying that &quot;I&#x27;d have some stuff to shed every evening, there were days of heavy crying, and I&#x27;d just be drained.&quot; It was released in 2020 to positive reviews on Disney+. &quot;Variety&quot; magazine described Campbell&#x27;s acting as &quot;well played within narrow bounds&quot;. &quot;IndieWire&quot; stated that she does &quot;a fine job of balancing unimaginable pain with hard-fought moments of joy&quot; and that she &quot;distills Laura Sobiech&#x27;s religious fervor into a more general desperation&quot;.

In September 2020, it was confirmed that Campbell would reprise her role as Sidney Prescott for the fifth &quot;Scream&quot; film, directed by Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett. She was initially &quot;apprehensive&quot; and hesitant to take the role given the death of Wes Craven; however, she was convinced to join once &quot;the new directors came to me with this beautiful letter saying that they&#x27;ve become directors and love film because of these films, and because of Wes, and they really want to be true to his story and his journey with these films, so I was really happy to hear that.&quot; The film was released on January 14, 2022, and earned widespread acclaim. It was also a major commercial success, grossing over $135 million against a budget of $24 million. Campbell was lauded for her performance once more, and she was particularly praised for her &quot;fresh&quot; take on the role of Prescott. &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; wrote that &quot;... it&#x27;s a pleasure to see Campbell again in fine form as Sidney, striding back into Woodsboro to take care of unfinished business&quot;. &quot;Elle&quot; magazine named her the &quot;Reigning Queen of &quot;Scream&quot;&quot; and stated that &quot;Sidney might not have that impact on people were it not for Campbell&#x27;s portrayal, rife with vulnerability, intelligence, and a palatable dose of humor.&quot;

In February 2021, Campbell was cast as Mickey Haller&#x27;s ex-wife Margaret &quot;Maggie&quot; McPherson in a television adaptation of &quot;The Lincoln Lawyer&quot; for Netflix; The series premiered on May 13, 2022, and entered Netflix&#x27;s Top 10 that same day. It was received positively by critics, and Lara Solanki of &quot;Radio Times&quot; felt that she was more &quot;dogged and determined, qualities she showed once again in this year&#x27;s &quot;Scream&quot; reboot&quot; and said that giving the actress more screen time &quot;would not be an unwelcome development&quot;. The series was renewed for a second season on June 14, 2022, with Campbell set to return. In February 2022, Campbell signed with both the Gersh Agency and Anonymous Content.

Campbell was approached to reprise the role of Sidney Prescott in the sixth installment in the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise. At the Mad Monster Party Convention, she stated that &quot;There&#x27;s no script yet. There is a draft coming in soon is what I was told. Actually, I was supposed to call a producer yesterday, because he wanted to talk to me about what&#x27;s going on. You know, we&#x27;ll see. I&#x27;ll read the script and see how I feel.&quot; In June 2022, it was announced she would not be returning to the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise after salary negotiations stalled with Paramount. She stated: &quot;As a woman I have had to work extremely hard in my career to establish my value, especially when it comes to &quot;Scream&quot;. I felt the offer that was presented to me did not equate to the value I have brought to the franchise. It&#x27;s been a very difficult decision to move on. To all my &quot;Scream&quot; fans, I love you. You&#x27;ve always been so incredibly supportive to me. I&#x27;m forever grateful to you and to what this franchise has given me over the past 25 years.&quot; &quot;IndieWire&quot; noted Campbell had spent 26 years acting in the franchise, and announced it was &quot;the end of an era&quot;. Campbell expanded on her statement a few weeks later, saying she could not bear &quot;walking on set and feeling undervalued&quot; and that the offer would have been different had she been a man.

In May 2022, Campbell was cast as Raven in a recurring role for the Peacock television series adaptation of &quot;Twisted Metal&quot;. The series was released in July 2023 and &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; said that she was &quot;coming across as cheery in a way that&#x27;s instantly suspicious&quot;. In August 2022, it was announced that Campbell had been cast in the lead role of the ABC series &quot;Avalon&quot; as Detective Nicole &quot;Nic&quot; Searcy. It was later announced in November that the series had been scrapped, though it was being shopped around to other networks.

In July 2023, it was announced that Campbell would serve as executive producer of the documentary &quot;Swan Song&quot;. Profiling the final days of ballerina Karen Kain at the National Ballet of Canada, Campbell enjoyed working on the film as it tied into her previous ballet interest. &quot;Swan Song&quot; was selected to premiere in the Special Presentations line-up of the Toronto International Film Festival and is scheduled to have a 2024 theatrical release.

In March 2024, Campbell announced through her Instagram that she would reprise the role of Sidney Prescott in the seventh &quot;Scream&quot; film, writing that &quot;It’s always been such a blast and an honor to get to play Sidney in the &quot;Scream&quot; movies… My appreciation for these films and for what they have meant to me, has never waned.&quot; It is set for release in February 2026.

== Other ventures ==
Campbell has advocated against poverty and world hunger. In a 2016 interview, she declared herself a socialist. In 2020, she and several other &quot;Scream&quot; co-stars hosted a charity event to raise funds for the National Breast Cancer Foundation. In July 2022, she appeared in an advertisement for the American Red Cross, where she played Sidney Prescott.

== Media image ==
Campbell has often been referred to as a scream queen, beginning with her work in the &quot;Scream&quot; franchise. In addition to her work in the horror genre, Campbell twice successfully established herself in mainstream film and television, beginning from the late 1990s with &quot;Party of Five&quot;,where she was described as &quot;television&#x27;s most believable teenager&quot;, and resuming in the 2010s, following a hiatus, by focusing on dramatic works which have earned her equal praise. The role of Sidney Prescott as played by Campbell established her as one of the highest-grossing and acclaimed heroines of all time in the slasher genre. She has frequently been included on lists citing the best actresses in horror. Despite her status in the genre, she stated that she finds horror movies &quot;difficult to watch&quot;. 

Campbell has often been referred to as a sex symbol, a title she has held since her breakout role in &quot;Party of Five&quot; in the 1990s. She is also recognized for her looks and fashion style. She appeared on &quot;People&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of &quot;50 Most Beautiful People&quot; twice, and &quot;Bustle&quot; magazine described her as &quot;one of the most recognizable faces in Hollywood&quot;. She ranked third on &quot;Empire&quot;&#x27;s 1998 list of &quot;100 Sexiest Movie Stars&quot; and appeared on several editions of &quot;FHM&quot;&#x27;s &quot;FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World&quot;.

Campbell was name-dropped in the Weeknd&#x27;s dance-pop album &quot;Dawn FM&quot; (2022). She was referenced in the single &quot;Here We Go... Again&quot; featuring Tyler, the Creator in the lyric &quot;I loved her right, make her scream like Neve Campbell.&quot; On an interview with James Corden, she said that &quot;at first, my publicist told me, and she was like, &#x27;The Weeknd,&#x27; and I was like, &#x27;Wait, which weekend? Last weekend?&#x27; I had no idea what she was talking about. And then I realized, &#x27;Oh, the guy who played at the Super Bowl! That guy!&#x27; Fellow Canadian. How cool.&quot;

Campbell trended on Twitter in January 2023 when Paramount Pictures was widely criticized for the &quot;Scream VI&quot; pay dispute. The news surprised Campbell, who said: &quot;I had a friend text me and say, &#x27;You&#x27;re trending right now.&#x27; I&#x27;ve never been on Twitter. I didn&#x27;t know what it meant.&quot; Fellow &quot;Scream&quot; actors David Arquette and Jasmin Savoy Brown came to her defense, among others.

== Personal life ==

Campbell has stated, &quot;I am a practicing Catholic, but my lineage is Jewish, so if someone asks me if I&#x27;m Jewish, I say yes.&quot; 

Campbell married Jeff Colt on April 3, 1995, and divorced in May 1998. In 2005, Campbell began dating John Light, whom she met while filming &quot;Investigating Sex&quot;. They became engaged in December 2005 and married in Malibu, California, on May 5, 2007. They lived together in Islington, London for five years until Campbell filed for divorce on June 30, 2010, in Los Angeles.

In March 2012, Campbell and her partner, actor JJ Feild, confirmed that they were expecting their first child together. Their son was born in 2012. On June 29, 2018, Campbell announced the adoption of their second son.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===

=== Television ===
=== Video games ===

* &quot;The Lion King: Simba&#x27;s Mighty Adventure&quot; (2000), as Kiara

== Awards and nominations ==
== See also ==
* List of Canadian actors

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* 
* CNN interview (January 13, 2004)
* IGN Films interview (January 5, 2004)
* E Online! interview (December 1997)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193482" start="0" end="22" title="Neve Campbell" label="Neve Adrianne Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381535" start="144" end="156" title="scream queen" label="scream queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="183" end="189" title="Horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="194" end="208" title="Thriller film" label="thriller films"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="235" end="247" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="252" end="272" title="Independent film" label="independent features"/>
<link wikidata="Q691969" start="367" end="374" title="Catwalk (Canadian TV series)" label="Catwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168407" start="423" end="444" title="The Canterville Ghost (1996 film)" label="The Canterville Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048363" start="518" end="532" title="Julia Salinger" label="Julia Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="540" end="543" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048363" start="568" end="581" title="Party of Five" label="Party of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959682" start="618" end="635" title="breakthrough role" label="breakthrough role"/>
<link wikidata="Q303741" start="698" end="713" title="Sidney Prescott" label="Sidney Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q223992" start="717" end="727" title="Wes Craven" label="Wes Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q27411" start="754" end="760" title="Scream (1996 film)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q388659" start="793" end="821" title="Scream (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Scream&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183099" start="874" end="883" title="Scream VI" label="the sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q937005" start="926" end="935" title="The Craft (film)" label="The Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133610" start="974" end="985" title="Wild Things (film)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q820116" start="1025" end="1030" title="Panic (2000 film)" label="Panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="1102" end="1115" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q681815" start="1140" end="1151" title="The Company (film)" label="The Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q470111" start="1257" end="1263" title="Medium (TV series)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662205" start="1323" end="1341" title="The Philanthropist (TV series)" label="The Philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37447062" start="1433" end="1443" title="Skyscraper (2018 film)" label="Skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q73549338" start="1482" end="1488" title="Clouds (2020 film)" label="Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="1565" end="1579" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106536181" start="1631" end="1649" title="The Lincoln Lawyer (TV series)" label="The Lincoln Lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504114" start="1711" end="1717" title="Guelph" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="1889" end="1903" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907112" start="1942" end="1966" title="Conversion to Catholicism" label="converted to Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="2122" end="2133" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965115" start="2307" end="2325" title="Christian Campbell" label="Christian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193705" start="2476" end="2490" title="The Nutcracker" label="The Nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="2528" end="2534" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029229" start="2625" end="2657" title="National Ballet School of Canada" label="National Ballet School of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="2744" end="2759" title="Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="2893" end="2917" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335183" start="2931" end="2944" title="Canon Theatre" label="Canon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232530" start="2972" end="3016" title="John F. Ross Collegiate Vocational Institute" label="John F. Ross Collegiate Vocational Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029" start="3113" end="3124" title="Tara Strong" label="Tara Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046643" start="3171" end="3183" title="Eaton&amp;#x27;s" label="Eaton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="3233" end="3242" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="3301" end="3312" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="3404" end="3431" title="Cameo appearance" label="uncredited cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975085" start="3452" end="3470" title="My Secret Identity" label="My Secret Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560903" start="3567" end="3587" title="The Kids in the Hall (TV series)" label="The Kids in the Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q691969" start="3673" end="3680" title="Catwalk (Canadian TV series)" label="Catwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418462" start="3788" end="3815" title="Are You Afraid of the Dark?" label="Are You Afraid of the Dark?"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3832" end="3861" title="Kung Fu: The Legend Continues" label="Kung Fu: The Legend Continues"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="3922" end="3931" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048363" start="4105" end="4118" title="Party of Five" label="Party of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048363" start="4174" end="4188" title="Julia Salinger" label="Julia Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="4367" end="4385" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255198" start="4390" end="4400" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama" label="Best Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q937005" start="4775" end="4784" title="The Craft (film)" label="The Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223992" start="4944" end="4954" title="Wes Craven" label="Wes Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q303741" start="5011" end="5026" title="Sidney Prescott" label="Sidney Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q27411" start="5048" end="5054" title="Scream (1996 film)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666646" start="5393" end="5402" title="Halloween (2018 film)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="5478" end="5485" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="5562" end="5579" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q28837118" start="5680" end="5720" title="Fangoria Chainsaw Award for Best Actress" label="Fangoria Chainsaw Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413741" start="5729" end="5758" title="Saturn Award for Best Actress" label="Saturn Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q270599" start="5816" end="5824" title="Scream 2" label="Scream 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="5940" end="5946" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q905413" start="6280" end="6323" title="MTV Movie Award for Best Actor in a Movie" label="MTV Movie Award for Best Female Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639568" start="6400" end="6409" title="Hairshirt (film)" label="Hairshirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849161" start="6426" end="6428" title="54 (film)" label="54"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="6459" end="6465" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6494" end="6530" title="The Lion King II: Simba&amp;#x27;s Pride" label="The Lion King II: Simba&amp;#x27;s Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133610" start="6590" end="6601" title="Wild Things (film)" label="Wild Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="6672" end="6680" title="Typecasting" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="6732" end="6739" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6983" end="7001" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="7067" end="7079" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q820116" start="7395" end="7400" title="Panic (2000 film)" label="Panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7408" end="7419" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q391784" start="7626" end="7634" title="Scream 3" label="Scream 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7789" end="7800" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="7918" end="7921" title="American Film Institute" label="AFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41832063" start="8026" end="8061" title="Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases" label="Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494151" start="8107" end="8116" title="Last Call (2002 film)" label="Last Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q681815" start="8263" end="8274" title="The Company (film)" label="The Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180342" start="8312" end="8326" title="Joffrey Ballet" label="Joffrey Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283691" start="8445" end="8465" title="When Will I Be Loved (film)" label="When Will I Be Loved"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="8830" end="8838" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="8869" end="8882" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316526" start="8896" end="8914" title="Resurrection Blues" label="Resurrection Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="8924" end="8935" title="the Old Vic" label="the Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316526" start="8984" end="9002" title="Resurrection Blues" label="Resurrection Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="9025" end="9038" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662205" start="9377" end="9395" title="The Philanthropist (TV series)" label="The Philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q323392" start="10061" end="10069" title="Scream 4" label="Scream 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065767" start="10208" end="10221" title="Scream Awards" label="Scream Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="10630" end="10650" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="10891" end="10894" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q470111" start="10920" end="10926" title="Medium (TV series)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="10938" end="10941" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="10964" end="10976" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="10988" end="10991" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="11012" end="11031" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="11043" end="11046" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="11066" end="11073" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633730" start="11102" end="11119" title="Welcome to Sweden (2014 TV series)" label="Welcome to Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52159113" start="11147" end="11168" title="Katherine Oppenheimer" label="Katherine Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11172" end="11184" title="Manhattan (TV series)#Season 2 (2015)" label="two episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="11192" end="11195" title="WGN America" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17317042" start="11222" end="11231" title="Manhattan (TV series)" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599048" start="11315" end="11335" title="Political consulting" label="political consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="11356" end="11363" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="11387" end="11401" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073973" start="11426" end="11439" title="House of Cards (season 4)" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="11508" end="11524" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="11823" end="11825" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650859" start="12057" end="12085" title="ACTRA Award" label="National Award of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650858" start="12147" end="12152" title="ACTRA" label="ACTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745616" start="12218" end="12241" title="Rawson Marshall Thurber" label="Rawson Marshall Thurber"/>
<link wikidata="Q37447062" start="12267" end="12277" title="Skyscraper (2018 film)" label="Skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q66124149" start="12693" end="12713" title="Castle in the Ground" label="Castle in the Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772754" start="12760" end="12800" title="2019 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2019 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q73549338" start="12976" end="12982" title="Clouds (2020 film)" label="Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360311" start="13026" end="13038" title="Zach Sobiech" label="Zach Sobiech"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="13271" end="13278" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="13397" end="13406" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q88563268" start="13726" end="13755" title="Scream (2022 film)" label="fifth &amp;quot;Scream&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788348" start="13769" end="13790" title="Matt Bettinelli-Olpin" label="Matt Bettinelli-Olpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221753" start="13795" end="13808" title="Tyler Gillett" label="Tyler Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="14557" end="14579" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="14752" end="14756" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363179" start="15060" end="15073" title="Mickey Haller" label="Mickey Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q106536181" start="15163" end="15181" title="The Lincoln Lawyer (TV series)" label="The Lincoln Lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="15353" end="15364" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736222" start="15742" end="15758" title="the Gersh Agency" label="the Gersh Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q567633" start="15763" end="15780" title="Anonymous Content" label="Anonymous Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183099" start="15853" end="15870" title="Scream VI" label="sixth installment"/>
<link wikidata="Q388659" start="15878" end="15906" title="Scream (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Scream&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="16899" end="16908" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="17291" end="17298" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q112223638" start="17337" end="17350" title="Twisted Metal (TV series)" label="Twisted Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17616" end="17619" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q114043868" start="17633" end="17639" title="Avalon (TV series)" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121339607" start="17919" end="17928" title="Swan Song (2023 film)" label="Swan Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369754" start="17974" end="17984" title="Karen Kain" label="Karen Kain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881270" start="17992" end="18017" title="National Ballet of Canada" label="National Ballet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="18193" end="18228" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18396" end="18427" title="Scream VI#Sequel" label="seventh &amp;quot;Scream&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561657" start="18731" end="18738" title="Child poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="18743" end="18755" title="Malnutrition" label="world hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="18801" end="18810" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65056424" start="18917" end="18950" title="National Breast Cancer Foundation (United States)" label="National Breast Cancer Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="19007" end="19025" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381535" start="19121" end="19133" title="scream queen" label="scream queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q303741" start="19593" end="19608" title="Sidney Prescott" label="Sidney Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="19720" end="19733" title="Slasher film" label="slasher genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="19962" end="19972" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="20140" end="20146" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708257" start="20231" end="20237" title="Bustle (magazine)" label="Bustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="20351" end="20369" title="Empire (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Empire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="20468" end="20471" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921999" start="20491" end="20525" title="FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World" label="FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424112" start="20547" end="20556" title="name-drop" label="name-drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="20563" end="20573" title="the Weeknd" label="the Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="20581" end="20590" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q110400486" start="20603" end="20610" title="Dawn FM" label="Dawn FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q124571202" start="20664" end="20683" title="Here We Go... Again" label="Here We Go... Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q167635" start="20700" end="20718" title="Tyler, the Creator" label="Tyler, the Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="20820" end="20832" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="21172" end="21179" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="21201" end="21219" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q294185" start="21512" end="21526" title="David Arquette" label="David Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266627" start="21531" end="21549" title="Jasmin Savoy Brown" label="Jasmin Savoy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205551" start="21652" end="21660" title="Catholic Church in Canada" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q714848" start="21851" end="21861" title="John Light (actor)" label="John Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q833977" start="21896" end="21913" title="Investigating Sex" label="Investigating Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="22032" end="22049" title="Islington" label="Islington, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q923265" start="22180" end="22188" title="JJ Feild" label="JJ Feild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22433" end="22477" title="The Lion King (franchise)#Video games" label="The Lion King: Simba&amp;#x27;s Mighty Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565716" start="22548" end="22571" title="List of Canadian actors" label="List of Canadian actors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83051" wikidata="Q3791456" url="?curid=83051" title="Ialysus (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Ialysus (; Ancient Greek: Ἰάλυσον &quot;Ialysos&quot;) or Jalysus (; Ἰᾱλυσός) was the eponymous founder of Ialysus in Rhodes. He was the eldest son of the Rhodian king, Cercaphus, one of the Heliades, and his niece Cydippe, daughter of Ochimus, also a former king. He had two younger brothers, Lindus and Camirus.

== Mythology ==
Ialysus and his brothers succeeded to the throne after their father&#x27;s death. During their time, the great deluge came in which their mother, who was now named as Cyrbe, was buried beneath the flood and laid waste. Later on, they parted the land among themselves, and each of them founded a city which bore his name.

==See also==
* Telchines

==Notes==
== References ==

* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Grimal, Pierre, &quot;The Dictionary of Classical Mythology&quot;, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996. .
* Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
* Parada, Carlos, &quot;Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology&quot;, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. .
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot; translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pindar, &quot;The Odes of Pindar&quot; including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Smith, William, &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Strabo, &quot;Geographica&quot; edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791456" start="20" end="27" title="Ialysus (mythology)" label="Ialysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="44" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791456" start="78" end="85" title="Ialysus (mythology)" label="Jalysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29963099" start="127" end="134" title="Ialysus" label="Ialysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="138" end="144" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471013" start="189" end="198" title="Cercaphus (Heliadae)" label="Cercaphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215951" start="211" end="219" title="Heliadae" label="Heliades"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185694" start="235" end="242" title="Cydippe" label="Cydippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q426041" start="256" end="263" title="Ochimus" label="Ochimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106483728" start="314" end="320" title="Lindus (mythology)" label="Lindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899143" start="325" end="332" title="Cameirus (mythology)" label="Camirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134605" start="688" end="697" title="Telchines" label="Telchines"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="729" end="745" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="796" end="819" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="837" end="859" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="1613" end="1619" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="2019" end="2033" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="2041" end="2094" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="2165" end="2171" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83053" wikidata="Q650293" url="?curid=83053" title="Linda">
<text>Linda is an English feminine given name, derived from the Spanish word , meaning &quot;pretty.&quot;

Linda may also refer to:

==Names==
* Linda (given name), a female given name (including a list of people and fictional characters so named)
* Linda (singer) (born 1977), stage name of Svetlana Geiman, a Russian singer
* Miss Linda, long-time manager and wife of Welsh wrestler Adrian Street
=== Surname ===
* Anita Linda (born Alice Lake, 1924–2020), Filipino film actress
* Bogusław Linda (born 1952), Polish actor
* La Prieta Linda (1933–2021), Mexican singer and actress 
* Sarah Linda (born 1987), British actress and model
* Solomon Linda (1909–1962), South African Zulu musician, singer and composer who wrote the song &quot;Mbube&quot; which later became &quot;The Lion Sleeps Tonight&quot;

==Places==
* Linda, Tasmania, Australia, a ghost town
* Linda Valley, Tasmania
* Linda, Georgia, a village in Abkhazia
* Linda, Bashkortostan, Russia, a village
* Linda, California, United States, a census-designated place
* Linda, Missouri, United States, a ghost town
* 7169 Linda, an asteroid
* Linda, a small lunar crater - see Delisle (crater)

==Music==
* &quot;Linda&quot; (Linda George album), 1974
* &quot;Linda&quot; (Linda Clifford album), 1977
* &quot;Linda&quot; (Miguel Bosé album), 1978
* &quot;Linda&quot; (1946 song), a popular song written by Jack Lawrence
* &quot;Linda&quot; (Pooh song), 1976, later covered by Miguel Bosé
* &quot;Linda (Tokischa and Rosalía song)&quot;, 2021
* &quot;Linda&quot;, a song by Ann Ronnell, written for the 1945 film &quot;The Story of G.I. Joe&quot;
* &quot;Linda&quot;, a song by Netón Vega and Tito Double P, 2024

==Fiction==
* &quot;Linda&quot; (1929 film), an American film
* &quot;Linda&quot; (1960 film), a British teen drama
* &quot;Linda&quot; (1973 film), a TV movie directed by Jack Smight
* &quot;Linda&quot; (1993 film), starring Richard Thomas and Virginia Madsen
* Linda (Sesame Street), a character appearing in Sesame Street
* &quot;Linda&quot; (TV series), a Hungarian action adventure series
* &quot;Linda&quot;, a poem by Patti Smith from her 1972 book &quot;Seventh Heaven&quot;

==Other uses==
* Tropical Storm Linda, various hurricanes, cyclones and storms
* &quot;Linda&quot; (magazine), a Dutch magazine
* &quot;Linda&quot; (Estonian magazine) (1887–1905), a feminist literary magazine in Estonia
* &quot;Linda&quot; (beetle), a genus of beetles in the family Cerambycidae
* Linda (coordination language), a programming language
* La Linda International Bridge, across the Rio Grande between the U.S. and Mexico
* &quot;Linda&quot; (sculpture), a monument in Estonia

==See also==
* &quot;Linda Linda&quot;, a 1987 single by the Japanese rock band The Blue Hearts, central to the below film
* &quot;Linda Linda Linda&quot;, a 2005 Japanese film
* Lynda, a given name
* Pretty (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650293" start="0" end="5" title="Linda" label="Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136594" start="140" end="158" title="Linda (given name)" label="Linda (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q469929" start="245" end="259" title="Linda (singer)" label="Linda (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685382" start="323" end="333" title="Miss Linda" label="Miss Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685382" start="380" end="393" title="Adrian Street" label="Adrian Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520221" start="412" end="423" title="Anita Linda" label="Anita Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55366" start="478" end="492" title="Bogusław Linda" label="Bogusław Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379869" start="521" end="536" title="La Prieta Linda" label="La Prieta Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422536" start="580" end="591" title="Sarah Linda" label="Sarah Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q775883" start="633" end="646" title="Solomon Linda" label="Solomon Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551341" start="815" end="830" title="Linda, Tasmania" label="Linda, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552030" start="858" end="870" title="Linda Valley" label="Linda Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965817" start="883" end="897" title="Linda, Georgia" label="Linda, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050096" start="923" end="943" title="Linda, Bashkortostan" label="Linda, Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q514215" start="965" end="982" title="Linda, California" label="Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995289" start="1027" end="1042" title="Linda, Missouri" label="Linda, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600420" start="1074" end="1084" title="7169 Linda" label="7169 Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q660138" start="1134" end="1150" title="Delisle (crater)" label="Delisle (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551349" start="1164" end="1202" title="Linda (Linda George album)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (Linda George album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791694" start="1211" end="1251" title="Linda (Linda Clifford album)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (Linda Clifford album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356762" start="1260" end="1297" title="Linda (Miguel Bosé album)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (Miguel Bosé album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551343" start="1306" end="1335" title="Linda (1946 song)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (1946 song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551345" start="1379" end="1408" title="Linda (Pooh song)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (Pooh song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523761" start="1453" end="1486" title="Linda (Tokischa and Rosalía song)" label="Linda (Tokischa and Rosalía song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033247" start="1575" end="1596" title="The Story of G.I. Joe" label="The Story of G.I. Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129208676" start="1634" end="1644" title="Netón Vega" label="Netón Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q22941775" start="1684" end="1713" title="Linda (1929 film)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (1929 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551353" start="1734" end="1763" title="Linda (1960 film)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (1960 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668225" start="1788" end="1817" title="Linda (1973 film)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (1973 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168188" start="1856" end="1885" title="Linda (1993 film)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (1993 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551417" start="1933" end="1954" title="Linda (Sesame Street)" label="Linda (Sesame Street)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130185" start="1997" end="2026" title="Linda (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457727" start="2132" end="2146" title="Seventh Heaven (book)" label="Seventh Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220149" start="2171" end="2191" title="Tropical Storm Linda" label="Tropical Storm Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023635" start="2235" end="2263" title="Linda (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31280554" start="2284" end="2321" title="Linda (Estonian magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (Estonian magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14892993" start="2377" end="2403" title="Linda (beetle)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (beetle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461865" start="2453" end="2482" title="Linda (coordination language)" label="Linda (coordination language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463423" start="2509" end="2538" title="La Linda International Bridge" label="La Linda International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12368810" start="2592" end="2621" title="Linda (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Linda&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343755" start="2667" end="2678" title="Linda Linda" label="Linda Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066199" start="2777" end="2794" title="Linda Linda Linda" label="Linda Linda Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18060451" start="2825" end="2830" title="Lynda" label="Lynda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242192" start="2847" end="2870" title="Pretty (disambiguation)" label="Pretty (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83054" wikidata="Q1134605" url="?curid=83054" title="Telchines">
<text>In Greek mythology, the Telchines () were the original inhabitants of the island of Rhodes and were known in Crete and Cyprus.

==Family==
Their parents were either Pontus and Gaia or Tartarus and Nemesis or else they were born from the blood of castrated Uranus, along with the Erinyes. According to Diodorus Siculus, the Telchines were the offspring of Thalassa. They had flippers instead of hands and the heads of dogs and were known as fish children. In some accounts, Poseidon was described as the Telchines&#x27; father.

==Names==
The following individual names are attested in various sources: Damon (Demonax); Mylas; Atabyrius; Antaeus (Actaeus), Megalesius, Ormenos (Hormenus), Lycus, Nicon and Mimon&quot;&quot;; Chryson, Argyron and Chalcon. Known female Telchines were Makelo, Dexithea (one of Damon&#x27;s daughters), Halia and probably Lysagora (the attesting text is severely damaged).
== Roles ==

=== Ministers of gods ===
The Telchines were regarded as the cultivators of the soil and ministers of the gods and as such they came from Crete to Cyprus and from thence to Rhodes or they proceeded from Rhodes to Crete and Boeotia. Rhodes, and in it the three towns of Cameirus, Ialysos, and Lindos (whence the Telchines are called &quot;Ialysii&quot;), which was their principal seat and was named after them Telchinis (Sicyon also was called &quot;Telchinia&quot;) and by some accounts, their children were highly worshiped as gods in the said three ancient Rhodian towns. The Telchines abandoned their homes because they foresaw that the island would be inundated and thence they scattered in different directions; Lycus went to Lycia, where he built the temple of the Lycian Apollo. This god had been worshiped by them at Lindos (Apollôn Telchinios) and Hera at Ialysos and Cameiros (Hêra telchinia); and Athena at Teumessus in Boeotia bore the surname of Telchinia. Nymphs also are called after them Telchiniae.

=== Sorcerers and demons ===
The Telchines were also regarded as wizards and envious daemons. Their very eyes and aspect were said to have been destructive. They had it in their power to bring on hail, rain, and snow, and to assume any form they pleased; they further produced a substance poisonous to living things. Thus, they were called Alastores for supervising the ceaseless wanderings of people and Palamnaioi for pouring the water of Styx with their palms and hands in order to make the fields infertile. The Telchines were described to have stings and being rough as the echinoid and thus, their names &quot;teliochinous&quot; that is “having a poisonous &quot;telos&quot; like an echinoid”.

=== Artists ===
The Telchines were said to have invented useful arts and institutions which were useful to mankind and to have made images of the gods. Telchines were regarded as excellent metallurgists; various accounts state that they were skilled metal workers in brass and iron and made a trident for Poseidon and a sickle for Cronus, both ceremonial weapons. Together with their help and the Cyclopes, the smith god Hephaestus forged the cursed necklace of Harmonia. Because of their excellent workmanship, the Telchines were maligned by rival workmen and thus received their bad reputation.

This last feature in the character of the Telchines seems to have been the reason of their being put together with the Idaean Dactyls and Strabo even states that those of the nine Rhodian Telchines who accompanied Rhea to Crete brought up the infant Zeus and were called Curetes. The Telchines were associated and sometimes confused with the Cyclopes, Dactyls, and Curetes.

== Mythology ==
The Telchines were entrusted by Rhea with the upbringing of Poseidon, which they accomplished with the aid of Capheira, one of Oceanus&#x27; daughters. Another version says that Rhea accompanied them to Crete from Rhodes, where nine of the Telchines, known as the Curetes, were selected to bring up Zeus.

However, in other versions of the tale, Rhea, Apollo, and Zeus were described as hostile to the Telchines. The gods (Zeus, Poseidon or Apollo) eventually killed them because they began to use magic for malignant purposes; particularly, they produced a mixture of Stygian water and sulfur, which killed animals and plants (according to Nonnus, they did so as revenge for being driven out of Rhodes by the Heliadae). Accounts vary on how exactly they were destroyed: by flood or Zeus&#x27;s thunderbolt or Poseidon&#x27;s trident or else Apollo assumed the shape of a wolf to kill them. They apparently lost the Titanomachy, the battle between the gods and the Titans.

Ovid in his &quot;Ibis&quot; mentions that Makelo, like the other Telchines, was killed with a thunderbolt; according to Callimachus and Nonnus, however, Makelo was the only one to be spared. According to Bacchylides, the survivor is Dexithea. Bacchylides also mentions that Dexithea later had a son Euxanthios by Minos. This Euxanthios is also known from Pindar&#x27;s works.

In rare accounts, the Telchines were originally the dogs of Actaeon, who were changed into men.

==See also==
*Cabeiri

==Notes==
== References ==

* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* John Tzetzes, &quot;Book of Histories,&quot; Book VII-VIII translated by Vasiliki Dogani from the original Greek of T. Kiessling&#x27;s edition of 1826. Online version at theio.com
*John Tzetzes, &quot;Book of Histories,&quot; Book XII-XIII translated by Nikolaos Giallousis from the original Greek of T. Kiessling&#x27;s edition of 1826. Online version at theio.com
* Maurus Servius Honoratus, &quot;In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii;&quot; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot; translated by William Henry Denham Rouse (1863-1950), from the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca. 3 Vols.&quot; W.H.D. Rouse. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1940-1942. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pseudo-Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses.&quot; Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Papinius Statius&quot;, The Thebaid&quot; translated by John Henry Mozley. Loeb Classical Library Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1928. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Publius Papinius Statius, &quot;The Thebaid. Vol I-II&quot;. John Henry Mozley. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1928. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Stephanus of Byzantium, &quot;Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt,&quot; edited by August Meineike (1790-1870), published 1849. A few entries from this important ancient handbook of place names have been translated by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Strabo, &quot;Geographica&quot; edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134605" start="24" end="33" title="Telchines" label="Telchines"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="84" end="90" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="109" end="114" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="119" end="125" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190563" start="165" end="171" title="Pontus (mythology)" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="176" end="180" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="184" end="192" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185747" start="197" end="204" title="Nemesis (mythology)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="256" end="262" title="Uranus (mythology)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="279" end="286" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="301" end="317" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q659437" start="355" end="363" title="Thalassa (mythology)" label="Thalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="473" end="481" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="609" end="616" title="Demonax (mythology)" label="Demonax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="619" end="624" title="Mylas (mythology)" label="Mylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56257363" start="646" end="653" title="Actaeus (mythology)" label="Actaeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="656" end="666" title="Megalesius" label="Megalesius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="685" title="Hormenus" label="Hormenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566891" start="688" end="693" title="Lycus (mythology)" label="Lycus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="695" end="700" title="Nicon (mythology)" label="Nicon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="705" end="710" title="Mimon (mythology)" label="Mimon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="724" end="731" title="Chryson (mythology)" label="Chryson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="733" end="740" title="Argyron" label="Argyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068630" start="745" end="752" title="Chalcon" label="Chalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275700" start="782" end="788" title="Macelo (mythology)" label="Makelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157003" start="790" end="798" title="Dexithea (mythology)" label="Dexithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611629" start="832" end="837" title="Halia of Rhodes" label="Halia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="851" end="859" title="Lysagora" label="Lysagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="1138" end="1145" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231539" start="1184" end="1192" title="Camirus" label="Cameirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018156" start="1194" end="1201" title="Ialysos" label="Ialysos"/>
<link wikidata="Q738700" start="1207" end="1213" title="Lindos" label="Lindos"/>
<link wikidata="Q368628" start="1336" end="1342" title="Sicyon" label="Sicyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="1647" end="1652" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814239" start="1687" end="1700" title="Lycian Apollo" label="Lycian Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="1773" end="1777" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1824" end="1830" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627845" start="1834" end="1843" title="Teumessus" label="Teumessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="1886" end="1891" title="Nymph" label="Nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="2927" end="2934" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="2965" end="2971" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="3031" end="3039" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445852" start="3084" end="3104" title="necklace of Harmonia" label="necklace of Harmonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831589" start="3351" end="3365" title="Dactyl (mythology)" label="Idaean Dactyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3370" end="3376" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12879305" start="3503" end="3510" title="Curetes (tribe)" label="Curetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108419" start="3655" end="3659" title="Rhea (mythology)" label="Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937275" start="3733" end="3741" title="Capheira" label="Capheira"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="3750" end="3757" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q631406" start="3887" end="3894" title="Korybantes" label="Curetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="3922" end="3926" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="4046" end="4050" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="4052" end="4060" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4064" end="4070" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q542758" start="4192" end="4199" title="Styx" label="Stygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="4264" end="4270" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215951" start="4333" end="4341" title="Heliadae" label="Heliadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q220878" start="4539" end="4550" title="Titanomachy" label="Titanomachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="4588" end="4594" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="4597" end="4601" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791552" start="4615" end="4619" title="Ibis (Ovid)" label="Ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="4718" end="4729" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="4734" end="4740" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="4802" end="4813" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414643" start="4897" end="4907" title="Euxanthios" label="Euxanthios"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="4911" end="4916" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4953" end="4959" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208531" start="5035" end="5042" title="Actaeon" label="Actaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q940138" start="5086" end="5093" title="Cabeiri" label="Cabeiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="5125" end="5141" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="5192" end="5215" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="5233" end="5255" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="5630" end="5642" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="5812" end="5824" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="5999" end="6023" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Maurus Servius Honoratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="6276" end="6295" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="6705" end="6723" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Pseudo-Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="7005" end="7025" title="Ovid" label="Publius Ovidius Naso"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="7343" end="7367" title="Statius" label="Publius Papinius Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="7783" end="7805" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="8069" end="8075" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83056" wikidata="Q7727937" url="?curid=83056" title="The Craft">
<text>The Craft may refer to:

==Common uses==
* a casual alternative name for Freemasonry
* an alternative name for neopagan witchcraft
** an alternative name for Wicca

==Entertainment==
* &quot;The Craft&quot; (album), a 2005 album by Blackalicious 
* &quot;The Craft&quot; (film), a 1996 American film
** &quot;The Craft: Legacy&quot;, a 2020 American film

==See also==
* Craft (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7727937" start="0" end="9" title="The Craft" label="The Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="73" end="84" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899858" start="111" end="130" title="neopagan witchcraft" label="neopagan witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="158" end="163" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727936" start="185" end="214" title="The Craft (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Craft&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q937005" start="249" end="277" title="The Craft (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Craft&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="309" end="326" title="The Craft: Legacy" label="The Craft: Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q351017" start="371" end="393" title="Craft (disambiguation)" label="Craft (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83060" wikidata="Q333921" url="?curid=83060" title="Magnetometer">
<text>A magnetometer is a device that measures magnetic field or magnetic dipole moment. Different types of magnetometers measure the direction, strength, or relative change of a magnetic field at a particular location. A compass is one such device, one that measures the direction of an ambient magnetic field, in this case, the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. Other magnetometers measure the magnetic dipole moment of a magnetic material such as a ferromagnet, for example by recording the effect of this magnetic dipole on the induced current in a coil.

The first magnetometer capable of measuring the absolute magnetic intensity at a point in space was invented by Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1833 and notable developments in the 19th century included the Hall effect, which is still widely used.

Magnetometers are widely used for measuring the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, in geophysical surveys, to detect magnetic anomalies of various types, and to determine the dipole moment of magnetic materials. In an aircraft&#x27;s attitude and heading reference system, they are commonly used as a heading reference. Magnetometers are also used by the military as a triggering mechanism in magnetic mines to detect submarines. Consequently, some countries, such as the United States, Canada and Australia, classify the more sensitive magnetometers as military technology, and control their distribution.

Magnetometers can be used as metal detectors: they can detect only magnetic (ferrous) metals, but can detect such metals at a much greater distance than conventional metal detectors, which rely on conductivity. Magnetometers are capable of detecting large objects, such as cars, at over , while a conventional metal detector&#x27;s range is rarely more than .

In recent years, magnetometers have been miniaturized to the extent that they can be incorporated in integrated circuits at very low cost and are finding increasing use as miniaturized compasses (MEMS magnetic field sensor).

==Introduction==

===Magnetic fields===
Magnetic fields are vector quantities characterized by both strength and direction. The strength of a magnetic field is measured in units of tesla in the SI units, and in gauss in the cgs system of units. 10,000 gauss are equal to one tesla. Measurements of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field are often quoted in units of nanotesla (nT), also called a gamma. The Earth&#x27;s magnetic field can vary from 20,000 to 80,000 nT depending on location, fluctuations in the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field are on the order of 100 nT, and magnetic field variations due to magnetic anomalies can be in the picotesla (pT) range. &quot;Gaussmeters&quot; and &quot;teslameters&quot; are magnetometers that measure in units of gauss or tesla, respectively. In some contexts, magnetometer is the term used for an instrument that measures fields of less than 1 millitesla (mT) and gaussmeter is used for those measuring greater than 1 mT.

===Types of magnetometer===

There are two basic types of magnetometer measurement. &quot;Vector magnetometers&quot; measure the vector components of a magnetic field. &quot;Total field magnetometers&quot; or &quot;scalar magnetometers&quot; measure the magnitude of the vector magnetic field. Magnetometers used to study the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field may express the vector components of the field in terms of &quot;declination&quot; (the angle between the horizontal component of the field vector and true, or geographic, north) and the &quot;inclination&quot; (the angle between the field vector and the horizontal surface).

&quot;Absolute magnetometers&quot; measure the absolute magnitude or vector magnetic field, using an internal calibration or known physical constants of the magnetic sensor. &quot;Relative magnetometers&quot; measure magnitude or vector magnetic field relative to a fixed but uncalibrated baseline. Also called &quot;variometers&quot;, relative magnetometers are used to measure variations in magnetic field.

Magnetometers may also be classified by their situation or intended use. &quot;Stationary magnetometers&quot; are installed to a fixed position and measurements are taken while the magnetometer is stationary. &quot;Portable&quot; or &quot;mobile magnetometers&quot; are meant to be used while in motion and may be manually carried or transported in a moving vehicle. &quot;Laboratory magnetometers&quot; are used to measure the magnetic field of materials placed within them and are typically stationary. &quot;Survey magnetometers&quot; are used to measure magnetic fields in geomagnetic surveys; they may be fixed base stations, as in the INTERMAGNET network, or mobile magnetometers used to scan a geographic region. An early adoption (in the 1950s) of airborne magnetometry by Inco prompted the discovery of Thompson, Manitoba.

===Performance and capabilities===
The performance and capabilities of magnetometers are described through their technical specifications. Major specifications include
*&quot;Sample rate&quot; is the number of readings given per second. The inverse is the &quot;cycle time&quot; in seconds per reading. Sample rate is important in mobile magnetometers; the sample rate and the vehicle speed determine the distance between measurements.
*&quot;Bandwidth&quot; or &quot;bandpass&quot; characterizes how well a magnetometer tracks rapid changes in magnetic field. For magnetometers with no onboard signal processing, bandwidth is determined by the Nyquist limit set by sample rate. Modern magnetometers may perform smoothing or averaging over sequential samples, achieving a lower noise in exchange for lower bandwidth.
*&quot;Resolution&quot; is the smallest change in a magnetic field the magnetometer can resolve. A magnetometer should have a resolution a good deal smaller than the smallest change one wishes to observe. This includes quantization error which is caused by recording roundoff and truncation of digital expressions of the data.
*&quot;Absolute error&quot; is the difference between the readings of a magnetometer true magnetic field.
*&quot;Drift&quot; is the change in absolute error over time.
*&quot;Thermal stability&quot; is the dependence of the measurement on temperature. It is given as a temperature coefficient in units of nT per degree Celsius.
*&quot;Noise&quot; is the random fluctuations generated by the magnetometer sensor or electronics. Noise is given in units of formula_1, where frequency component refers to the bandwidth.
*&quot;Sensitivity&quot; is the larger of the noise or the resolution.
*&quot;Heading error&quot; is the change in the measurement due to a change in orientation of the instrument in a constant magnetic field.
*The &quot;dead zone&quot; is the angular region of magnetometer orientation in which the instrument produces poor or no measurements. All optically pumped, proton-free precession, and Overhauser magnetometers experience some dead zone effects.
*&quot;Gradient tolerance&quot; is the ability of a magnetometer to obtain a reliable measurement in the presence of a magnetic field gradient. In surveys of unexploded ordnance or landfills, gradients can be large.

===Early magnetometers===


The compass, consisting of a magnetized needle whose orientation changes in response to the ambient magnetic field, is a simple type of magnetometer, one that measures the direction of the field. The oscillation frequency of a magnetized needle is proportional to the square-root of the strength of the ambient magnetic field; so, for example, the oscillation frequency of the needle of a horizontally situated compass is proportional to the square-root of the horizontal intensity of the ambient field.

In 1833, Carl Friedrich Gauss, head of the Geomagnetic Observatory in Göttingen, published a paper on measurement of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. It described a new instrument that consisted of a permanent bar magnet suspended horizontally from a gold fibre. The difference in the oscillations when the bar was magnetised and when it was demagnetised allowed Gauss to calculate an absolute value for the strength of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field.

The gauss, the CGS unit of magnetic flux density was named in his honour, defined as one maxwell per square centimeter; it equals 1×10−4 tesla (the SI unit).

Francis Ronalds and Charles Brooke independently invented magnetographs in 1846 that continuously recorded the magnet&#x27;s movements using photography, thus easing the load on observers. They were quickly utilised by Edward Sabine and others in a global magnetic survey and updated machines were in use well into the 20th century.

==Laboratory magnetometers==
Laboratory magnetometers measure the magnetization, also known as the magnetic moment of a sample material. Unlike survey magnetometers, laboratory magnetometers require the sample to be placed inside the magnetometer, and often the temperature, magnetic field, and other parameters of the sample can be controlled. A sample&#x27;s magnetization, is primarily dependent on the ordering of unpaired electrons within its atoms, with smaller contributions from nuclear magnetic moments, Larmor diamagnetism, among others. Ordering of magnetic moments are primarily classified as diamagnetic, paramagnetic, ferromagnetic, or antiferromagnetic (although the zoology of magnetic ordering also includes ferrimagnetic, helimagnetic, toroidal, spin glass, etc.). Measuring the magnetization as a function of temperature and magnetic field can give clues as to the type of magnetic ordering, as well as any phase transitions between different types of magnetic orders that occur at critical temperatures or magnetic fields. This type of magnetometry measurement is very important to understand the magnetic properties of materials in physics, chemistry, geophysics and geology, as well as sometimes biology.

===SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device)===

SQUIDs are a type of magnetometer used both as survey and as laboratory magnetometers. SQUID magnetometry is an extremely sensitive absolute magnetometry technique. However SQUIDs are noise sensitive, making them impractical as laboratory magnetometers in high DC magnetic fields, and in pulsed magnets. Commercial SQUID magnetometers are available for sample temperatures between 300 mK and 400 K, and magnetic fields up to 7 tesla.

===Inductive pickup coils===

Inductive pickup coils (also referred as inductive sensor) measure the magnetic dipole moment of a material by detecting the current induced in a coil due to the changing magnetic moment of the sample. The sample&#x27;s magnetization can be changed by applying a small ac magnetic field (or a rapidly changing dc field), as occurs in capacitor-driven pulsed magnets. These measurements require differentiating between the magnetic field produced by the sample and that from the external applied field. Often a special arrangement of cancellation coils is used. For example, half of the pickup coil is wound in one direction, and the other half in the other direction, and the sample is placed in only one half. The external uniform magnetic field is detected by both halves of the coil, and since they are counter-wound, the external magnetic field produces no net signal.

===VSM (vibrating-sample magnetometer)===
Vibrating-sample magnetometers (VSMs) detect the dipole moment of a sample by mechanically vibrating the sample inside of an inductive pickup coil or inside of a SQUID coil. Induced current or changing flux in the coil is measured. The vibration is typically created by a motor or a piezoelectric actuator. Typically the VSM technique is about an order of magnitude less sensitive than SQUID magnetometry. VSMs can be combined with SQUIDs to create a system that is more sensitive than either one alone. Heat due to the sample vibration can limit the base temperature of a VSM, typically to 2 kelvin. VSM is also impractical for measuring a fragile sample that is sensitive to rapid acceleration.

===Pulsed-field extraction magnetometry===
Pulsed-field extraction magnetometry is another method making use of pickup coils to measure magnetization. Unlike VSMs where the sample is physically vibrated, in pulsed-field extraction magnetometry, the sample is secured and the external magnetic field is changed rapidly, for example in a capacitor-driven magnet. One of multiple techniques must then be used to cancel out the external field from the field produced by the sample. These include counterwound coils that cancel the external uniform field and background measurements with the sample removed from the coil.

===Torque magnetometry===
Magnetic torque magnetometry can be even more sensitive than SQUID magnetometry. However, magnetic torque magnetometry doesn&#x27;t measure magnetism directly as all the previously mentioned methods do. Magnetic torque magnetometry instead measures the torque τ acting on a sample&#x27;s magnetic moment μ as a result of a uniform magnetic field B, τ = μ × B. A torque is thus a measure of the sample&#x27;s magnetic or shape anisotropy. In some cases the sample&#x27;s magnetization can be extracted from the measured torque. In other cases, the magnetic torque measurement is used to detect magnetic phase transitions or quantum oscillations. The most common way to measure magnetic torque is to mount the sample on a cantilever and measure the displacement via capacitance measurement between the cantilever and nearby fixed object, or by measuring the piezoelectricity of the cantilever, or by optical interferometry off the surface of the cantilever.

===Faraday force magnetometry===
Faraday force magnetometry uses the fact that a spatial magnetic field gradient produces force that acts on a magnetized object, F = (M⋅∇)B. In Faraday force magnetometry the force on the sample can be measured by a scale (hanging the sample from a sensitive balance), or by detecting the displacement against a spring. Commonly a capacitive load cell or cantilever is used because of its sensitivity, size, and lack of mechanical parts. Faraday force magnetometry is approximately one order of magnitude less sensitive than a SQUID. The biggest drawback to Faraday force magnetometry is that it requires some means of not only producing a magnetic field, but also producing a magnetic field gradient. While this can be accomplished by using a set of special pole faces, a much better result can be achieved by using set of gradient coils. A major advantage to Faraday force magnetometry is that it is small and reasonably tolerant to noise, and thus can be implemented in a wide range of environments, including a dilution refrigerator. Faraday force magnetometry can also be complicated by the presence of torque (see previous technique). This can be circumvented by varying the gradient field independently of the applied DC field so the torque and the Faraday force contribution can be separated, and/or by designing a Faraday force magnetometer that prevents the sample from being rotated.

===Optical magnetometry===
Optical magnetometry makes use of various optical techniques to measure magnetization. One such technique, Kerr magnetometry makes use of the magneto-optic Kerr effect, or MOKE. In this technique, incident light is directed at the sample&#x27;s surface. Light interacts with a magnetized surface nonlinearly so the reflected light has an elliptical polarization, which is then measured by a detector. Another method of optical magnetometry is Faraday rotation magnetometry. Faraday rotation magnetometry utilizes nonlinear magneto-optical rotation to measure a sample&#x27;s magnetization. In this method a Faraday modulating thin film is applied to the sample to be measured and a series of images are taken with a camera that senses the polarization of the reflected light. To reduce noise, multiple pictures are then averaged together. One advantage to this method is that it allows mapping of the magnetic characteristics over the surface of a sample. This can be especially useful when studying such things as the Meissner effect on superconductors. Microfabricated optically pumped magnetometers (μOPMs) can be used to detect the origin of brain seizures more precisely and generate less heat than currently available superconducting quantum interference devices, better known as SQUIDs. The device works by using polarized light to control the spin of rubidium atoms which can be used to measure and monitor the magnetic field.

==Survey magnetometers==
Survey magnetometers can be divided into two basic types:
*&quot;Scalar magnetometers&quot; measure the total strength of the magnetic field to which they are subjected, but not its direction
*&quot;Vector magnetometers&quot; have the capability to measure the component of the magnetic field in a particular direction, relative to the spatial orientation of the device.

A vector is a mathematical entity with both magnitude and direction. The Earth&#x27;s magnetic field at a given point is a vector. A magnetic compass is designed to give a horizontal bearing direction, whereas a &quot;vector magnetometer&quot; measures both the magnitude and direction of the total magnetic field. Three orthogonal sensors are required to measure the components of the magnetic field in all three dimensions.

They are also rated as &quot;absolute&quot; if the strength of the field can be calibrated from their own known internal constants or &quot;relative&quot; if they need to be calibrated by reference to a known field.

A &quot;magnetograph&quot; is a magnetometer that continuously records data over time. This data is typically represented in magnetograms.

Magnetometers can also be classified as &quot;AC&quot; if they measure fields that vary relatively rapidly in time (&gt;100 Hz), and &quot;DC&quot; if they measure fields that vary only slowly (quasi-static) or are static. AC magnetometers find use in electromagnetic systems (such as magnetotellurics), and DC magnetometers are used for detecting mineralisation and corresponding geological structures.

===Scalar magnetometers===

====Proton precession magnetometer====

&quot;Proton precession magnetometer&quot;s, also known as &quot;proton magnetometers&quot;, PPMs or simply mags, measure the resonance frequency of protons (hydrogen nuclei) in the magnetic field to be measured, due to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Because the precession frequency depends only on atomic constants and the strength of the ambient magnetic field, the accuracy of this type of magnetometer can reach 1 ppm.

A direct current flowing in a solenoid creates a strong magnetic field around a hydrogen-rich fluid (kerosene and decane are popular, and even water can be used), causing some of the protons to align themselves with that field. The current is then interrupted, and as protons realign themselves with the magnetic field, they precess at a frequency that is directly proportional to the magnetic field. This produces a weak rotating magnetic field that is picked up by a (sometimes separate) inductor, amplified electronically, and fed to a digital frequency counter whose output is typically scaled and displayed directly as field strength or output as digital data.

For hand/backpack carried units, PPM sample rates are typically limited to less than one sample per second. Measurements are typically taken with the sensor held at fixed locations at approximately 10 metre increments.

Portable instruments are also limited by sensor volume (weight) and power consumption. PPMs work in field gradients up to 3,000 nT/m, which is adequate for most mineral exploration work. For higher gradient tolerance, such as mapping banded iron formations and detecting large ferrous objects, Overhauser magnetometers can handle 10,000 nT/m, and caesium magnetometers can handle 30,000 nT/m.

They are relatively inexpensive (&lt; US$8,000) and were once widely used in mineral exploration. Three manufacturers dominate the market: GEM Systems, Geometrics and Scintrex. Popular models include G-856/857, Smartmag, GSM-18, and GSM-19T.

For mineral exploration, they have been superseded by Overhauser, caesium, and potassium instruments, all of which are fast-cycling, and do not require the operator to pause between readings.

====Overhauser effect magnetometer====
The &quot;Overhauser effect magnetometer&quot; or &quot;Overhauser magnetometer&quot; uses the same fundamental effect as the &quot;proton precession magnetometer&quot; to take measurements. By adding free radicals to the measurement fluid, the nuclear Overhauser effect can be exploited to significantly improve upon the proton precession magnetometer. Rather than aligning the protons using a solenoid, a low power radio-frequency field is used to align (polarise) the electron spin of the free radicals, which then couples to the protons via the Overhauser effect. This has two main advantages: driving the RF field takes a fraction of the energy (allowing lighter-weight batteries for portable units), and faster sampling as the electron-proton coupling can happen even as measurements are being taken. An Overhauser magnetometer produces readings with a 0.01 nT to 0.02 nT standard deviation while sampling once per second.

====Caesium vapour magnetometer====
The &quot;optically pumped caesium vapour magnetometer&quot; is a highly sensitive (300 fT/Hz0.5) and accurate device used in a wide range of applications. It is one of a number of alkali vapours (including rubidium and potassium) that are used in this way.

The device broadly consists of a photon emitter, such as a laser, an absorption chamber containing caesium vapour mixed with a &quot;buffer gas&quot; through which the emitted photons pass, and a photon detector, arranged in that order. The buffer gas is usually helium or nitrogen and they are used to reduce collisions between the caesium vapour atoms.

The basic principle that allows the device to operate is the fact that a caesium atom can exist in any of nine energy levels, which can be informally thought of as the placement of electron atomic orbitals around the atomic nucleus. When a caesium atom within the chamber encounters a photon from the laser, it is excited to a higher energy state, emits a photon and falls to an indeterminate lower energy state. The caesium atom is &quot;sensitive&quot; to the photons from the laser in three of its nine energy states, and therefore, assuming a closed system, all the atoms eventually fall into a state in which all the photons from the laser pass through unhindered and are measured by the photon detector. The caesium vapour has become transparent. This process happens continuously to maintain as many of the electrons as possible in that state.

At this point, the sample (or population) is said to have been optically pumped and ready for measurement to take place. When an external field is applied it disrupts this state and causes atoms to move to different states which makes the vapour less transparent. The photo detector can measure this change and therefore measure the magnitude of the magnetic field.

In the most common type of caesium magnetometer, a very small AC magnetic field is applied to the cell. Since the difference in the energy levels of the electrons is determined by the external magnetic field, there is a frequency at which this small AC field makes the electrons change states. In this new state, the electrons once again can absorb a photon of light. This causes a signal on a photo detector that measures the light passing through the cell. The associated electronics use this fact to create a signal exactly at the frequency that corresponds to the external field.

Another type of caesium magnetometer modulates the light applied to the cell. This is referred to as a Bell-Bloom magnetometer, after the two scientists who first investigated the effect. If the light is turned on and off at the frequency corresponding to the Earth&#x27;s field, there is a change in the signal seen at the photo detector. Again, the associated electronics use this to create a signal exactly at the frequency that corresponds to the external field. Both methods lead to high performance magnetometers.

====Potassium vapour magnetometer====
Potassium is the only optically pumped magnetometer that operates on a single, narrow electron spin resonance (ESR) line in contrast to other alkali vapour magnetometers that use irregular, composite and wide spectral lines and helium with the inherently wide spectral line.

====Metastable helium-4 scalar magnetometer====
Magnetometers based on helium-4 excited to its metastable triplet state thanks to a plasma discharge have been developed in the 1960s and 70s by Texas Instruments, then by its spinoff Polatomic, and from late 1980s by CEA-Leti. The latter pioneered a configuration which cancels the dead-zones, which are a recurrent problem of atomic magnetometers. This configuration was demonstrated to show an accuracy of 50 pT in orbit operation. The ESA chose this technology for the Swarm mission, which was launched in 2013. An experimental vector mode, which could compete with fluxgate magnetometers was tested in this mission with overall success.

====Applications====
The caesium and potassium magnetometers are typically used where a higher performance magnetometer than the proton magnetometer is needed. In archaeology and geophysics, where the sensor sweeps through an area and many accurate magnetic field measurements are often needed, caesium and potassium magnetometers have advantages over the proton magnetometer.

The caesium and potassium magnetometer&#x27;s faster measurement rate allows the sensor to be moved through the area more quickly for a given number of data points. Caesium and potassium magnetometers are insensitive to rotation of the sensor while the measurement is being made.

The lower noise of caesium and potassium magnetometers allow those measurements to more accurately show the variations in the field with position.
===Vector magnetometers===
Vector magnetometers measure one or more components of the magnetic field electronically. Using three orthogonal magnetometers, both azimuth and dip (inclination) can be measured. By taking the square root of the sum of the squares of the components the total magnetic field strength (also called total magnetic intensity, TMI) can be calculated by the Pythagorean theorem.

Vector magnetometers are subject to temperature drift and the dimensional instability of the ferrite cores. They also require leveling to obtain component information, unlike total field (scalar) instruments. For these reasons they are no longer used for mineral exploration.

====Rotating coil magnetometer====
The magnetic field induces a sine wave in a rotating coil. The amplitude of the signal is proportional to the strength of the field, provided it is uniform, and to the sine of the angle between the rotation axis of the coil and the field lines. This type of magnetometer is obsolete.

====Hall effect magnetometer====

The most common magnetic sensing devices are solid-state Hall effect sensors. These sensors produce a voltage proportional to the applied magnetic field and also sense polarity. They are used in applications where the magnetic field strength is relatively large, such as in anti-lock braking systems in cars, which sense wheel rotation speed via slots in the wheel disks.

====Magnetoresistive devices====

These are made of thin strips of Permalloy, a high magnetic permeability, nickel-iron alloy, whose electrical resistance varies with a change in magnetic field. They have a well-defined axis of sensitivity, can be produced in 3-D versions and can be mass-produced as an integrated circuit. They have a response time of less than 1 microsecond and can be sampled in moving vehicles up to 1,000 times/second. They can be used in compasses that read within 1°, for which the underlying sensor must reliably resolve 0.1°.

====Fluxgate magnetometer====

A fluxgate magnetometer consists of a small magnetically susceptible core wrapped by two coils of wire. An alternating electric current is passed through one coil, driving the core through an alternating cycle of magnetic saturation; i.e., magnetised, unmagnetised, inversely magnetised, unmagnetised, magnetised, and so forth. This constantly changing field induces a voltage in the second coil which is measured by a detector. In a magnetically neutral background, the input and output signals match. However, when the core is exposed to a background field, it is more easily saturated in alignment with that field and less easily saturated in opposition to it. Hence the alternating magnetic field and the induced output voltage, are out of step with the input current. The extent to which this is the case depends on the strength of the background magnetic field. Often, the signal in the output coil is integrated, yielding an output analog voltage proportional to the magnetic field.

The fluxgate magnetometer was invented by H. Aschenbrenner and G. Goubau in 1936. A team at Gulf Research Laboratories led by Victor Vacquier developed airborne fluxgate magnetometers to detect submarines during World War II and after the war confirmed the theory of plate tectonics by using them to measure shifts in the magnetic patterns on the sea floor.

A wide variety of sensors are currently available and used to measure magnetic fields. Fluxgate compasses and gradiometers measure the direction and magnitude of magnetic fields. Fluxgates are affordable, rugged and compact with miniaturization recently advancing to the point of complete sensor solutions in the form of IC chips, including examples from both academia and industry. This, plus their typically low power consumption makes them ideal for a variety of sensing applications. Gradiometers are commonly used for archaeological prospecting, and unexploded ordnance (UXO) detection such as the German military&#x27;s popular &quot;Foerster&quot;. Utility location specialists also use gradiometers for locating underground utilities such as pipeline valves, septic tanks, and manhole covers.

The typical fluxgate magnetometer consists of a &quot;sense&quot; (secondary) coil surrounding an inner &quot;drive&quot; (primary) coil that is closely wound around a highly permeable core material, such as mu-metal or permalloy. An alternating current is applied to the drive winding, which drives the core in a continuous repeating cycle of saturation and unsaturation. To an external field, the core is alternately weakly permeable and highly permeable. The core is often a toroidally wrapped ring or a pair of linear elements whose drive windings are each wound in opposing directions. Such closed flux paths minimise coupling between the drive and sense windings. In the presence of an external magnetic field, with the core in a highly permeable state, such a field is locally attracted or gated (hence the name fluxgate) through the sense winding. When the core is weakly permeable, the external field is less attracted. This continuous gating of the external field in and out of the sense winding induces a signal in the sense winding, whose principal frequency is twice that of the drive frequency, and whose strength and phase orientation vary directly with the external-field magnitude and polarity.

There are additional factors that affect the size of the resultant signal. These factors include the number of turns in the sense winding, magnetic permeability of the core, sensor geometry, and the gated flux rate of change with respect to time.

Phase synchronous detection is used to extract these harmonic signals from the sense winding and convert them into a DC voltage proportional to the external magnetic field. Active current feedback may also be employed, such that the sense winding is driven to counteract the external field. In such cases, the feedback current varies linearly with the external magnetic field and is used as the basis for measurement. This helps to counter inherent non-linearity between the applied external field strength and the flux gated through the sense winding.

====SQUID magnetometer====

SQUIDs, or superconducting quantum interference devices, measure extremely small changes in magnetic fields. They are very sensitive vector magnetometers, with noise levels as low as 3 fT Hz−½ in commercial instruments and 0.4 fT Hz−½ in experimental devices. Many liquid-helium-cooled commercial SQUIDs achieve a flat noise spectrum from near DC (less than 1 Hz) to tens of kilohertz, making such devices ideal for time-domain biomagnetic signal measurements. SERF atomic magnetometers demonstrated in laboratories so far reach competitive noise floor but in relatively small frequency ranges.

SQUID magnetometers require cooling with liquid helium () or liquid nitrogen () to operate, hence the packaging requirements to use them are rather stringent both from a thermal-mechanical as well as magnetic standpoint. SQUID magnetometers are most commonly used to measure the magnetic fields produced by laboratory samples, also for brain or heart activity (magnetoencephalography and magnetocardiography, respectively). Geophysical surveys use SQUIDs from time to time, but the logistics of cooling the SQUID are much more complicated than other magnetometers that operate at room temperature.

====Zero-field optically-pumped magnetometers====
Magnetometers based on atomic gasses can perform vector measurements of the magnetic field in the low field regime, where the decay of the atomic coherence becomes faster than the Larmor frequency. The physics of such magnetometers is based on the Hanle effect. Such zero-field optically pumped magnetometers have been tested in various configurations and with different atomic species, notably alkali (potassium, rubidium and cesium), helium and mercury. For the case of alkali, the coherence times were greatly limited due to spin-exchange relaxation. A major breakthrough happened at the beginning of the 2000 decade, Romalis group in Princeton demonstrated that in such a low field regime, alkali coherence times can be greatly enhanced if a high enough density can be reached by high temperature heating, this is the so-called SERF effect.

The main interest of optically-pumped magnetometers is to replace SQUID magnetometers in applications where cryogenic cooling is a drawback. This is notably the case of medical imaging where such cooling imposes a thick thermal insulation, strongly affecting the amplitude of the recorded biomagnetic signals. Several startup companies are currently developing optically pumped magnetometers for biomedical applications: those of TwinLeaf, quSpin and FieldLine being based on alkali vapors, and those of Mag4Health on metastable helium-4.

=====Spin-exchange relaxation-free (SERF) atomic magnetometers=====

At sufficiently high atomic density, extremely high sensitivity can be achieved. Spin-exchange-relaxation-free (SERF) atomic magnetometers containing potassium, caesium, or rubidium vapor operate similarly to the caesium magnetometers described above, yet can reach sensitivities lower than 1 fT Hz−. The SERF magnetometers only operate in small magnetic fields. The Earth&#x27;s field is about 50 μT; SERF magnetometers operate in fields less than 0.5 μT.

Large volume detectors have achieved a sensitivity of 200 aT Hz−. This technology has greater sensitivity per unit volume than SQUID detectors. The technology can also produce very small magnetometers that may in the future replace coils for detecting radio-frequency magnetic fields. This technology may produce a magnetic sensor that has all of its input and output signals in the form of light on fiber-optic cables. This lets the magnetic measurement be made near high electrical voltages.

==Calibration of magnetometers==
The calibration of magnetometers is usually performed by means of coils which are supplied by an electrical current to create a magnetic field. It allows to characterize the sensitivity of the magnetometer (in terms of V/T). In many applications the homogeneity of the calibration coil is an important feature. For this reason, coils like Helmholtz coils are commonly used either in a single axis or a three axis configuration. For demanding applications a high homogeneity magnetic field is mandatory, in such cases magnetic field calibration can be performed using a Maxwell coil, cosine coils, or calibration in the highly homogenous Earth&#x27;s magnetic field.

==Uses==


Magnetometers have a very diverse range of applications, including locating objects such as submarines, sunken ships, hazards affecting tunnel boring machines, coal mine hazards, unexploded ordnance, toxic waste drums, as well as a wide range of mineral deposits and geological structures. They also have applications in heart beat monitors, concealed weapons detection, military weapon systems positioning, sensors in anti-locking brakes, weather prediction (via solar cycles), steel pylons, drill guidance systems, archaeology, plate tectonics, radio wave propagation, and planetary exploration. Laboratory magnetometers determine the magnetic dipole moment of a magnetic sample, typically as a function of temperature, magnetic field, or other parameter. This helps to reveal its magnetic properties such as ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism, superconductivity, or other properties that affect magnetism.

Depending on the application, magnetometers can be deployed in spacecraft, aeroplanes (&quot;fixed wing&quot; magnetometers), helicopters (&quot;stinger&quot; and &quot;bird&quot;), on the ground (&quot;backpack&quot;), towed at a distance behind quad bikes (ATVs) on a (&quot;sled&quot; or &quot;trailer&quot;), lowered into boreholes (&quot;tool&quot;, &quot;probe,&quot; or &quot;sonde&quot;), or towed behind boats (&quot;tow fish&quot;).

===Mechanical stress measurement===
Magnetometers are used to measure or monitor mechanical stress in ferromagnetic materials. Mechanical stress will improve alignment of magnetic domains in microscopic scale that will raise the magnetic field measured close to the material by magnetometers. There are different hypothesis about stress-magnetisation relationship. However the effect of mechanical stress on measured magnetic field near the specimen is claimed to be proven in many scientific publications. There have been efforts to solve the inverse problem of magnetisation-stress resolution in order to quantify the stress based on measured magnetic field.

===Accelerator physics===

Magnetometers are used extensively in experimental particle physics to measure the magnetic field of pivotal components such as the concentration or focusing beam-magnets.

===Archaeology===

Magnetometers are also used to detect archaeological sites, shipwrecks, and other buried or submerged objects. Fluxgate gradiometers are popular due to their compact configuration and relatively low cost. Gradiometers enhance shallow features and negate the need for a base station. Caesium and Overhauser magnetometers are also very effective when used as gradiometers or as single-sensor systems with base stations.

The TV program &quot;Time Team&quot; popularised &#x27;geophys&#x27;, including magnetic techniques used in archaeological work to detect fire hearths, walls of baked bricks and magnetic stones such as basalt and granite. Walking tracks and roadways can sometimes be mapped with differential compaction in magnetic soils or with disturbances in clays, such as on the Great Hungarian Plain. Ploughed fields behave as sources of magnetic noise in such surveys.

===Auroras===
Magnetometers can give an indication of auroral activity before the light from the aurora becomes visible. A grid of magnetometers around the world constantly measures the effect of the solar wind on the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, which is then published on the K-index.

===Coal exploration===
While magnetometers can be used to help map basin shape at a regional scale, they are more commonly used to map hazards to coal mining, such as basaltic intrusions (dykes, sills, and volcanic plug) that destroy resources and are dangerous to longwall mining equipment. Magnetometers can also locate zones ignited by lightning and map siderite (an impurity in coal).

The best survey results are achieved on the ground in high-resolution surveys (with approximately 10 m line spacing and 0.5 m station spacing). Bore-hole magnetometers using a Ferretcan also assist when coal seams are deep, by using multiple sills or looking beneath surface basalt flows.

Modern surveys generally use magnetometers with GPS technology to automatically record the magnetic field and their location. The data set is then corrected with data from a second magnetometer (the base station) that is left stationary and records the change in the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field during the survey.

===Directional drilling===
Magnetometers are used in directional drilling for oil or gas to detect the azimuth of the drilling tools near the drill. They are most often paired with accelerometers in drilling tools so that both the inclination and azimuth of the drill can be found.

===Military===
For defensive purposes, navies use arrays of magnetometers laid across sea floors in strategic locations (i.e. around ports) to monitor submarine activity. The Russian Alfa-class titanium submarines were designed and built at great expense to thwart such systems (as pure titanium is non-magnetic).

Military submarines are degaussed—by passing through large underwater loops at regular intervals—to help them escape detection by sea-floor monitoring systems, magnetic anomaly detectors, and magnetically-triggered mines. However, submarines are never completely de-magnetised. It is possible to tell the depth at which a submarine has been by measuring its magnetic field, which is distorted as the pressure distorts the hull and hence the field. Heating can also change the magnetization of steel.

Submarines tow long sonar arrays to detect ships, and can even recognise different propeller noises. The sonar arrays need to be accurately positioned so they can triangulate direction to targets (e.g. ships). The arrays do not tow in a straight line, so fluxgate magnetometers are used to orient each sonar node in the array.

Fluxgates can also be used in weapons navigation systems, but have been largely superseded by GPS and ring laser gyroscopes.

Magnetometers such as the German Foerster are used to locate ferrous ordnance. Caesium and Overhauser magnetometers are used to locate and help clean up old bombing and test ranges.

UAV payloads also include magnetometers for a range of defensive and offensive tasks.

===Mineral exploration===
Magnetometric surveys can be useful in defining magnetic anomalies which represent ore (direct detection), or in some cases gangue minerals associated with ore deposits (indirect or inferential detection). This includes iron ore, magnetite, hematite, and often pyrrhotite.

Developed countries such as Australia, Canada and USA invest heavily in systematic airborne magnetic surveys of their respective continents and surrounding oceans, to assist with map geology and in the discovery of mineral deposits. Such aeromag surveys are typically undertaken with 400 m line spacing at 100 m elevation, with readings every 10 meters or more. To overcome the asymmetry in the data density, data is interpolated between lines (usually 5 times) and data along the line is then averaged. Such data is gridded to an 80 m × 80 m pixel size and image processed using a program like ERMapper. At an exploration lease scale, the survey may be followed by a more detailed helimag or crop duster style fixed wing at 50 m line spacing and 50 m elevation (terrain permitting). Such an image is gridded on a 10 x 10 m pixel, offering 64 times the resolution.

Where targets are shallow (&lt;200 m), aeromag anomalies may be followed up with ground magnetic surveys on 10 m to 50 m line spacing with 1 m station spacing to provide the best detail (2 to 10 m pixel grid) (or 25 times the resolution prior to drilling).

Magnetic fields from magnetic bodies of ore fall off with the inverse distance cubed (dipole target), or at best inverse distance squared (magnetic monopole target). One analogy to the resolution-with-distance is a car driving at night with lights on. At a distance of 400 m one sees one glowing haze, but as it approaches, two headlights, and then the left blinker, are visible.

There are many challenges interpreting magnetic data for mineral exploration. Multiple targets mix together like multiple heat sources and, unlike light, there is no magnetic telescope to focus fields. The combination of multiple sources is measured at the surface. The geometry, depth, or magnetisation direction (remanence) of the targets are also generally not known, and so multiple models can explain the data.

Potent by Geophysical Software Solutions is a leading magnetic (and gravity) interpretation package used extensively in the Australian exploration industry.

Magnetometers assist mineral explorers both directly (i.e., gold mineralisation associated with magnetite, diamonds in kimberlite pipes) and, more commonly, indirectly, such as by mapping geological structures conducive to mineralisation (i.e., shear zones and alteration haloes around granites).

Airborne Magnetometers detect the change in the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field using sensors attached to the aircraft in the form of a &quot;stinger&quot; or by towing a magnetometer on the end of a cable. The magnetometer on a cable is often referred to as a &quot;bomb&quot; because of its shape. Others call it a &quot;bird&quot;.

Because hills and valleys under the aircraft make the magnetic readings rise and fall, a radar altimeter keeps track of the transducer&#x27;s deviation from the nominal altitude above ground. There may also be a camera that takes photos of the ground. The location of the measurement is determined by also recording a GPS.

===Mobile phones===
Many smartphones contain miniaturized microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) magnetometers which are used to detect magnetic field strength and are used as compasses. The iPhone 3GS has a magnetometer, a magnetoresistive permalloy sensor, the AN-203 produced by Honeywell. In 2009, the price of three-axis magnetometers dipped below US$1 per device and dropped rapidly. The use of a three-axis device means that it is not sensitive to the way it is held in orientation or elevation. Hall effect devices are also popular.

Researchers at Deutsche Telekom have used magnetometers embedded in mobile devices to permit touchless 3D interaction. Their interaction framework, called MagiTact, tracks changes to the magnetic field around a cellphone to identify different gestures made by a hand holding or wearing a magnet.

===Oil exploration===
Seismic methods are preferred to magnetometers as the primary survey method for oil exploration although magnetic methods can give additional information about the underlying geology and in some environments evidence of leakage from traps. Magnetometers are also used in oil exploration to show locations of geologic features that make drilling impractical, and other features that give geophysicists a more complete picture of stratigraphy.

===Spacecraft===

A three-axis fluxgate magnetometer was part of the &quot;Mariner 2&quot; and &quot;Mariner 10&quot; missions. A dual technique magnetometer is part of the &quot;Cassini–Huygens&quot; mission to explore Saturn. This system is composed of a vector helium and fluxgate magnetometers. Magnetometers were also a component instrument on the Mercury &quot;MESSENGER&quot; mission. A magnetometer can also be used by satellites like GOES to measure both the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field of a planet or moon.

===Magnetic surveys===

Systematic surveys can be used to in searching for mineral deposits or locating lost objects. Such surveys are divided into:
*Aeromagnetic survey
*Borehole
*Ground
*Marine

Aeromag datasets for Australia can be downloaded from the GADDS database.

Data can be divided in point located and image data, the latter of which is in ERMapper format.

====Magnetovision====
On the base of space measured distribution of magnetic field parameters (e.g. amplitude or direction), the magnetovision images may be generated. Such presentation of magnetic data is very useful for further analyse and data fusion.

====Gradiometer====
Magnetic gradiometers are pairs of magnetometers with their sensors separated, usually horizontally, by a fixed distance. The readings are subtracted to measure the difference between the sensed magnetic fields, which gives the field gradients caused by magnetic anomalies. This is one way of compensating both for the variability in time of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field and for other sources of electromagnetic interference, thus allowing for more sensitive detection of anomalies. Because nearly equal values are being subtracted, the noise performance requirements for the magnetometers is more extreme.

Gradiometers enhance shallow magnetic anomalies and are thus good for archaeological and site investigation work. They are also good for real-time work such as unexploded ordnance (UXO) location. It is twice as efficient to run a base station and use two (or more) mobile sensors to read parallel lines simultaneously (assuming data is stored and post-processed). In this manner, both along-line and cross-line gradients can be calculated.

====Position control of magnetic surveys====
In traditional mineral exploration and archaeological work, grid pegs placed by theodolite and tape measure were used to define the survey area. Some UXO surveys used ropes to define the lanes. Airborne surveys used radio triangulation beacons, such as Siledus.

Non-magnetic electronic hipchain triggers were developed to trigger magnetometers. They used rotary shaft encoders to measure distance along disposable cotton reels.

Modern explorers use a range of low-magnetic signature GPS units, including real-time kinematic GPS.

====Heading errors in magnetic surveys====
Magnetic surveys can suffer from noise coming from a range of sources. Different magnetometer technologies suffer different kinds of noise problems.

Heading errors are one group of noise. They can come from three sources:
*Sensor
*Console
*Operator

Some total field sensors give different readings depending on their orientation. Magnetic materials in the sensor itself are the primary cause of this error. In some magnetometers, such as the vapor magnetometers (caesium, potassium, etc.), there are sources of heading error in the physics that contribute small amounts to the total heading error.

Console noise comes from magnetic components on or within the console. These include ferrite in cores in inductors and transformers, steel frames around LCDs, legs on IC chips and steel cases in disposable batteries. Some popular MIL spec connectors also have steel springs.

Operators must take care to be magnetically clean and should check the &#x27;magnetic hygiene&#x27; of all apparel and items carried during a survey. Akubra hats are very popular in Australia, but their steel rims must be removed before use on magnetic surveys. Steel rings on notepads, steel capped boots and steel springs in overall eyelets can all cause unnecessary noise in surveys. Pens, mobile phones and stainless steel implants can also be problematic.

The magnetic response (noise) from ferrous object on the operator and console can change with heading direction because of induction and remanence. Aeromagnetic survey aircraft and quad bike systems can use special compensators to correct for heading error noise.

Heading errors look like herringbone patterns in survey images. Alternate lines can also be corrugated.

====Image processing of magnetic data====
Recording data and image processing is superior to real-time work because subtle anomalies often missed by the operator (especially in magnetically noisy areas) can be correlated between lines, shapes and clusters better defined. A range of sophisticated enhancement techniques can also be used. There is also a hard copy and need for systematic coverage.

===Aircraft navigation===
The Magnetometer Navigation (MAGNAV) algorithm was initially running as a flight experiment in 2004. Later on, diamond magnetometers were developed by the United States Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) as a better method of navigation which cannot be jammed by the enemy.

==See also==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==References==
==Further reading==
*


==External links==

*Earthquake forecasting techniques and more research on the study of electromagnetic fields
*USGS Geomagnetism Program
*Earth&#x27;s Field NMR (EFNMR)
*Space-based magnetometers
*Practical guidelines for building a magnetometer by hobbyists – Part 1 Introduction 
*Practical guidelines for building a magnetometer by hobbyists – Part 2 Building </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="2" end="14" title="Magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="41" end="55" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="59" end="81" title="magnetic dipole moment" label="magnetic dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="216" end="223" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="324" end="351" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="441" end="452" title="ferromagnet" label="ferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q390314" start="498" end="513" title="magnetic dipole" label="magnetic dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="661" end="681" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="748" end="759" title="Hall effect" label="Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747649" start="870" end="888" title="geophysical survey" label="geophysical survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q117987" start="901" end="919" title="magnetic anomaly" label="magnetic anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4248887" start="1018" end="1055" title="attitude and heading reference system" label="attitude and heading reference system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384217" start="1085" end="1092" title="Heading (navigation)" label="heading"/>
<link wikidata="Q211959" start="1421" end="1435" title="metal detector" label="metal detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="1469" end="1476" title="ferrous" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1854" end="1872" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103582" start="1949" end="1975" title="MEMS magnetic field sensor" label="MEMS magnetic field sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="2039" end="2045" title="vector (mathematics)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="2160" end="2165" title="tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="2173" end="2180" title="SI unit" label="SI unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="2190" end="2195" title="gauss (unit)" label="gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="2203" end="2213" title="cgs system" label="cgs system"/>
<link wikidata="Q117987" start="2577" end="2595" title="magnetic anomaly" label="magnetic anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q243289" start="3351" end="3374" title="Magnetic declination" label="&amp;quot;declination&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="4556" end="4567" title="geomagnetic" label="geomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623414" start="4620" end="4631" title="INTERMAGNET" label="INTERMAGNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269002" start="4760" end="4764" title="Inco" label="Inco"/>
<link wikidata="Q991295" start="4791" end="4809" title="Thompson, Manitoba" label="Thompson, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="5407" end="5424" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="5457" end="5470" title="Nyquist limit" label="Nyquist limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q198099" start="5848" end="5866" title="quantization error" label="quantization error"/>
<link wikidata="Q173582" start="7061" end="7069" title="gradient" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="7085" end="7104" title="unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="7176" end="7183" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="7686" end="7706" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="7928" end="7932" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="8135" end="8140" title="gauss (unit)" label="gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="8146" end="8149" title="CGS" label="CGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="8158" end="8179" title="magnetic flux density" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q608697" start="8220" end="8227" title="maxwell (unit)" label="maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="8268" end="8273" title="tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="8279" end="8286" title="SI unit" label="SI unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482339" start="8290" end="8305" title="Francis Ronalds" label="Francis Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075810" start="8310" end="8324" title="Charles Brooke (surgeon)" label="Charles Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8431" end="8442" title="photography#Science and forensics" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8509" end="8522" title="Edward Sabine#The magnetic crusade" label="Edward Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="8690" end="8703" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="8723" end="8738" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269677" start="9111" end="9134" title="nuclear magnetic moment" label="nuclear magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9137" end="9156" title="Larmor diamagnetism" label="Larmor diamagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="9229" end="9240" title="diamagnetic" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="9242" end="9254" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="9256" end="9269" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="9274" end="9291" title="antiferromagnetic" label="antiferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217121" start="9349" end="9362" title="ferrimagnetic" label="ferrimagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144647" start="9364" end="9376" title="helimagnetic" label="helimagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241394" start="9378" end="9384" title="toroid" label="toroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490646" start="9388" end="9398" title="spin glass" label="spin glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="9550" end="9566" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924640" start="11292" end="11321" title="Vibrating-sample magnetometer" label="Vibrating-sample magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="13236" end="13252" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269081" start="13257" end="13276" title="quantum oscillation" label="quantum oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="13319" end="13325" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="13354" end="13364" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="13398" end="13409" title="capacitance" label="capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="13434" end="13444" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="13490" end="13506" title="piezoelectricity" label="piezoelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="13532" end="13554" title="optical interferometry" label="optical interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q229468" start="14639" end="14660" title="dilution refrigerator" label="dilution refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066400" start="15189" end="15214" title="magneto-optic Kerr effect" label="magneto-optic Kerr effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15490" end="15519" title="Faraday Rotation Magnetometry" label="Faraday rotation magnetometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q220620" start="16066" end="16081" title="Meissner effect" label="Meissner effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289248" start="16573" end="16579" title="Scalar (mathematics)" label="Scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="16707" end="16713" title="Euclidean vector" label="Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235286" start="16844" end="16863" title="spatial orientation" label="spatial orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="17013" end="17029" title="magnetic compass" label="magnetic compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273815" start="17063" end="17070" title="bearing (navigation)" label="bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="17201" end="17211" title="orthogonal" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413106" start="17949" end="17965" title="magnetotellurics" label="magnetotellurics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864409" start="18012" end="18026" title="Mineralization (geology)" label="mineralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="18045" end="18055" title="geological" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q459438" start="18202" end="18221" title="proton magnetometer" label="proton magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="18286" end="18292" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="18357" end="18383" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="18559" end="18562" title="part per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q245739" start="18595" end="18603" title="solenoid" label="solenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="18645" end="18653" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="18666" end="18674" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q150717" start="18679" end="18685" title="decane" label="decane"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="18890" end="18897" title="precession" label="precess"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="19065" end="19074" title="amplifier" label="amplified"/>
<link wikidata="Q304213" start="19686" end="19707" title="banded iron formation" label="banded iron formation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19746" end="19770" title="#Overhauser effect magnetometer" label="Overhauser magnetometers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19799" end="19820" title="#Caesium vapour magnetometer" label="caesium magnetometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="20522" end="20534" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q901095" start="20566" end="20591" title="nuclear Overhauser effect" label="nuclear Overhauser effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="20700" end="20706" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="21314" end="21321" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="21494" end="21502" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="21507" end="21516" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="21579" end="21585" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985952" start="21679" end="21689" title="buffer gas" label="buffer gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="21722" end="21728" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="21809" end="21815" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="21819" end="21827" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="22013" end="22025" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="22083" end="22091" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="22092" end="22106" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="22119" end="22133" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151346" start="24612" end="24620" title="helium-4" label="helium-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="24734" end="24751" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24807" end="24815" title="CEA-Leti: Laboratoire d&amp;#x27;électronique des technologies de l&amp;#x27;information" label="CEA-Leti"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="25028" end="25031" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q285267" start="25062" end="25075" title="Swarm (spacecraft)" label="Swarm mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="26418" end="26437" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981904" start="26805" end="26809" title="electromagnetic coil" label="coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="26920" end="26924" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="27116" end="27127" title="solid state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="27128" end="27139" title="Hall effect" label="Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="27345" end="27369" title="anti-lock braking system" label="anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061375" start="27511" end="27520" title="Permalloy" label="Permalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28352" start="27529" end="27550" title="magnetic permeability" label="magnetic permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630994" start="28241" end="28260" title="saturation (magnetic)" label="magnetic saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488575" start="29145" end="29160" title="Victor Vacquier" label="Victor Vacquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29231" end="29243" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="29286" end="29301" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q120492037" start="29465" end="29481" title="Fluxgate compass" label="Fluxgate compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q629879" start="29488" end="29499" title="gradiometer" label="gradiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="29933" end="29952" title="unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q307036" start="30388" end="30396" title="mu-metal" label="mu-metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061375" start="30400" end="30409" title="permalloy" label="permalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q746502" start="32223" end="32228" title="SQUID" label="SQUID"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="32867" end="32873" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="32880" end="32895" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q384188" start="33180" end="33202" title="magnetoencephalography" label="magnetoencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884389" start="33207" end="33226" title="magnetocardiography" label="magnetocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q286406" start="33648" end="33664" title="Larmor frequency" label="Larmor frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q94866" start="33716" end="33728" title="Hanle effect" label="Hanle effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="33863" end="33869" title="Alkali metal" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="33904" end="33910" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="33915" end="33922" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072221" start="34300" end="34311" title="SERF" label="SERF effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072221" start="35035" end="35039" title="SERF" label="SERF"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="35073" end="35082" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="35084" end="35091" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="35096" end="35104" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="35321" end="35323" title="tesla (unit)" label="μT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603273" start="36248" end="36262" title="Helmholtz coil" label="Helmholtz coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796167" start="36478" end="36490" title="Maxwell coil" label="Maxwell coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="36546" end="36573" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q130617" start="36723" end="36744" title="tunnel boring machine" label="tunnel boring machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="37296" end="37307" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="37309" end="37323" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="37398" end="37412" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="37414" end="37432" title="antiferromagnetism" label="antiferromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="37434" end="37451" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="37485" end="37494" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="37744" end="37754" title="quad bikes" label="quad bikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="38860" end="38879" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="38882" end="38891" title="shipwreck" label="shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q629879" start="38942" end="38953" title="gradiometer" label="gradiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788226" start="39262" end="39271" title="Time Team" label="Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q83857" start="39608" end="39629" title="Great Hungarian Plain" label="Great Hungarian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="39783" end="39788" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="39798" end="39804" title="aurora" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306457" start="39979" end="39986" title="K-index" label="K-index"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="40177" end="40182" title="dike (geology)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q830230" start="40184" end="40189" title="sill (geology)" label="sills"/>
<link wikidata="Q653139" start="40195" end="40208" title="volcanic plug" label="volcanic plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q192669" start="40346" end="40354" title="siderite" label="siderite"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="40717" end="40720" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="41037" end="41057" title="directional drilling" label="directional drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="41087" end="41094" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="41165" end="41178" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="41215" end="41226" title="inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q663037" start="41450" end="41460" title="Alfa-class submarine" label="Alfa-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345036" start="41606" end="41615" title="degaussing" label="degaussed"/>
<link wikidata="Q383619" start="41742" end="41767" title="magnetic anomaly detector" label="magnetic anomaly detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706914" start="42513" end="42533" title="ring laser gyroscope" label="ring laser gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="43053" end="43061" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="43063" end="43072" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="43074" end="43082" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421944" start="43094" end="43104" title="pyrrhotite" label="pyrrhotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="44317" end="44323" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="44370" end="44387" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="45283" end="45292" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261752" start="45306" end="45321" title="kimberlite pipe" label="kimberlite pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="46199" end="46229" title="microelectromechanical systems" label="microelectromechanical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="46316" end="46323" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="46697" end="46713" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636326" start="46785" end="46799" title="3D interaction" label="3D interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="47001" end="47008" title="Seismic" label="Seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="47429" end="47441" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208984" start="47519" end="47528" title="Mariner 2" label="Mariner 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q59131" start="47545" end="47555" title="Mariner 10" label="Mariner 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="47623" end="47638" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="Cassini–Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="47811" end="47820" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q976688" start="47887" end="47891" title="Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite" label="GOES"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091629" start="47912" end="47921" title="magnitude (mathematics)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565197" start="47926" end="47935" title="Direction (geometry, geography)" label="direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q381526" start="48130" end="48149" title="Aeromagnetic survey" label="Aeromagnetic survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351519" start="48478" end="48491" title="magnetovision" label="magnetovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q456962" start="48591" end="48602" title="data fusion" label="data fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q629879" start="48634" end="48645" title="gradiometer" label="gradiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="49396" end="49415" title="unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q423706" start="51324" end="51330" title="Akubra" label="Akubra"/>
<link wikidata="Q626958" start="51926" end="51945" title="herringbone pattern" label="herringbone pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607176" start="52586" end="52629" title="United States Air Force Research Laboratory" label="United States Air Force Research Laboratory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83063" wikidata="Q1121944" url="?curid=83063" title="Erythraean Sibyl">
<text>The Erythraean [[Sibyl]] was the prophetess of classical antiquity presiding over the Apollonian oracle at Erythrae, a town in Ionia opposite Chios, which was built by Neleus, the son of Codrus.

The word &quot;Sibyl&quot; comes (via Latin) from the ancient Greek word &quot;sibylla&quot;, meaning prophetess. Sibyls would give answers whose value depended upon good questions — unlike prophets, who typically answered with responses indirectly related to questions asked. 

Presumably there was more than one sibyl at Erythrae. One is recorded as having been named Herophile. At least one is said to have been from Chaldea, a nation in the southern portion of Babylonia, being the daughter of Berossus (who wrote the Chaldean history) and Erymanthe. Apollodorus of Erythrae, however, says that one who was his own countrywoman predicted the Trojan War and prophesied to the Greeks both that Troy would be destroyed and that Homer would write falsehoods.

The term has been applied to the prophecies of the Erythraean Sibyl, which were written on leaves and arranged so that the initial letters of the leaves always formed a word.

The Erythraean Sibyl is believed to have made extremely precise statements regarding the coming of Christ. In Christian iconography, the Erythraean Sibyl is credited with prophesying the coming of the Redeemer, which prophecy was in the form of an acrostic whose initial letters spelled out &quot;ΙΗΣΌΎΣ ΧΡΕΙΣΤΟΣ ΘΕΟΥ ΎΊΟΣ ΣΩΤΗΡ ΣΤΑΎΡΟΣ&quot; (&quot;Jesus Christ, God&#x27;s Son, Savior, Cross). Examples were in mediaeval paintings in Salisbury Cathedral, and others are shown in the illustrations on this page. 

==See also==
* Sibylline Oracles
Greek Mythology

==Notes==
==References==

*Lactantius, &quot;Divinae institutiones I.6.8, 14&quot;
*Augustine, &quot;De civitate dei xviii.23&quot;
*Isidore, &quot;Etymologiae viii.8.1, 3, 4&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1121944" start="4" end="24" title="Erythraean Sibyl" label="Erythraean [[Sibyl]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="47" end="66" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="86" end="92" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="97" end="103" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q723091" start="107" end="115" title="Erythrae" label="Erythrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="127" end="132" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="142" end="147" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q637955" start="168" end="174" title="Neleus" label="Neleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052888" start="187" end="193" title="Codrus" label="Codrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="211" end="216" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="234" end="239" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="250" end="263" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="298" end="305" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="386" end="393" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121944" start="566" end="575" title="Erythraean Sibyl" label="Herophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="616" end="623" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="661" end="670" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312425" start="694" end="702" title="Berossus" label="Berossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680073" start="751" end="774" title="Apollodorus of Erythrae" label="Apollodorus of Erythrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="842" end="852" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="892" end="896" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="925" end="930" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1231" end="1237" title="Jesus" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305703" start="1333" end="1341" title="Redeemer (Christianity)" label="Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="1568" end="1587" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q740092" start="1662" end="1679" title="Sibylline Oracles" label="Sibylline Oracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1680" end="1695" title="Greek Mythology" label="Greek Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83065" wikidata="Q488651" url="?curid=83065" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score">
<text>The Academy Award for Best Original Score is an award presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to the best substantial body of music in the form of dramatic underscoring written specifically for the film by the submitting composer. Some pre-existing music is allowed, though, but a contending film must include a minimum of original music. This minimum since 2021 is established as 35% of the music, which is raised to 80% for sequels and franchise films. Fifteen scores are shortlisted before nominations are announced.

==History==
The Academy began awarding movies for their scores in 1935. The category was originally called Best Scoring. At the time, winners and nominees were a mix of original scores and adaptations of pre-existing material. Following the controversial win of Charles Previn for &quot;One Hundred Men and a Girl&quot; in 1938, a film without a credited composer that featured pre-existing classical music, the Academy added a Best Original Score category in 1939. In 1942, the distinction between the two Scoring categories changed slightly as they were renamed to Best Music Score of a Dramatic Picture and Best Scoring of a Musical Picture. This marked the first time the category was split into separate genres. From 1942 to 1985, musical scores had their own category, with the exception of 1958, 1981, and 1982. During that time, both categories had many name changes:

;1. Non-musical scores
* Best Music Score of a Dramatic Picture (1942)
* Best Music Score of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture (1943–1962)
* Best Music Score—substantially original (1963–1966)
* Best Original Music Score (1967–1968)
* Best Original Score—for a motion picture [not a musical] (1969–1970)
* Best Original Score (1971, 1976–1995, 2000–present)
* Best Original Dramatic Score (1972–1975, 1996–1999)

;2. Musical scores
* Best Scoring of a Musical Picture (1942–1962)
* Best Scoring of Music—adaptation or treatment (1963–1968)
* Best Score of a Musical Picture—original or adaptation (1969–1970)
* Best Original Song Score (1971)
* Best Scoring: Adaptation and Original Song Score (1972–1973)
* Best Scoring: Original Song Score and Adaptation -or- Scoring: Adaptation (1974–1976)
* Best Original Song Score and Its Adaptation or Adaptation Score (1977–1978)
* Best Adaptation Score (1979)
* Best Original Song Score and Its Adaptation -or- Adaptation Score (1980, 1983)
* Best Original Song Score or Adaptation Score (1984)
* Best Original Song Score (1985)
* Best Original Musical or Comedy Score (1996–1999)

Following the wins of four Walt Disney Feature Animation films in six years from 1990 to 1995 (&quot;The Little Mermaid&quot;, &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot;, &quot;Aladdin&quot;, and &quot;The Lion King&quot;) during a period called the Disney Renaissance, it was decided to once again split the Best Original Score category by genres, this time by combining comedies and musicals together. As Alan Bergman, the chairman of the Academy&#x27;s music branch said, &quot;People were voting for the songs, not the underscores. We felt that Academy members outside the music branch didn&#x27;t distinguish between the two. So when a score like &quot;The Lion King&quot; is competing against a drama like &quot;Forrest Gump,&quot; it&#x27;s apples and oranges – not in the quality of the score, but in the way it functions in the movie. There&#x27;s a big difference.&quot; The category was therefore split into Best Original Dramatic Score and Best Original Musical or Comedy Score in 1996. This change proved unpopular in the other branches of the Academy as Charles Bernstein, chairman of the Academy&#x27;s rules committee, noted that &quot;no other Oscar category depended on a film&#x27;s genre&quot; and &quot;the job of composing an underscore for a romantic comedy is not substantially different from working on a heavy drama.&quot; This split was reverted in 2000.

In 2020, rules were changed to require that a film&#x27;s score include a minimum of 60% original music. Franchise films and sequels must include a minimum of 80% new music. In 2021, the rules were changed again, lowering the minimum percentage of original music from 60% to 35% of the total music in the film.

==Academy Award for Best Original Musical==
The Academy Award for Best Original Musical is a category that was re-established in 2000 after the Best Original Musical or Comedy Score category was retired. It has never been awarded in its present form due to a prolonged drought of films meeting the sufficient eligibility requirements. The Music Branch Executive Committee of the Academy decides whether there are enough quality submissions to justify its activation.

According to the rules, the Best Original Musical is defined as follows: 

==Winners and nominees==
The following is the list of nominated composers organized by year, and listing both films and composers. The years shown in the following list of winners are the production years, thus a reference to 1967 means the Oscars presented in 1968 for films released in 1967.

===1930s===
===1940s===
===1950s===
===1960s===
===1970s===
===1980s===
===1990s===
===2000s===
===2010s===
===2020s===
==Shortlisted finalists==
Finalists for Best Score are selected by the Music Branch. Music Branch members shall vote in order of their preference for not more than 15 pictures to be considered for the Score award. The 15 motion pictures receiving the highest number of votes shall advance to the next round of voting.


== Records ==

=== Superlatives ===
These are only for nominations in the Scoring categories. Nominations in other categories, such as the Original Song category, are not included.

=== Age superlatives ===
Only one composer has won two Scoring Oscars the same year: in 1973, Marvin Hamlisch won Original Dramatic Score for &quot;The Way We Were&quot; and Best Adaptation Score, for &quot;The Sting&quot;. Hamlisch also won Best Song that year for &quot;The Way We Were&quot;, making him the only composer to win three music Oscars in the same year.

Only one composer has won Oscars three years in a row: Roger Edens won for &quot;Easter Parade&quot; (1948), &quot;On the Town&quot; (1949) and &quot;Annie Get Your Gun&quot; (1950).

Eight composers have won Oscars two years in a row:

# Ray Heindorf won for &quot;Yankee Doodle Dandy&quot; (1942) and &quot;This Is the Army&quot; (1943).
# Franz Waxman won for &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; (1950) and &quot;A Place in the Sun&quot; (1951).
# Alfred Newman won for &quot;With a Song in My Heart&quot; (1952) and &quot;Call Me Madam&quot; (1953). He won again two years in a row for &quot;Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing&quot; (1955) and &quot;The King and I&quot; (1956).
# Adolph Deutsch won for &quot;Seven Brides for Seven Brothers&quot; (1954) and &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; (1955).
# André Previn won for &quot;Gigi&quot; (1958) and &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot; (1959). He won again two years in a row for &quot;Irma la Douce&quot; (1963) and &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; (1964).
# Leonard Rosenman won for &quot;Barry Lyndon&quot; (1975) and &quot;Bound for Glory&quot; (1976).
# Alan Menken won for &quot;Beauty and The Beast&quot; (1991) and &quot;Aladdin&quot; (1992).
# Gustavo Santaolalla won for &quot;Brokeback Mountain&quot; (2005) and &quot;Babel&quot; (2006).

=== Female nominees ===
As of 2023, only 10 women have been nominated in music score categories: Ann Ronell, Tylwyth Kymry aka Meg Karlin, Angela Morley, Marilyn Bergman, Rachel Portman, Anne Dudley, Lynn Ahrens, Hildur Guðnadóttir, Germaine Franco, and Laura Karpman. Kymry, Bergman, and Ahrens were nominated for their contribution as lyricists.

Four women have won in the scoring categories. Three are composers: Rachel Portman, who won for &quot;Emma&quot; (1996); Anne Dudley, who won for &quot;The Full Monty&quot; (1997); and Hildur Guðnadóttir, who won for &quot;Joker&quot; (2019). The fourth is lyricist Marilyn Bergman, who won for &quot;Yentl&quot; (1983) in the Original Song Score category, sharing the award with co-lyricist Alan Bergman (her husband) and composer Michel Legrand. Hildur is the only woman to win the award under no qualifications; Bergman won for Best Song Score while Portman and Dudley won for Best Musical or Comedy Score.

The female composers nominated for multiple Scoring Oscars are Rachel Portman, who was nominated for &quot;Emma&quot; (1996) (for which she won for Best Musical or Comedy Score), &quot;The Cider House Rules&quot; (1999), and &quot;Chocolat&quot; (2000); and Angela Morley, who was nominated twice in the Original Song Score or Adaptation Score category for &quot;The Little Prince&quot; (1974) and &quot;The Slipper and the Rose&quot; (1976).

=== Notable nominees ===
Dmitri Shostakovich and Duke Ellington were both nominated the same year but lost to the arrangers of &quot;West Side Story&quot;.

The scores of &quot;Midnight Express&quot; by Giorgio Moroder in 1979, &quot;Slumdog Millionaire&quot; by A. R. Rahman in 2009, and &quot;The Social Network&quot; by Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross in 2011 are the only scores with electronic-based music ever to win the award. In addition, the electronic-based scores of &quot;Witness&quot; by Maurice Jarre in 1986, &quot;Rain Man&quot; by Hans Zimmer in 1989, and &quot;Her&quot; by William Butler, and Owen Pallett in 2014 have also been nominated.

Noted nominated composers known for their music mostly outside the film world include: Aaron Copland, Kurt Weill, Gian Carlo Menotti, Philip Glass, John Corigliano, Peter Maxwell Davies, Randy Newman, Richard Rodney Bennett, Stephen Schwartz, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Artie Shaw, Trent Reznor, Quincy Jones, Herbie Hancock, Jon Batiste, and Jonny Greenwood.

Rock musicians and pop stars are most often nominated in the songwriting category. These popular performers were nominated in the Scoring categories: The Beatles, Prince, Pete Townshend, Rod McKuen, Isaac Hayes, Kris Kristofferson, Quincy Jones, Randy Newman, Anthony Newley, Paul Williams, Tom Waits, David Byrne, Ryuichi Sakamoto, Trent Reznor, and Matthew Wilder.

Record producers George Martin (The Beatles) and Jerry Wexler (Atlantic Records) also received nominations in the Scoring categories.

=== Multiple nominations ===
The following is a list of composers nominated more than once and winning at least one Academy Award (in this category). This list is sorted by number of awards, with the number of total nominations listed in parentheses. These do not include nominations (or awards) in the Best Original Song category.

* 9: Alfred Newman (43)
* 5: John Williams (49)
* 4: Johnny Green (12)
* 4: André Previn (11)
* 4: John Barry (6)
* 4: Alan Menken (5)
* 3: Max Steiner (24)
* 3: Ray Heindorf (17)
* 3: Morris Stoloff (17)
* 3: Miklós Rózsa (16)
* 3: Dimitri Tiomkin (14)
* 3: Maurice Jarre (8)
* 3: Ken Darby (6)
* 3: Roger Edens (6)
* 3: Saul Chaplin (5)
* 3: Adolph Deutsch (5)
* 2: Hans Zimmer (12)
* 2: Alexandre Desplat (11)
* 2: Franz Waxman (11)
* 2: Henry Mancini (7)
* 2: Lennie Hayton (6)
* 2: Michel Legrand (6)
* 2: Irwin Kostal (5)
* 2: Marvin Hamlisch (4)
* 2: Leonard Rosenman (4)
* 2: Ralph Burns (3)
* 2: Trent Reznor (3)
* 2: Atticus Ross (3)
* 2: Howard Shore (3)
* 2: Ludwig Göransson (2)
* 2: Gustavo Santaolalla (2)
* 1: Jerry Goldsmith (17)
* 1: Victor Young (17)
* 1: Herbert Stothart (11)
* 1: Elmer Bernstein (10)
* 1: Hugo Friedhofer (9)
* 1: Lionel Newman (9)
* 1: Georgie Stoll (9)
* 1: James Horner (8)
* 1: Leigh Harline (7)
* 1: Charles Previn (7)
* 1: Paul Smith (7)
* 1: Dave Grusin (6)
* 1: Ennio Morricone (6) 
* 1: Leslie Bricusse (5)
* 1: Georges Delerue (5)
* 1: Richard Hageman (5)
* 1: Bernard Herrmann (5)
* 1: Nelson Riddle (5)
* 1: Oliver Wallace (5)
* 1: Aaron Copland (4)
* 1: Leo F. Forbstein (4)
* 1: Ernest Gold (4)
* 1: Stephen Schwartz (4)
* 1: Richard M. Sherman (4)
* 1: Robert B. Sherman (4)
* 1: Louis Silvers (4)
* 1: Volker Bertelmann (3)
* 1: Frank Churchill (3)
* 1: Elliot Goldenthal (3)
* 1: Erich Wolfgang Korngold (3)
* 1: Bronisław Kaper (3)
* 1: Dario Marianelli (3)
* 1: Rachel Portman (3)
* 1: Harry Sukman (3)
* 1: Gabriel Yared (3)
* 1: John Addison (2)
* 1: Luis Bacalov (2)
* 1: Robert Russell Bennett (2)
* 1: Jay Blackton (2)
* 1: John Corigliano (2)
* 1: Michael Giacchino (2)
* 1: Michael Gore (2)
* 1: W. Franke Harling (2)
* 1: Justin Hurwitz (2)
* 1: A. R. Rahman (2)
* 1: Heinz Roemheld (2)
* 1: Nino Rota (2)
* 1: Leo Shuken (2)

The following composers have been nominated for a Best Original Score Oscar more than once but have yet to garner one. The number of nominations is listed in parentheses. These do not include nominations (or awards) in the Best Original Song category.

==== Deceased ====
* Alex North (14) 
* Walter Scharf (9)
* Roy Webb (7)
* Werner Janssen (6)
* George Duning (5)
* Edward Ward (5)
* Constantin Bakaleinikoff (4)
* Edward H. Plumb (4)
* Frank Skinner (4)
* Frank De Vol (4)
* Richard Rodney Bennett (3)
* George Bruns (3)
* Louis Gruenberg (3)
* Marvin Hatley (3)
* Quincy Jones (3) 
* Ernst Toch (3)
* Charles Wolcott (3)
* Daniele Amfitheatrof (2)
* Nat W. Finston (2)
* Frederick Hollander (2)
* Jóhann Jóhannsson (2)
* Jack Nitzsche (2) 
* Richard Robbins (2)
* Victor Schertzinger (2)
* Meredith Willson (2)

==== Living ====
* Thomas Newman (14)
* Randy Newman (9) 
* James Newton Howard (7)
* Lalo Schifrin (5) 
* Danny Elfman (4)
* George Fenton (4)
* Alberto Iglesias (4)
* Marc Shaiman (4)
* Philip Glass (3)
* Nicholas Britell (3)
* Carter Burwell (3) 
* Marco Beltrami (2)
* Terence Blanchard (2)
* Patrick Doyle (2)
* Jonny Greenwood (2)
* David Hirschfelder (2)
* John Powell (2)

==See also==
* Academy Award for Best Original Song
* BAFTA Award for Best Original Music
* Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Score
* Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score
* Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition
* Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance
* Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
* Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media
* Grammy Award for Best Arrangement, Instrumental or A Cappella
* Saturn Award for Best Music
* List of Academy Award–nominated films

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* Oscars.org (official Academy site)
* The Academy Awards Database (official site)
* Oscar.com (official ceremony promotional site)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="4" end="41" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Academy Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="80" end="123" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="185" end="206" title="Film score" label="dramatic underscoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707597" start="396" end="400" title="94th Academy Awards" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q24856" start="476" end="491" title="film series" label="franchise films"/>
<link wikidata="Q508451" start="625" end="629" title="7th Academy Awards" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065815" start="821" end="835" title="Charles Previn" label="Charles Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165172" start="846" end="872" title="One Hundred Men and a Girl" label="One Hundred Men and a Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q508601" start="882" end="886" title="10th Academy Awards" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q508390" start="1019" end="1023" title="11th Academy Awards" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q508406" start="1028" end="1032" title="14th Academy Awards" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q508406" start="1281" end="1285" title="14th Academy Awards" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q427425" start="1289" end="1293" title="57th Academy Awards" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q684095" start="1356" end="1360" title="30th Academy Awards" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q767355" start="1362" end="1366" title="53rd Academy Awards" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q28969" start="1372" end="1376" title="54th Academy Awards" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q508406" start="1501" end="1505" title="14th Academy Awards" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q508528" start="1559" end="1563" title="15th Academy Awards" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q917163" start="1564" end="1568" title="34th Academy Awards" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q917148" start="1613" end="1617" title="35th Academy Awards" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q917067" start="1618" end="1622" title="38th Academy Awards" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q167214" start="1653" end="1657" title="39th Academy Awards" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065291" start="1658" end="1662" title="40th Academy Awards" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q544731" start="1724" end="1728" title="41st Academy Awards" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q221467" start="1729" end="1733" title="42nd Academy Awards" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q937162" start="1758" end="1762" title="43rd Academy Awards" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q388978" start="1764" end="1768" title="48th Academy Awards" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q857001" start="1769" end="1773" title="67th Academy Awards" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q429319" start="1775" end="1779" title="72nd Academy Awards" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q289412" start="1821" end="1825" title="44th Academy Awards" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q369706" start="1826" end="1830" title="47th Academy Awards" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="1832" end="1836" title="68th Academy Awards" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q263239" start="1837" end="1841" title="71st Academy Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q508406" start="1900" end="1904" title="14th Academy Awards" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q917163" start="1905" end="1909" title="34th Academy Awards" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q917148" start="1960" end="1964" title="35th Academy Awards" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065291" start="1965" end="1969" title="40th Academy Awards" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q544731" start="2029" end="2033" title="41st Academy Awards" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q221467" start="2034" end="2038" title="42nd Academy Awards" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q937162" start="2068" end="2072" title="43rd Academy Awards" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q289412" start="2126" end="2130" title="44th Academy Awards" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q918125" start="2131" end="2135" title="45th Academy Awards" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q570921" start="2214" end="2218" title="46th Academy Awards" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q388978" start="2219" end="2223" title="48th Academy Awards" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q611050" start="2292" end="2296" title="49th Academy Awards" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q282159" start="2297" end="2301" title="50th Academy Awards" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065282" start="2328" end="2332" title="51st Academy Awards" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q543438" start="2403" end="2407" title="52nd Academy Awards" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q41918" start="2409" end="2413" title="55th Academy Awards" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q47193" start="2463" end="2467" title="56th Academy Awards" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q427425" start="2497" end="2501" title="57th Academy Awards" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="2544" end="2548" title="68th Academy Awards" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q263239" start="2549" end="2553" title="71st Academy Awards" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="2583" end="2612" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney Feature Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q910864" start="2637" end="2641" title="62nd Academy Awards" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q857001" start="2645" end="2649" title="67th Academy Awards" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q190135" start="2657" end="2675" title="The Little Mermaid (1989 film)" label="The Little Mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="2689" end="2709" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q215518" start="2723" end="2730" title="Aladdin (1992 Disney film)" label="Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="2748" end="2761" title="The Lion King" label="The Lion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q906232" start="2796" end="2814" title="Disney Renaissance" label="Disney Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583521" start="2953" end="2965" title="Alan and Marilyn Bergman" label="Alan Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="3264" end="3276" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="3539" end="3543" title="68th Academy Awards" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063713" start="3614" end="3631" title="Charles Bernstein (composer)" label="Charles Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q429319" start="3922" end="3926" title="72nd Academy Awards" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246152" start="3932" end="3936" title="93rd Academy Awards" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707597" start="4106" end="4110" title="94th Academy Awards" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q429319" start="4370" end="4374" title="72nd Academy Awards" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5025" end="5031" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="5658" end="5671" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="5795" end="5810" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q910900" start="5849" end="5864" title="The Way We Were" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q62665" start="5908" end="5917" title="The Sting" label="The Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q126149" start="5973" end="5988" title="The Way We Were (song)" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582156" start="6125" end="6136" title="Roger Edens" label="Roger Edens"/>
<link wikidata="Q957893" start="6151" end="6164" title="Easter Parade (film)" label="Easter Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q32011" start="6185" end="6196" title="On the Town (film)" label="On the Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263921" start="6220" end="6238" title="Annie Get Your Gun (film)" label="Annie Get Your Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q713301" start="6309" end="6321" title="Ray Heindorf" label="Ray Heindorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321622" start="6336" end="6355" title="Yankee Doodle Dandy" label="Yankee Doodle Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018061" start="6379" end="6395" title="This Is the Army" label="This Is the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q213611" start="6412" end="6424" title="Franz Waxman" label="Franz Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="6439" end="6455" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q733627" start="6479" end="6497" title="A Place in the Sun (1951 film)" label="A Place in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q367032" start="6514" end="6527" title="Alfred Newman" label="Alfred Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548988" start="6542" end="6565" title="With a Song in My Heart (film)" label="With a Song in My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021556" start="6589" end="6602" title="Call Me Madam (film)" label="Call Me Madam"/>
<link wikidata="Q714941" start="6659" end="6690" title="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (film)" label="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27149" start="6714" end="6728" title="The King and I (1956 film)" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q365310" start="6745" end="6759" title="Adolph Deutsch" label="Adolph Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q662679" start="6774" end="6805" title="Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" label="Seven Brides for Seven Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017333" start="6829" end="6838" title="Oklahoma! (1955 film)" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="6855" end="6867" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="6882" end="6886" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q374526" start="6910" end="6924" title="Porgy and Bess (film)" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q387370" start="6981" end="6994" title="Irma la Douce" label="Irma la Douce"/>
<link wikidata="Q201215" start="7018" end="7030" title="My Fair Lady (film)" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346580" start="7047" end="7063" title="Leonard Rosenman" label="Leonard Rosenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q471716" start="7078" end="7090" title="Barry Lyndon" label="Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q533585" start="7114" end="7129" title="Bound for Glory (1976 film)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q317272" start="7146" end="7157" title="Alan Menken" label="Alan Menken"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="7172" end="7192" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and The Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q215518" start="7216" end="7223" title="Aladdin (1992 Disney film)" label="Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312434" start="7240" end="7259" title="Gustavo Santaolalla" label="Gustavo Santaolalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q160618" start="7274" end="7292" title="Brokeback Mountain" label="Brokeback Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191074" start="7316" end="7321" title="Babel (film)" label="Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q532253" start="7434" end="7444" title="Ann Ronell" label="Ann Ronell"/>
<link wikidata="Q936212" start="7446" end="7474" title="Fred Karlin" label="Tylwyth Kymry aka Meg Karlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q432573" start="7476" end="7489" title="Angela Morley" label="Angela Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583521" start="7491" end="7506" title="Alan and Marilyn Bergman" label="Marilyn Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q261314" start="7508" end="7522" title="Rachel Portman" label="Rachel Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="7524" end="7535" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q293323" start="7537" end="7548" title="Lynn Ahrens" label="Lynn Ahrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q433734" start="7550" end="7568" title="Hildur Guðnadóttir" label="Hildur Guðnadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q62732315" start="7570" end="7585" title="Germaine Franco" label="Germaine Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q512541" start="7591" end="7604" title="Laura Karpman" label="Laura Karpman"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="7674" end="7682" title="lyricist" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q261314" start="7754" end="7768" title="Rachel Portman" label="Rachel Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338008" start="7788" end="7792" title="Emma (1996 theatrical film)" label="Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="7807" end="7818" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q775970" start="7838" end="7852" title="The Full Monty" label="The Full Monty"/>
<link wikidata="Q433734" start="7871" end="7889" title="Hildur Guðnadóttir" label="Hildur Guðnadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759035" start="7909" end="7914" title="Joker (2019 film)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583521" start="7952" end="7967" title="Alan and Marilyn Bergman" label="Marilyn Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q780469" start="7987" end="7992" title="Yentl (film)" label="Yentl"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583521" start="8078" end="8090" title="Alan and Marilyn Bergman" label="Alan Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313281" start="8118" end="8132" title="Michel Legrand" label="Michel Legrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q261314" start="8360" end="8374" title="Rachel Portman" label="Rachel Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338008" start="8404" end="8408" title="Emma (1996 theatrical film)" label="Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q648977" start="8482" end="8503" title="The Cider House Rules (film)" label="The Cider House Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q220423" start="8528" end="8536" title="Chocolat (2000 film)" label="Chocolat"/>
<link wikidata="Q432573" start="8555" end="8568" title="Angela Morley" label="Angela Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199280" start="8660" end="8677" title="The Little Prince (1974 film)" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779010" start="8701" end="8725" title="The Slipper and the Rose" label="The Slipper and the Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="8766" end="8785" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="8790" end="8804" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="8874" end="8889" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q174699" start="8918" end="8934" title="Midnight Express (film)" label="Midnight Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="8944" end="8959" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q125076" start="8975" end="8994" title="Slumdog Millionaire" label="Slumdog Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="9004" end="9016" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="9036" end="9054" title="The Social Network" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="9064" end="9076" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q520346" start="9081" end="9093" title="Atticus Ross" label="Atticus Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q488041" start="9223" end="9230" title="Witness (1985 film)" label="Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q105487" start="9240" end="9253" title="Maurice Jarre" label="Maurice Jarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q188845" start="9269" end="9277" title="Rain Man" label="Rain Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="9287" end="9298" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q788822" start="9318" end="9321" title="Her (2013 film)" label="Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097555" start="9331" end="9345" title="William Butler (musician)" label="William Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q162045" start="9351" end="9363" title="Owen Pallett" label="Owen Pallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="9486" end="9499" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="9501" end="9511" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q270662" start="9513" end="9531" title="Gian Carlo Menotti" label="Gian Carlo Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="9533" end="9545" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="9547" end="9562" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q139223" start="9564" end="9584" title="Peter Maxwell Davies" label="Peter Maxwell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="9586" end="9598" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="9600" end="9622" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q542484" start="9624" end="9640" title="Stephen Schwartz" label="Stephen Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="9642" end="9661" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="9663" end="9673" title="Artie Shaw" label="Artie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="9675" end="9687" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="9689" end="9701" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="9703" end="9717" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272528" start="9719" end="9730" title="Jon Batiste" label="Jon Batiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q286410" start="9736" end="9751" title="Jonny Greenwood" label="Jonny Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="9904" end="9915" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="9917" end="9923" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="9925" end="9939" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341627" start="9941" end="9951" title="Rod McKuen" label="Rod McKuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="9953" end="9964" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="9966" end="9984" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="9986" end="9998" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="10000" end="10012" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q573709" start="10014" end="10028" title="Anthony Newley" label="Anthony Newley"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="10030" end="10043" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="10045" end="10054" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="10056" end="10067" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q345494" start="10069" end="10085" title="Ryuichi Sakamoto" label="Ryuichi Sakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="10087" end="10099" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378792" start="10105" end="10119" title="Matthew Wilder" label="Matthew Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="10139" end="10152" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="10154" end="10165" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q537722" start="10171" end="10183" title="Jerry Wexler" label="Jerry Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="10185" end="10201" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q367032" start="10595" end="10608" title="Alfred Newman" label="Alfred Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285" start="10619" end="10632" title="John Williams" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q664592" start="10643" end="10655" title="Johnny Green" label="Johnny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="10666" end="10678" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="10689" end="10699" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q317272" start="10709" end="10720" title="Alan Menken" label="Alan Menken"/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="10730" end="10741" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q713301" start="10752" end="10764" title="Ray Heindorf" label="Ray Heindorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569339" start="10775" end="10789" title="Morris Stoloff" label="Morris Stoloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q319396" start="10800" end="10812" title="Miklós Rózsa" label="Miklós Rózsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q317033" start="10823" end="10838" title="Dimitri Tiomkin" label="Dimitri Tiomkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105487" start="10849" end="10862" title="Maurice Jarre" label="Maurice Jarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316737" start="10872" end="10881" title="Ken Darby" label="Ken Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582156" start="10891" end="10902" title="Roger Edens" label="Roger Edens"/>
<link wikidata="Q542481" start="10912" end="10924" title="Saul Chaplin" label="Saul Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365310" start="10934" end="10948" title="Adolph Deutsch" label="Adolph Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="10958" end="10969" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313362" start="10980" end="10997" title="Alexandre Desplat" label="Alexandre Desplat"/>
<link wikidata="Q213611" start="11008" end="11020" title="Franz Waxman" label="Franz Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185928" start="11031" end="11044" title="Henry Mancini" label="Henry Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q487355" start="11054" end="11067" title="Lennie Hayton" label="Lennie Hayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313281" start="11077" end="11091" title="Michel Legrand" label="Michel Legrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q329998" start="11101" end="11113" title="Irwin Kostal" label="Irwin Kostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="11123" end="11138" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346580" start="11148" end="11164" title="Leonard Rosenman" label="Leonard Rosenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966681" start="11174" end="11185" title="Ralph Burns" label="Ralph Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="11195" end="11207" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q520346" start="11217" end="11229" title="Atticus Ross" label="Atticus Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q207773" start="11239" end="11251" title="Howard Shore" label="Howard Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358202" start="11261" end="11277" title="Ludwig Göransson" label="Ludwig Göransson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312434" start="11287" end="11306" title="Gustavo Santaolalla" label="Gustavo Santaolalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q235077" start="11316" end="11331" title="Jerry Goldsmith" label="Jerry Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q365199" start="11342" end="11354" title="Victor Young" label="Victor Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609199" start="11365" end="11381" title="Herbert Stothart" label="Herbert Stothart"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="11392" end="11407" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350676" start="11418" end="11433" title="Hugo Friedhofer" label="Hugo Friedhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827266" start="11443" end="11456" title="Lionel Newman" label="Lionel Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507268" start="11466" end="11479" title="Georgie Stoll" label="Georgie Stoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q106221" start="11489" end="11501" title="James Horner" label="James Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367518" start="11511" end="11524" title="Leigh Harline" label="Leigh Harline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065815" start="11534" end="11548" title="Charles Previn" label="Charles Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356617" start="11558" end="11568" title="Paul Smith (composer)" label="Paul Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q502923" start="11578" end="11589" title="Dave Grusin" label="Dave Grusin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="11599" end="11614" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305608" start="11625" end="11640" title="Leslie Bricusse" label="Leslie Bricusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q435034" start="11650" end="11665" title="Georges Delerue" label="Georges Delerue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375195" start="11675" end="11690" title="Richard Hageman" label="Richard Hageman"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="11700" end="11716" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q961851" start="11726" end="11739" title="Nelson Riddle" label="Nelson Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q712851" start="11749" end="11763" title="Oliver Wallace" label="Oliver Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="11773" end="11786" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818548" start="11796" end="11812" title="Leo F. Forbstein" label="Leo F. Forbstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215753" start="11822" end="11833" title="Ernest Gold (composer)" label="Ernest Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q542484" start="11843" end="11859" title="Stephen Schwartz (composer)" label="Stephen Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318968" start="11869" end="11887" title="Richard M. Sherman" label="Richard M. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419093" start="11897" end="11914" title="Robert B. Sherman" label="Robert B. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q730318" start="11924" end="11937" title="Louis Silvers" label="Louis Silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q91573" start="11947" end="11964" title="Hauschka" label="Volker Bertelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q912572" start="11974" end="11989" title="Frank Churchill" label="Frank Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q264565" start="11999" end="12016" title="Elliot Goldenthal" label="Elliot Goldenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313371" start="12026" end="12049" title="Erich Wolfgang Korngold" label="Erich Wolfgang Korngold"/>
<link wikidata="Q927472" start="12059" end="12074" title="Bronisław Kaper" label="Bronisław Kaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q360399" start="12084" end="12100" title="Dario Marianelli" label="Dario Marianelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q261314" start="12110" end="12124" title="Rachel Portman" label="Rachel Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q534994" start="12134" end="12146" title="Harry Sukman" label="Harry Sukman"/>
<link wikidata="Q502957" start="12156" end="12169" title="Gabriel Yared" label="Gabriel Yared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699098" start="12179" end="12191" title="John Addison" label="John Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332599" start="12201" end="12213" title="Luis Bacalov" label="Luis Bacalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054753" start="12223" end="12245" title="Robert Russell Bennett" label="Robert Russell Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807499" start="12255" end="12267" title="Jay Blackton" label="Jay Blackton"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="12277" end="12292" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q155124" start="12302" end="12319" title="Michael Giacchino" label="Michael Giacchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q538824" start="12329" end="12341" title="Michael Gore" label="Michael Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q331123" start="12351" end="12368" title="W. Franke Harling" label="W. Franke Harling"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012756" start="12378" end="12392" title="Justin Hurwitz" label="Justin Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="12402" end="12414" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q453461" start="12424" end="12438" title="Heinz Roemheld" label="Heinz Roemheld"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="12448" end="12457" title="Nino Rota" label="Nino Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818748" start="12467" end="12477" title="Leo Shuken" label="Leo Shuken"/>
<link wikidata="Q349448" start="12757" end="12767" title="Alex North" label="Alex North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231447" start="12776" end="12789" title="Walter Scharf" label="Walter Scharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367973" start="12796" end="12804" title="Roy Webb" label="Roy Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567322" start="12811" end="12825" title="Werner Janssen" label="Werner Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q457727" start="12832" end="12845" title="George Duning" label="George Duning"/>
<link wikidata="Q506292" start="12852" end="12863" title="Edward Ward (composer)" label="Edward Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127767" start="12870" end="12894" title="Constantin Bakaleinikoff" label="Constantin Bakaleinikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q464028" start="12901" end="12916" title="Edward H. Plumb" label="Edward H. Plumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q165686" start="12923" end="12936" title="Frank Skinner (composer)" label="Frank Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q666108" start="12943" end="12955" title="Frank De Vol" label="Frank De Vol"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="12962" end="12984" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q977176" start="12991" end="13003" title="George Bruns" label="George Bruns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374446" start="13010" end="13025" title="Louis Gruenberg" label="Louis Gruenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906085" start="13032" end="13045" title="Marvin Hatley" label="Marvin Hatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="13052" end="13064" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q213635" start="13072" end="13082" title="Ernst Toch" label="Ernst Toch"/>
<link wikidata="Q509710" start="13089" end="13104" title="Charles Wolcott" label="Charles Wolcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q155474" start="13111" end="13131" title="Daniele Amfitheatrof" label="Daniele Amfitheatrof"/>
<link wikidata="Q213900" start="13159" end="13178" title="Frederick Hollander" label="Frederick Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q428347" start="13185" end="13202" title="Jóhann Jóhannsson" label="Jóhann Jóhannsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q709857" start="13209" end="13222" title="Jack Nitzsche" label="Jack Nitzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q707132" start="13230" end="13245" title="Richard Robbins (composer)" label="Richard Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q707999" start="13252" end="13271" title="Victor Schertzinger" label="Victor Schertzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281750" start="13278" end="13294" title="Meredith Willson" label="Meredith Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319996" start="13319" end="13332" title="Thomas Newman" label="Thomas Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="13340" end="13352" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213869" start="13360" end="13379" title="James Newton Howard" label="James Newton Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q247293" start="13386" end="13399" title="Lalo Schifrin" label="Lalo Schifrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193338" start="13407" end="13419" title="Danny Elfman" label="Danny Elfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="13426" end="13439" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q335515" start="13446" end="13462" title="Alberto Iglesias" label="Alberto Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q979312" start="13469" end="13481" title="Marc Shaiman" label="Marc Shaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="13488" end="13500" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429514" start="13507" end="13523" title="Nicholas Britell" label="Nicholas Britell"/>
<link wikidata="Q374754" start="13530" end="13544" title="Carter Burwell" label="Carter Burwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465754" start="13552" end="13566" title="Marco Beltrami" label="Marco Beltrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q967230" start="13573" end="13590" title="Terence Blanchard" label="Terence Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q363241" start="13597" end="13610" title="Patrick Doyle" label="Patrick Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q286410" start="13617" end="13632" title="Jonny Greenwood" label="Jonny Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174736" start="13639" end="13657" title="David Hirschfelder" label="David Hirschfelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q313540" start="13664" end="13675" title="John Powell (film composer)" label="John Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="13696" end="13732" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Academy Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q787098" start="13735" end="13770" title="BAFTA Award for Best Original Music" label="BAFTA Award for Best Original Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q922326" start="13773" end="13820" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Score" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422140" start="13823" end="13865" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635451" start="13868" end="13914" title="Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition" label="Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593861" start="13917" end="13967" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376972" start="13970" end="14025" title="Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media" label="Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593771" start="14028" end="14089" title="Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media" label="Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593816" start="14092" end="14153" title="Grammy Award for Best Arrangement, Instrumental or A Cappella" label="Grammy Award for Best Arrangement, Instrumental or A Cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757366" start="14156" end="14183" title="Saturn Award for Best Music" label="Saturn Award for Best Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362374" start="14186" end="14223" title="List of Academy Award–nominated films" label="List of Academy Award–nominated films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83066" wikidata="Q1128239" url="?curid=83066" title="Metope (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[metope]] is the space between two triglyphs of a Doric frieze.

Metope may also refer to:

* Metope (mythology), a river nymph in Greek mythology
* Metope (producer), electronic music producer Michael Schwanen
* &quot;Métopes&quot; Op.29, a piano work by Karol Szymanowski

==See also==
* Metopes of the Parthenon, notably on the Parthenon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128239" start="2" end="12" title="Metope (disambiguation)" label="[[metope]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128239" start="68" end="74" title="Metope (disambiguation)" label="Metope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237258" start="97" end="115" title="Metope (mythology)" label="Metope (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824229" start="152" end="169" title="Metope (producer)" label="Metope (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333755" start="222" end="229" title="Métopes" label="Métopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559606" start="293" end="317" title="Metopes of the Parthenon" label="Metopes of the Parthenon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83067" wikidata="Q7663536" url="?curid=83067" title="Syrus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Syrus or Syros (Ancient Greek: Σύρων) may refer to a person or an animal:

* Syrus, son of Sinope (daughter of Asopus and Metope) and Apollo; the Syrians are named after him. In one account, Syros was the son of King Agenor of Tyre and Tyro, and brother to Cadmus, Phoenix, Cilix and Europa. When Agenor was about to die, he decreed that his kingdom will be divided among his three sons: Phoenix, Syros and Cilix. Syros named the country which was allotted to him Syria while his brothers received Phoenicia and Cilicia, respectively. Syros was said to be a wise man who wrote arithmetic philosophy in Phoenician letters.
* Syrus, one of the dogs of the hunter Actaeon.

== Note ==
== References ==

* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663536" start="20" end="25" title="Syrus" label="Syrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663536" start="29" end="34" title="Syrus" label="Syros"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="36" end="49" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539539" start="111" end="117" title="Sinope (mythology)" label="Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q622781" start="131" end="137" title="Asopus" label="Asopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237258" start="142" end="148" title="Metope (mythology)" label="Metope"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="154" end="160" title="Apollo (god)" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="166" end="171" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q392631" start="237" end="243" title="Agenor" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="247" end="251" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128792243" start="256" end="260" title="Tyro (mythology)" label="Tyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q27613" start="277" end="283" title="Cadmus" label="Cadmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145956" start="285" end="292" title="Phoenix (son of Agenor)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q616782" start="294" end="299" title="Cilix" label="Cilix"/>
<link wikidata="Q165170" start="304" end="310" title="Europa (consort of Zeus)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q943676" start="484" end="489" title="History of Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="518" end="527" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="532" end="539" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208531" start="681" end="688" title="Actaeon" label="Actaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="722" end="738" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="789" end="812" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="830" end="852" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1226" end="1246" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83071" wikidata="Q796204" url="?curid=83071" title="Eternalism (philosophy of time)">
<text>In the philosophy of space and time, eternalism is an approach to the ontological nature of time, which takes the view that all existence in time is equally &quot;real&quot;, as opposed to presentism or the growing block universe theory of time, in which at least the future is not the same as any other time. Some forms of eternalism give time a similar ontology to that of space, as a dimension, with different times being as real as different places, and future events are &quot;already there&quot; in the same sense other places are already there, and that there is no objective flow of time.

It is sometimes referred to as the &quot;block time&quot; or &quot;block universe&quot; theory due to its description of space-time as an unchanging four-dimensional &quot;block&quot;, as opposed to the view of the world as a three-dimensional space modulated by the passage of time.

==The present==

In classical philosophy, time is divided into three distinct regions: the &quot;past&quot;, the &quot;present&quot;, and the &quot;future&quot;. Using that representational model, the past is generally seen as being immutably fixed, and the future as at least partly undefined. As time passes, the moment that was once the present becomes part of the past, and part of the future, in turn, becomes the new present. In this way time is said to pass, with a distinct present moment moving forward into the future and leaving the past behind. One view of this type, presentism, argues that only the present exists. The present does not travel forward through an environment of time, moving from a real point in the past and toward a real point in the future. Instead, it merely changes. The past and future do not exist and are only concepts used to describe the real, isolated, and changing present. This conventional model presents a number of difficult philosophical problems and may be difficult to reconcile with currently accepted scientific theories such as the theory of relativity.
It can be argued that special relativity eliminates the concept of absolute simultaneity and a universal present: according to the relativity of simultaneity, observers in different frames of reference can have different measurements of whether a given pair of events happened at the same time or at different times, with there being no physical basis for preferring one frame&#x27;s judgments over those of another. However, there are events that may be non-simultaneous in all frames of reference: when one event is within the light cone of another—its causal past or causal future—then observers in all frames of reference show that one event preceded the other. The causal past and causal future are consistent within all frames of reference, but any other time is &quot;elsewhere&quot;, and within it there is no present, past, or future. There is no physical basis for a set of events that represents the present.

Many philosophers have argued that relativity implies eternalism. Philosopher of science Dean Rickles says that, &quot;the consensus among philosophers seems to be that special and general relativity are incompatible with presentism.&quot; Christian Wüthrich argues that supporters of presentism can salvage absolute simultaneity only if they reject either empiricism or relativity. Dean Zimmerman and others argue for a single privileged frame whose judgments about length, time, and simultaneity are the &quot;true&quot; ones, even if there is no empirical way to distinguish this frame. Hilary Putnam concluded in 1967 that it follows from special relativity that ″any future event &quot;X&quot; is already real″ and eternalim is the only view compatible with STR. The philosopher Mauro Dorato interprets Putnam&#x27;s arguments differently and asserts that ″the opposition between presentism − only the presently existing
event exist − and eternalism − past present and future events are equally real − which is
somewhat presupposed in Putnam 1967, is misguided.″

== The flow of time ==
=== Antiquity ===
Arguments for and against an independent flow of time have been raised since antiquity, represented by fatalism, reductionism, and Platonism: Classical fatalism argues that every proposition about the future exists, and it is either true or false, hence there is a set of every true proposition about the future, which means these propositions describe the future exactly as it is, and this future is true and unavoidable. Fatalism is challenged by positing that there are propositions that are neither true nor false, for example they may be indeterminate. Reductionism questions whether time can exist independently of the relation between events, and Platonism argues that time is absolute, and it exists independently of the events that occupy it.

Earlier, pre-Socratic Greek philosopher Parmenides of Elea had posited that existence is timeless and change is impossible (an idea popularized by his disciple Zeno of Elea and his paradoxes about motion).

=== Middle ages ===
The philosopher Katherin A. Rogers argued that Anselm of Canterbury took an eternalist view of time, although the philosopher Brian Leftow argued against this interpretation, suggesting that Anselm instead advocated a type of presentism. Rogers responded to this paper, defending her original interpretation. Rogers also discusses this issue in her book &quot;Anselm on Freedom&quot;, using the term &quot;four-dimensionalism&quot; rather than &quot;eternalism&quot; for the view that &quot;the present moment is not ontologically privileged&quot;, and commenting that &quot;Boethius and Augustine do sometimes sound rather four-dimensionalist, but Anselm is apparently the first consistently and explicitly to embrace the position.&quot; Taneli Kukkonen argues in the &quot;Oxford Handbook of Medieval Philosophy&quot; that &quot;what Augustine&#x27;s and Anselm&#x27;s mix of eternalist and presentist, tenseless and tensed language tells is that medieval philosophers saw no need to choose sides&quot; the way modern philosophers do.

Augustine of Hippo wrote that God is outside of time—that time exists only within the created universe. Thomas Aquinas took the same view, and many theologians agree. On this view, God would perceive something like a block universe, while time might appear differently to the finite beings contained within it.

=== Modern period ===
One of the most famous arguments about the nature of time in modern philosophy is presented in &quot;The Unreality of Time&quot; by J. M. E. McTaggart. It argues that time is an illusion. McTaggart argued that the description of events as existing in absolute time is self-contradictory, because the events have to have properties about being in the past and in the future, which are incompatible with each other. McTaggart viewed this as a contradiction in the concept of time itself, and concluded that reality is non-temporal. He called this concept the B-theory of time.

Dirck Vorenkamp, a professor of religious studies, argued in his paper &quot;B-Series Temporal Order in Dogen&#x27;s Theory of Time&quot; that the Zen Buddhist teacher Dōgen presented views on time that contained all the main elements of McTaggart&#x27;s B-series view of time (which denies any objective present), although he noted that some of Dōgen&#x27;s reasoning also contained A-Series notions, which Vorenkamp argued may indicate some inconsistency in Dōgen&#x27;s thinking.

Eternalism also encapsulates the theory of world lines, and the concept of linear reality that is - the individual perception of linear time.

=== Quantum physics ===
Some philosophers appeal to a specific theory that is &quot;timeless&quot; in a more radical sense than the rest of physics, the theory of quantum gravity. This theory is used, for instance, in Julian Barbour&#x27;s theory of timelessness. On the other hand, George Ellis argues that time is absent in cosmological theories because of the details they leave out.

Recently, Hrvoje Nikolić has argued that a block time model solves the black hole information paradox.

== Objections ==

Philosophers such as John Lucas argue that &quot;The Block universe gives a deeply inadequate view of time. It fails to account for the passage of time, the pre-eminence of the present, the directedness of time and the difference between the future and the past.&quot; Similarly, Karl Popper argued in his discussion with Albert Einstein against determinism and eternalism from a common-sense standpoint.

A flow-of-time theory with a strictly deterministic future, which nonetheless does not exist in the same sense as the present, would not satisfy common-sense intuitions about time. Some have argued that common-sense flow-of-time theories can be compatible with eternalism, for example John G. Cramer’s transactional interpretation. Kastner (2010) &quot;proposed that in order to preserve the elegance and economy of the interpretation, it may be necessary to consider offer and confirmation waves as propagating in a “higher space” of possibilities.

In &quot;Time Reborn&quot;, Lee Smolin argues that time is physically fundamental, in contrast to Einstein&#x27;s view that time is an illusion. Smolin hypothesizes that the laws of physics are not fixed, but rather evolve over time via a form of cosmological natural selection. In &quot;The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time&quot;, co-authored with philosopher Roberto Mangabeira Unger, Smolin goes into more detail on his views on the physical passage of time. In contrast to the orthodox block universe view, Smolin argues that what instead exists is a &quot;thick present&quot; in which two events in the present can be causally related to each other. Marina Cortês and Lee Smolin also argue that certain classes of discrete dynamical systems demonstrate time asymmetry and irreversibility, which is inconsistent with the block universe interpretation of time.

Avshalom Elitzur vehemently rejects the block universe interpretation of time. At the Time in Cosmology conference, held at the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in 2016, Elitzur said: &quot;I’m sick and tired of this block universe, ... I don’t think that next Thursday has the same footing as this Thursday. The future does not exist. It does not! Ontologically, it’s not there.&quot; Elitzur and Shahar Dolev argue that quantum mechanical experiments such as the Quantum Liar and the evaporation of black holes challenge the mainstream block universe model, and support the existence of an objective passage of time. Elitzur and Dolev believe that an objective passage of time and relativity can be reconciled, and that it would resolve many of the issues with the block universe and the conflict between relativity and quantum mechanics. Additionally, Elitzur and Dolev believe that certain quantum mechanical experiments provide evidence of apparently inconsistent histories, and that spacetime itself may therefore be subject to change affecting entire histories.

Some philosophers have made objections to eternalism based on the existence of the self and concepts such as Benj Hellie&#x27;s vertiginous question. Vincent Conitzer argues that arguments in favor of the A-theory of time are more effective as arguments for the combined position of both A-theory being true and the &quot;I&quot; being metaphysically privileged from other perspectives. Similar arguments have been made by Caspar Hare with the theories of egocentric presentism and perspectival realism.

==See also==
* A series and B series
* Arrow of time
* Centered world
* Eternity of the world
* Imaginary time
* Philosophical presentism
* Philosophy of space and time
* Problem of time
* Steady state
* Steady-state model
* Strata-cut animation

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Smart, Jack. &quot;River of Time&quot;. In Anthony Kenny. Essays in Conceptual Analysis. pp. 214–215.
* van Inwagen, Peter (2008). &quot;Metaphysics.&quot; Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

==External links==
* 
* 
* Slavov, Matias (2024) &quot;Eternalism&quot; &quot;The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;. ISSN 2161-0002. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1754940" start="7" end="35" title="philosophy of space and time" label="philosophy of space and time"/>
<link wikidata="Q796204" start="37" end="47" title="Eternalism (philosophy of time)" label="eternalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="70" end="81" title="ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="92" end="96" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264656" start="189" end="199" title="Presentism (philosophy of time)" label="presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748016" start="207" end="229" title="growing block universe" label="growing block universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="355" end="363" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="375" end="380" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="387" end="396" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="458" end="464" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214913" start="573" end="582" title="objectivity (science)" label="objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q796204" start="639" end="649" title="Eternalism (philosophy of time)" label="block time"/>
<link wikidata="Q796204" start="665" end="679" title="Eternalism (philosophy of time)" label="block universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="719" end="729" title="space-time" label="space-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q192630" start="980" end="984" title="past" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q193168" start="1002" end="1009" title="present" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="1031" end="1037" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264656" start="1463" end="1473" title="Presentism (philosophy of time)" label="presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="1966" end="1986" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="2010" end="2028" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q837505" start="2119" end="2145" title="relativity of simultaneity" label="relativity of simultaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="2170" end="2189" title="Frame of reference" label="frames of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137903" start="2517" end="2527" title="light cone" label="light cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="3266" end="3276" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246576" start="3292" end="3306" title="Dean Zimmerman (philosopher)" label="Dean Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19314" start="3328" end="3353" title="Absolute space and time" label="a single privileged frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="3499" end="3512" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="4122" end="4130" title="fatalism" label="fatalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="4132" end="4144" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="4150" end="4159" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="4198" end="4209" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="4812" end="4822" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="4932" end="4944" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33378" start="4949" end="4975" title="Zeno&amp;#x27;s paradoxes" label="his paradoxes about motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="5046" end="5066" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964473" start="5125" end="5137" title="Brian Leftow" label="Brian Leftow"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="5574" end="5582" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="6037" end="6055" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6067" end="6070" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q138045" start="6074" end="6089" title="eternity" label="outside of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="6141" end="6155" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771686" start="6472" end="6493" title="The Unreality of Time" label="The Unreality of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q463553" start="6503" end="6521" title="J. M. E. McTaggart" label="J. M. E. McTaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833742" start="6928" end="6944" title="B-theory of time" label="B-theory of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="7094" end="7097" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318064" start="7115" end="7120" title="Dōgen" label="Dōgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="7737" end="7752" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q981768" start="7792" end="7806" title="Julian Barbour" label="Julian Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="8033" end="8063" title="black hole information paradox" label="black hole information paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701524" start="8105" end="8115" title="John Lucas (philosopher)" label="John Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="8364" end="8375" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="8406" end="8421" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="8528" end="8541" title="determinism" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841857" start="8775" end="8789" title="John G. Cramer" label="John G. Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q986786" start="8792" end="8820" title="transactional interpretation" label="transactional interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579358" start="9050" end="9061" title="Time Reborn" label="Time Reborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q437263" start="9069" end="9079" title="Lee Smolin" label="Lee Smolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800604" start="9329" end="9374" title="The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time" label="The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q569063" start="9411" end="9435" title="Roberto Mangabeira Unger" label="Roberto Mangabeira Unger"/>
<link wikidata="Q328683" start="9915" end="9931" title="Avshalom Elitzur" label="Avshalom Elitzur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004561" start="10043" end="10086" title="Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics" label="Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455813" start="11124" end="11144" title="vertiginous question" label="vertiginous question"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011806" start="11452" end="11473" title="egocentric presentism" label="egocentric presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130985" start="11478" end="11498" title="perspectival realism" label="perspectival realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010559" start="11516" end="11537" title="A series and B series" label="A series and B series"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="11540" end="11553" title="Arrow of time" label="Arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965768" start="11556" end="11570" title="Centered world" label="Centered world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383206" start="11573" end="11594" title="Eternity of the world" label="Eternity of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274262" start="11597" end="11611" title="Imaginary time" label="Imaginary time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264656" start="11614" end="11638" title="Philosophical presentism" label="Philosophical presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754940" start="11641" end="11669" title="Philosophy of space and time" label="Philosophy of space and time"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344764" start="11672" end="11687" title="Problem of time" label="Problem of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788637" start="11690" end="11702" title="Steady state" label="Steady state"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="11705" end="11723" title="Steady-state model" label="Steady-state model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621738" start="11726" end="11746" title="Strata-cut animation" label="Strata-cut animation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83073" wikidata="Q18113956" url="?curid=83073" title="Spercheus">
<text>Spercheus is a genus of aquatic beetles which are placed in a family of their own, Spercheidae within the Hydrophiloidea. About 20 species are known from around the world except the Nearctic with the majority being from the Oriental and Afrotropical Realms.

All life stages are found in shallow still water with rich vegetation, which in some species includes temporary saline pools. Adults and larvae live attached to pieces of vegetation or debris, and also walk on the underside of the water surface. Air is held in a bubble on the underside of the body. The larvae feed on grazed detritus as well as drifting algae, dead organisms, and other organic refuse. The adults live as filter feeders on floating debris like decaying plant material and other decomposing organic remains. The adult females build a silken-egg case which they attach to their mid-tibiae and held by the hind legs, carried below the abdomen. These beetles were formerly placed in the family Hydrophilidae but are distinctive.

The front of the head is notched and the 7–9 segmented antenna has the terminal 3–4 segments club like and an enlarged fourth segment. The elytra are very convex and one or two abdominal segments may extend beyond the apex. They have 5 tarsal segments on all legs.

Possible fossils of &quot;Spercheus&quot; have been described from the Eocene aged Bembridge Marls of the Isle of Wight, England. The extinct genus &quot;Prospercheus&quot; from the Late Jurassic of Shar-Teg, Mongolia, has also been considered a close relative of &quot;Spercheus&quot;, and also placed in Spercheidae.

== Species ==
* &quot;Spercheus belli&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus burgeoni&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus cerisyi&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus crenulatus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus emarginatus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus fimbriicollis&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus gerardi&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus halophilus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus hanseni&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus hovanus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus humeralis&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus platycephalus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus senegalensis&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus siamensis&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus spangleri&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus stangli&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus stasimus&quot; 
* &quot;Spercheus wattsi&quot; 

==References ==
==External links ==
* Australian Freshwater Invertebrates
* Tree of Life</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18113956" start="83" end="94" title="Spercheus" label="Spercheidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132264" start="106" end="120" title="Hydrophiloidea" label="Hydrophiloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q737742" start="182" end="190" title="Nearctic realm" label="Nearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q757081" start="224" end="232" title="Oriental realm" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q388614" start="237" end="249" title="Afrotropical realm" label="Afrotropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="682" end="695" title="filter feeder" label="filter feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q839281" start="967" end="980" title="Hydrophilidae" label="Hydrophilidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1340" end="1346" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q895055" start="1352" end="1367" title="Bembridge Marls" label="Bembridge Marls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1423" end="1435" title="Prospercheus" label="Prospercheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="1456" end="1464" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489340" start="1468" end="1476" title="Ulan Malgait Formation" label="Shar-Teg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83076" wikidata="Q151480" url="?curid=83076" title="Sphinx">
<text>A sphinx ( ; , ; or sphinges ) is a mythical creature with the head of a human, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.

In Greek tradition, the sphinx is a treacherous and merciless being with the head of a woman, the haunches of a lion, and the wings of a bird. According to Greek myth, she challenges those who encounter her to answer a riddle, and kills and eats them when they fail to solve the riddle. This deadly version of a sphinx appears in the myth and drama of Oedipus.

In Egyptian mythology, in contrast, the sphinx is typically depicted as a man (an androsphinx ()), and is seen as a benevolent representation of strength and ferocity, usually of a pharaoh. Unlike Greek or Levantine/Mesopotamian ones, Egyptian sphinxes were not winged.

Both the Greek and Egyptian sphinxes were thought of as guardians, and statues of them often flank the entrances to temples. During the Renaissance, the sphinx enjoyed a major revival in European decorative art. During this period, images of the sphinx were initially similar to the ancient Egyptian version, but when later exported to other cultures, the sphinx was often conceived of quite differently, partly due to varied translations of descriptions of the originals, and partly through the evolution of the concept as it was integrated into other cultural traditions.

However, depictions of the sphinx are generally associated with grand architectural structures, such as royal tombs or religious temples.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;sphinx&quot; comes from the Greek Σφίγξ, associated by folk etymology with the verb σφίγγειν (&quot;sphíngēn&quot;), meaning &quot;to squeeze&quot;, &quot;to tighten up&quot;. This name may be derived from the fact that lions kill their prey by strangulation, biting the throat of prey and holding them down until they die. However, the historian Susan Wise Bauer suggests that the word &quot;sphinx&quot; was instead a Greek corruption of the Egyptian name &quot;shesepankh&quot;, which meant &quot;living image&quot;, and referred rather to the &quot;statue&quot; of the sphinx, which was carved out of &quot;living rock&quot; (rock that was a contiguous part of the stony body of the Earth, shaped, but not cut away from its original source), than to the beast itself.

== Egypt ==

The largest and most famous sphinx is the Great Sphinx of Giza, situated on the Giza Plateau adjacent to the Great Pyramids of Giza on the west bank of the Nile River and facing east (). The sphinx is located southeast of the pyramids. While the date of its construction is not known for certain, the general consensus among Egyptologists is that the head of the Great Sphinx bears the likeness of the pharaoh Khafre, dating it to between 2600 and 2500 BC. However, a fringe minority of late 20th century geologists have claimed evidence of water erosion in and around the Sphinx enclosure which would prove that the Sphinx predates Khafre, at around 10,000 to 5000 BC, a claim that is sometimes referred to as the Sphinx water erosion hypothesis but which has little support among Egyptologists and contradicts other evidence.

What names their builders gave to these statues is unknown. At the Great Sphinx site, a 1400 BC inscription on a stele belonging to the 18th dynasty pharaoh Thutmose IV lists the names of three aspects of the local sun deity of that period, &quot;Khepera–Rê–Atum&quot;. Many pharaohs had their heads carved atop the guardian statues for their tombs to show their close relationship with the powerful solar deity Sekhmet, a lioness. Besides the Great Sphinx, other famous Egyptian sphinxes include one bearing the head of the pharaoh Hatshepsut, with her likeness carved in granite, which is now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and the alabaster Sphinx of Memphis, currently located within the open-air museum at that site. The theme was expanded to form great avenues of guardian sphinxes lining the approaches to tombs and temples as well as serving as details atop the posts of flights of stairs to very grand complexes. Nine hundred sphinxes with ram heads (Criosphinxes), believed to represent Amon, were built in Thebes, where his cult was strongest. At Karnak, each Criosphinx is fronted by a full-length statue of the pharaoh. The task of these sphinxes was to hold back the forces of evil.

The Great Sphinx has become an emblem of Egypt, frequently appearing on its stamps, coins, and official documents.

In March 2023, a limestone sphinx was discovered at the Dendera Temple Complex. This sphinx, which is depicted with a slight grin and dimples, is thought to be made in the image of the Roman emperor Claudius.

== Europe ==
The revived Mannerist sphinx of the late 15th century is sometimes thought of as the &quot;French sphinx&quot;. Her coiffed head is erect and she has the breasts of a young woman. Often she wears ear drops and pearls as ornaments. Her body is naturalistically rendered as a recumbent lioness. Such sphinxes were revived when the &quot;grottesche&quot; or &quot;grotesque&quot; decorations of the unearthed &quot;Domus Aurea&quot; of Nero were brought to light in late 15th-century Rome, and she was incorporated into the classical vocabulary of arabesque designs that spread throughout Europe in engravings during the 16th and 17th centuries. Sphinxes were included in the decoration of the &quot;loggia&quot; of the Vatican Palace by the workshop of Raphael (1515–20), which updated the vocabulary of the Roman &quot;grottesche&quot;.

The first appearances of sphinxes in French art are in the School of Fontainebleau in the 1520s and 1530s and she continues into the Late Baroque style of the French Régence (1715–1723). From France, she spread throughout Europe, becoming a regular feature of the outdoors decorative sculpture of 18th-century palace gardens, as in the Upper Belvedere Palace in Vienna, Sanssouci Park in Potsdam, La Granja in Spain, Branicki Palace in Białystok, or the late Rococo examples in the grounds of the Portuguese Queluz National Palace (of perhaps the 1760s), with ruffs and clothed chests ending with a little cape.

Sphinxes are a feature of the neoclassical interior decorations of Robert Adam and his followers, returning closer to the undressed style of the &quot;grottesche&quot;. They had an equal appeal to artists and designers of the Romanticism and subsequent Symbolism movements in the 19th century. Most of these sphinxes alluded to the Greek sphinx and the myth of Oedipus, rather than the Egyptian, although they may not have wings.

The Decadent Movement, a European movement that was attributed to the notion of &quot;decadence&quot; around the 1890s, implores the main notion of finding beauty in the decline of civilization in the form of macabre or taboo subjects such as the sphinx. The motif of the sphinx can also be connected to the motif of the &quot;femme fatale&quot; figure in decadent texts in which a typically female-like figure or beast seduces and murders men. The &quot;femme fatale&quot; is used to establish a decline or decay ranging from perversion, death, prostitution, and other taboos of Victorian society.

Deborah Barker discusses, in &quot;The Riddle of the Sphinx: Elizabeth Stuart Phelps&#x27;s The Story of Avis&quot;, how the painter Avis used the Sphinx as a representation of what women truly were in the nineteenth century. Avis thought that she could solve the prejudice that resulted from her gender and race through the Sphinx to show how she is an artist by tapping into the logic of Western Culture and visual recognition and classification. Napoleon on the other hand felt that the Sphinx was a representation of the empire he created, while Avis&#x27; father Hegel Dobell thought that the Sphinx represented just an idea.

Oscar Wilde, a known Decadent writer, utilized this motif in his poem &quot;The Sphinx&quot;. The poem itself establishes a connection between the Sphinx and the French due to underlying social decline such as the French Empire collapsing. Wilde describes the sphinx as a sort of half-cat and half-woman that is connected to many mythological events, typically that of Egypt and Greece, as well as how the mysterious creature is surrounded by lust and death. The writer James Thomson, similarly to Wilde, also utilizes the motif of the sphinx in his poem &quot;The City of Dreadful Night&quot;. The poem revolves around an isolated and anxious man who runs throughout the city, his anxiety and fears taking on the personified image of a grandiose beast that has the makeup of a dragon and lion. While not inherently stated, the beast is likely that of a decadent form of a sphinx due to its appearance and grand nature.

=== Greece ===
In the Bronze Age, the Hellenes had trade and cultural contacts with Egypt. Before the time that Alexander the Great occupied Egypt, the Greek name, &quot;sphinx&quot;, was already applied to these statues. The historians and geographers of Greece such as Herodotus wrote extensively about Egyptian culture.

There was a single &quot;sphinx&quot; in Greek mythology, a unique demon of destruction and bad luck. Apollodorus describes the sphinx as having a woman&#x27;s face, the body and tail of a lion and the wings of a bird. Pliny the Elder mentions that Ethiopia produces plenty of sphinxes, with brown hair and breasts, corroborated by 20th-century archeologists. Statius describes her as a winged monster, with pallid cheeks, eyes tainted with corruption, plumes clotted with gore and talons on livid hands. Sometimes, the wings are specified to be those of an eagle, and the tail to be serpent-headed. According to Hesiod, the Sphinx was a daughter of Orthrus and an unknown she—either the Chimera, Echidna, or Ceto. According to Apollodorus and Lasus, she was a daughter of Echidna and Typhon.

The sphinx was the emblem of the ancient city-state of Chios, and appeared on seals and the obverse side of coins from the 6th century BC until the 3rd century AD.

==== Riddle of the Sphinx ====

The Sphinx is said to have guarded the entrance to the Greek city of Thebes, asking a riddle to travellers to allow them passage. The exact riddle asked by the Sphinx was not specified by early tellers of the myth, and was not standardized as the one given below until late in Greek history.

It was said in late lore that Hera or Ares sent the Sphinx from her Aethiopian homeland (the Greeks always remembered the foreign origin of the Sphinx) to Thebes in Greece where she asked all passersby the most famous riddle in history: &quot;Which creature has one voice and yet becomes four-footed and two-footed and three-footed?&quot; She strangled and devoured anyone who could not answer. Oedipus solved the riddle by answering: &quot;Man—who crawls on all fours as a baby, then walks on two feet as an adult, and then uses a walking stick in old age&quot;. In some lesser accounts, there was a second riddle: &quot;There are two sisters: one gives birth to the other and she, in turn, gives birth to the first. Who are the two sisters?&quot; The answer is &quot;day and night&quot; (both words—&quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;, respectively—are feminine in Ancient Greek). This second riddle is also found in a Gascon version of the myth and could be very ancient.

Bested at last, the Sphinx then threw herself from her high rock and died; or, in some versions Oedipus killed her. An alternative version tells that she devoured herself. In both cases, Oedipus can therefore be recognized as a &quot;liminal&quot; or threshold figure, helping effect the transition between the old religious practices, represented by the death of the Sphinx, and the rise of the new, Olympian gods.

===== The riddle in popular culture =====
In Jean Cocteau&#x27;s retelling of the Oedipus legend, &quot;The Infernal Machine&quot;, the Sphinx tells Oedipus the answer to the riddle in order to kill herself so that she did not have to kill any more, and also to make him love her. He leaves without ever thanking her for giving him the answer to the riddle. The scene ends when the Sphinx and Anubis ascend back to the heavens.

There are mythic, anthropological, psychoanalytic and parodic interpretations of the Riddle of the Sphinx, and of Oedipus&#x27;s answer to it. Sigmund Freud describes &quot;the question of where babies come from&quot; as a riddle of the Sphinx.

Numerous riddle books use the Sphinx in their title or illustrations.

=== Romania ===

Sfinxul is a natural rock formation in the Bucegi Natural Park which is in the Bucegi Mountains of Romania. This rock formation is named for its resemblance to the Sphinx of Giza, and is located at an altitude of within the Babele complex of rock formations.

== Asia ==

A composite mythological being with the body of a lion and the head of a human is present in the traditions, mythology and art of South and Southeast Asia. Variously known as &quot;puruṣamr̥ga&quot; (Sanskrit, &quot;human-animal&quot;), &quot;purushamirugam&quot; (Tamil, &quot;human-animal&quot;), &quot;naravirala&quot; (Sanskrit, &quot;human-cat&quot;) in India, or as &quot;nara-simha&quot; (Sanskrit, &quot;human-lion&quot;) in Sri Lanka, &quot;manussiha&quot; or &quot;manutthiha&quot; (Pali, &quot;human-lion&quot;) in Myanmar, and &quot;norasingha&quot; (from Pali, &quot;human-lion&quot;, a variation of the Sanskrit &quot;nara-simha&quot;) or &quot;thep norasingha&quot; (&quot;man-lion deity&quot;), or &quot;nora nair&quot; in Thailand. Although, just like the &quot;nara-simha&quot;, she/he has a head of a lion and the body of a human.

In contrast to the sphinxes in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Greece, of which the traditions largely have been lost due to the discontinuity of the civilization, the traditions related to the &quot;Asian sphinxes&quot; are very much alive today. The earliest artistic depictions of &quot;sphinxes&quot; from the South Asian subcontinent are to some extent influenced by Hellenistic art and writings. These hail from the period when Buddhist art underwent a phase of Hellenistic influence. Numerous sphinxes can be seen on the gateways of Bharhut stupa, dating to the 1st century B.C.

In South India, the &quot;sphinx&quot; is known as &quot;puruṣamr̥ga&quot; (Sanskrit) or &quot;purushamirugam&quot; (Tamil), meaning &quot;human-animal&quot;. It is found depicted in sculptural art in temples and palaces where it serves an apotropaic purpose, just as the &quot;sphinxes&quot; in other parts of the ancient world. It is said by the tradition, to take away the sins of the devotees when they enter a temple and to ward off evil in general. It is therefore often found in a strategic position on the gopuram or temple gateway, or near the entrance of the sanctum sanctorum.
The &quot;puruṣamr̥ga&quot; plays a significant role in daily as well as yearly ritual of South Indian Hindu temples. In the Shodhasha-Upakaara (or sixteen honors) ritual, performed between one and six times at significant sacred moments through the day, it decorates one of the lamps of the Deepaaradhana or lamp ceremony. And in several temples the &quot;puruṣamr̥ga&quot; is also one of the &quot;vahana&quot; or vehicles of the deity during the processions of the Brahmotsava or festival.

In Kanyakumari district, in the southernmost tip of the Indian subcontinent, during the night of Maha Shivaratri, devotees run 75 kilometres while visiting and worshiping at twelve Shiva temples. This Shiva Ottam or Running for Shiva is performed in commemoration of the story of the race between the Purushamirugam and Bhima, one of the Pandavas of the Hindu Epic &quot;Mahabharata&quot;.

The Indian conception of a sphinx that comes closest to the classic Greaco-Roman idea is the Sharabha and Gandabherunda, two mythical creatures, part lion, part human, part mammal and part bird, and the form of Sharabha that god Shiva took on and fought with the god Vishnu as Narasimha and Shiva as Sharabha was killed by Vishnu as Gandabherunda in the form of Narashima when Narashima killed Hiranyakashipu.

In Sri Lanka the sphinx is known as &quot;narasimha&quot; or human-lion. As a sphinx, it has the body of a lion and the head of a human being, and is not to be confused with Narasimha, the fourth incarnation of the deity Vishnu; this avatara or incarnation of Vishnu has a human body and the head of a lion and Vishnu as Narashima killed Hiranyakashipu. The &quot;sphinx&quot; narasimha is part of the Buddhist tradition and functions as a guardian of the northern direction and also was depicted on banners.
In Burma (Myanmar), the sphinx-like statue, with a human head and two lion hindquarters, is known as &quot;Manussiha&quot; (&quot;manuthiha&quot;). It is depicted on the corners of Buddhist stupas, and its legends tell how it was created by Buddhist monks to protect a new-born royal baby from being devoured by ogresses.

Nora Nair, Norasingha and Thep Norasingha are three of the names under which the &quot;sphinx&quot; is known in Thailand. They are depicted as upright walking beings with the lower body of a lion or deer, and the upper body of a human. Often they are found as female-male pairs. Here, too, the sphinx serves a protective function. It also is enumerated among the mythological creatures that inhabit the ranges of the sacred mountain Himapan.

=== Japanese literature ===
Giorgio Amitrano&#x27;s &quot;Echoes of Ancient Greek Myths in Murakami Haruki&#x27;s novels and in Other Works of Contemporary Japanese Literature&quot; explores how Haruki Murakami&#x27;s &quot;Kafka on the Shore&quot; shares thematic elements of decadence with Oedipus&#x27; myth and parallels the protagonist&#x27;s journey to self-discovery. The Sphinx motif present within the novel is established through the enigmatic creature of Murakami&#x27;s design, Oshima: a mysterious, omnipotent being who has the protagonist grapple with the concept of a meaningless existence in turn of searching for authenticity by disconnecting from societal conventions of wealth and status. He tests the durability of character of the novel&#x27;s protagonists through a series of tests that may challenge their perception of truth regarding their existence.

=== Burmese Literature ===
Lowell Edmunds&#x27; &quot;Oedipus in Burma&quot; is an explorative look on the Oedipus&#x27; myth in Burmese literature and culture. The folktale &quot;Pauk and the Dragon&quot; uses similar motifs from the Greek myth to explore Pauk&#x27;s, the protagonist, road to destiny and fulfilling the quests needed to defeat the dragon: the Sphinx motif. Using intelligence, courage, and determination, Pauk defeats the dragon but not before facing the consequences of the knowledge he acquired on his journey. Decadent themes of fate, destiny, tragedy, mystery, and identity present themselves in the Burmese adaptations of Greek myths, in this case, it is Oedipus and the Sphinx. 

== Freemasonry ==
The sphinx imagery has historically been adopted into Masonic architecture, symbolism and some of its rituals.

Among the Egyptians, sphinxes were placed at the entrance of the temples to guard their mysteries, by warning those who penetrated within that they should conceal a knowledge of them from the uninitiated. Champollion said that the sphinx became successively the symbol of each of the gods. The placement of the sphinxes expressed the idea that all the gods were hidden from the people, and that the knowledge of them, guarded in the sanctuaries, was revealed to initiates only.

As a Masonic emblem, the sphinx has been adopted as a symbol of mystery, and as such often is found as a decoration sculptured in front of Masonic temples, or engraved at the head of Masonic documents.

== Similar hybrid creatures ==

=== With feline features ===
*Gopaitioshah – The Persian &quot;Gopat&quot; or &quot;Gopaitioshah&quot; is another creature that is similar to the Sphinx, being a winged bull or lion with human face. The Gopat have been represented in ancient art of Iran since late second millennium BC, and was a common symbol for dominant royal power in ancient Iran. Gopats were common motifs in the art of Elamite period, Luristan, North and North West region of Iran in Iron Age, and Achaemenid art, and can be found in texts such as the &quot;Bundahishn&quot;, the &quot;Dadestan-i Denig&quot;, the &quot;Menog-i Khrad&quot;, as well as in collections of tales, such as the &quot;Matikan-e yusht faryan&quot; and in its Islamic replication, the &quot;Marzubannama&quot;.
*Löwenmensch figurine – The 32,000-year-old Aurignacian Löwenmensch figurine, also known as &quot;lion-human&quot; is the oldest known anthropomorphic statue, discovered in the Hohlenstein-Stadel, a German cave in 1939.
* Manticore – The Manticore (Early Middle Persian: &quot;Mardyakhor&quot; or &quot;Martikhwar&quot;, means: Man-eater) is a Persian legendary hybrid creature and another similar creature to the sphinx.
* Narasimha – Narasimha (&quot;human-lion&quot;) is an incarnation (Avatara) of Vishnu in Hinduism in the Dashavatara of Vishnu who takes the form of half-man/half-Asiatic lion, having a human torso and lower body, but with a lion-like face and claws and in this avatara, Vishnu killed Hiranyakashipu as Narashima and saved the world from chaos in Hindu Mythology.

=== Without feline features ===

*In ancient Assyria, bas-reliefs of shedu bulls with the crowned bearded heads of kings guarded the entrances of temples.
* Many Greek mythological creatures who are archaic survivals of previous mythologies with respect to the classical Olympian mythology, like the centaurs, are similar to the Sphinx.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Hybrid creatures in mythology
* List of hybrid creatures in mythology

Similar hybrid creatures

* Lupul Dacic or the head of a wolf with the body of a snake, the sacred symbol of the Dacians, the ancient inhabitants of modern Romania. 
* Anzû (older reading: Zû), Mesopotamian monster
* Chimera, Greek mythological hybrid monster
* Centaur and Ichthyocentaur, Greek horse and human hybrid, or horse, human, fish hybrid
* Cockatrice, snake with rooster&#x27;s head and feet and bat&#x27;s wings
* Dragon, European and East Asian reptile-like mythical creature
* Griffin or griffon, lion-bird hybrid
* Harpy, Greco-Roman mythological bird monster with woman&#x27;s face
* Siren, Greco-Roman mythical creature with the combined features of a woman and bird, often a woman&#x27;s head and breasts and a bird&#x27;s body 
* Lamassu, Assyrian deity, bull/lion-eagle-human hybrid
* Hippogryph, half eagle, half horse
* Manticore, Persian monster with a lion&#x27;s body and a humanoid head.
* Nue, Japanese legendary creature
* Pegasus, winged stallion in Greek mythology
* Phoenix, self-regenerating bird in Greek mythology
* Pixiu or Pi Yao, Chinese mythical creature
* Qilin, Chinese/East Asian mythical hybrid creature
* Satyr, or Faun, a Greek or Roman mythical creature that is half human half goat
* Sharabha, Hindu mythology: lion-bird hybrid
* Simurgh, Iranian mythical flying creature
* Sirin, Russian mythological creature, half-woman half-bird
* Snow Lion, Tibetan mythological celestial animal
* Yali, Hindu mythological lion-elephant-horse hybrid
* Ziz, giant griffin-like bird in Jewish mythology
* Komainu to compare its use in Japanese culture
* Chinthe similar lion statues in Burma, Laos and Cambodia
* Shisa similar lion statues in the Ryukyu Islands
* Nian to compare with a similar but horned (unicorn) mythical beast
* Haetae to compare with similar lion-like statues in Korea.

== Notes ==

== References ==
* Caldwell, Richard, &quot;Hesiod&#x27;s Theogony&quot;, Focus Publishing/R. Pullins Company (1 June 1987). .
* Clay, Jenny Strauss, &quot;Hesiod&#x27;s Cosmos&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2003. .
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Kallich, Martin. &quot;Oedipus and the Sphinx.&quot; &quot;Oedipus: Myth and Drama&quot;. N.p.: Western, 1968. N. pag. Print.
* Most, G.W., &quot;Hesiod, Theogony, Works and Days, Testimonia,&quot; Edited and translated by Glenn W. Most, Loeb Classical Library No. 57, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2018. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Stewart, Desmond. Pyramids and the Sphinx. [S.l.]: &quot;Newsweek&quot;, U.S., 72. Print.

== Further reading ==
* Dessenne, André. &quot;La Sphinx: Étude iconographique&quot; (in French). De Boccard, 1957.

== External links ==
* Sphinx Head Found in Greek Tomb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="2" end="8" title="Sphinx" label="sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="20" end="28" title="Sphinx" label="sphinges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239243" start="36" end="53" title="mythical creature" label="mythical creature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149548" start="131" end="146" title="Culture of Greece" label="Greek tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540134" start="226" end="234" title="haunches" label="haunches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="265" end="269" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="347" end="353" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="480" end="487" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205740" start="493" end="511" title="Egyptian mythology" label="Egyptian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="572" end="583" title="Sphinx" label="androsphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="671" end="678" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="897" end="908" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q381885" start="1446" end="1450" title="tomb" label="tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1534" end="1539" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="1561" end="1575" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505617" start="1853" end="1869" title="Susan Wise Bauer" label="Susan Wise Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130958" start="2334" end="2354" title="Great Sphinx of Giza" label="Great Sphinx of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="2372" end="2376" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508" start="2401" end="2423" title="Great Pyramids of Giza" label="Great Pyramids of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2448" end="2458" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q199861" start="2702" end="2708" title="Khafre" label="Khafre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059039" start="3007" end="3038" title="Sphinx water erosion hypothesis" label="Sphinx water erosion hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179700" start="3161" end="3167" title="statue" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="3234" end="3239" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="3257" end="3269" title="18th dynasty" label="18th dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q157985" start="3278" end="3289" title="Thutmose IV" label="Thutmose IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q146083" start="3340" end="3345" title="ancient Egyptian deities" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215940" start="3368" end="3375" title="Khepera" label="Khepera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="3376" end="3378" title="Rê" label="Rê"/>
<link wikidata="Q170569" start="3379" end="3383" title="Atum" label="Atum"/>
<link wikidata="Q146104" start="3533" end="3540" title="Sekhmet" label="Sekhmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="3654" end="3664" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="3694" end="3701" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="3723" end="3749" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="3771" end="3780" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839567" start="3781" end="3798" title="Sphinx of Memphis" label="Sphinx of Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="3896" end="3903" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="4134" end="4138" title="Amun" label="Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="4154" end="4160" title="Thebes (Egypt)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q735254" start="4507" end="4529" title="Dendera Temple complex" label="Dendera Temple Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4636" end="4641" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="4650" end="4658" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="4686" end="4695" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="4884" end="4889" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q218248" start="5009" end="5019" title="Grotesque" label="grottesche"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="5086" end="5097" title="Domus Aurea" label="Domus Aurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="5107" end="5111" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="5219" end="5228" title="Arabesque (European art)" label="arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q466544" start="5371" end="5377" title="loggia" label="loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145093" start="5391" end="5405" title="Vatican Palace" label="Vatican Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="5425" end="5432" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q584084" start="5570" end="5593" title="School of Fontainebleau" label="School of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="5644" end="5656" title="Baroque" label="Late Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362712" start="5677" end="5684" title="Regence" label="Régence"/>
<link wikidata="Q211818" start="5847" end="5869" title="Belvedere (palace)" label="Upper Belvedere Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="5873" end="5879" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q449256" start="5881" end="5895" title="Sanssouci Park" label="Sanssouci Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="5899" end="5906" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540732" start="5908" end="5917" title="La Granja (palace)" label="La Granja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376970" start="5928" end="5943" title="Branicki Palace, Białystok" label="Branicki Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="5947" end="5956" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="5970" end="5976" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073173" start="6019" end="6041" title="Queluz National Palace" label="Queluz National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q653053" start="6071" end="6075" title="Ruff (clothing)" label="ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="6154" end="6166" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="6191" end="6202" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="6350" end="6361" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="6377" end="6386" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="6485" end="6492" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="6555" end="6576" title="Decadent movement" label="The Decadent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="8730" end="8740" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="8820" end="8839" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="8979" end="8988" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="9134" end="9145" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="9251" end="9266" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="9392" end="9399" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="9590" end="9595" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="9616" end="9623" title="snake" label="serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="9645" end="9651" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q336230" start="9682" end="9689" title="Orthrus" label="Orthrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="9720" end="9727" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="Chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="9729" end="9736" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q209489" start="9741" end="9745" title="Ceto" label="Ceto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128200" start="9776" end="9781" title="Lasus of Hermione" label="Lasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="9817" end="9823" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="9881" end="9886" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="10109" end="10115" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="10346" end="10350" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="10354" end="10358" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q410453" start="10384" end="10393" title="Aethiopia" label="Aethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="10471" end="10477" title="Thebes (Greece)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="10711" end="10718" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825499" start="11520" end="11527" title="Liminality" label="liminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="11687" end="11695" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="11748" end="11760" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q856675" start="11807" end="11827" title="The Infernal Machine (play)" label="The Infernal Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="12096" end="12102" title="Anubis" label="Anubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="12275" end="12288" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623938" start="12466" end="12473" title="Sphinx (Romania)" label="Sfinxul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364563" start="12509" end="12528" title="Bucegi Natural Park" label="Bucegi Natural Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="12868" end="12873" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12878" end="12892" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221375" start="13953" end="13968" title="Hellenistic art" label="Hellenistic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958690" start="14038" end="14070" title="Hellenistic influence on Indian art" label="a phase of Hellenistic influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="14121" end="14128" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="14408" end="14418" title="apotropaic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435771" start="14682" end="14689" title="gopuram" label="gopuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415734" start="14737" end="14754" title="sanctum sanctorum" label="sanctum sanctorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="14859" end="14864" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q167681" start="15156" end="15162" title="vahana" label="vahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13004657" start="15224" end="15235" title="Brahmotsava" label="Brahmotsava"/>
<link wikidata="Q15158" start="15253" end="15264" title="Kanyakumari district" label="Kanyakumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="15347" end="15362" title="Maha Shivaratri" label="Maha Shivaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651886" start="15570" end="15575" title="Bhima" label="Bhima"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="15621" end="15632" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521202" start="15852" end="15860" title="Sharabha" label="Sharabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="15870" end="15875" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="15908" end="15914" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q237543" start="15918" end="15927" title="Narasimha" label="Narasimha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520580" start="15974" end="15987" title="Gandaberunda" label="Gandabherunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368474" start="16035" end="16049" title="Hiranyakashipu" label="Hiranyakashipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="16055" end="16064" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q237543" start="16226" end="16235" title="Narasimha" label="Narasimha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="16273" end="16279" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="16286" end="16292" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="16571" end="16578" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107741521" start="16668" end="16677" title="Manussiha" label="Manussiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="16751" end="16757" title="stupas" label="stupas"/>
<link wikidata="Q290562" start="16873" end="16877" title="ogre" label="ogre"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="16996" end="17004" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619023" start="17317" end="17324" title="Himapan" label="Himapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765252" start="17355" end="17371" title="Giorgio Amitrano" label="Giorgio Amitrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q134798" start="17522" end="17537" title="Haruki Murakami" label="Haruki Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q579744" start="17551" end="17569" title="Kafka on the Shore" label="Kafka on the Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="18981" end="18986" title="Freemasonry" label="Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559000" start="19029" end="19036" title="Rite of Memphis-Misraim" label="rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="19244" end="19255" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35470" start="20146" end="20153" title="Elamite" label="Elamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680883" start="20162" end="20170" title="Luristan bronze" label="Luristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="20211" end="20219" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="20225" end="20239" title="Achaemenid art" label="Achaemenid art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005362" start="20285" end="20295" title="Bundahishn" label="Bundahishn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208059" start="20313" end="20329" title="Dadestan-i Denig" label="Dadestan-i Denig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073314" start="20347" end="20360" title="Menog-i Khrad" label="Menog-i Khrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401611" start="20493" end="20505" title="Marzubannama" label="Marzubannama"/>
<link wikidata="Q221901" start="20557" end="20568" title="Aurignacian" label="Aurignacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q702658" start="20569" end="20589" title="Lion-man" label="Löwenmensch figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="20648" end="20663" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498134" start="20690" end="20708" title="Hohlenstein-Stadel" label="Hohlenstein-Stadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223795" start="20751" end="20760" title="Manticore" label="Manticore"/>
<link wikidata="Q237543" start="20949" end="20958" title="Narasimha" label="Narasimha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="21003" end="21009" title="Avatar" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="21015" end="21021" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="21025" end="21033" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176651" start="21041" end="21052" title="Dashavatara" label="Dashavatara"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="21099" end="21111" title="Asiatic lion" label="Asiatic lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368474" start="21221" end="21235" title="Hiranyakashipu" label="Hiranyakashipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="21283" end="21298" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="21346" end="21353" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q616332" start="21370" end="21375" title="shedu" label="shedu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="21601" end="21608" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387388" start="21670" end="21699" title="Mythological hybrid" label="Hybrid creatures in mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623829" start="21702" end="21739" title="List of hybrid creatures in mythology" label="List of hybrid creatures in mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038486" start="21769" end="21780" title="Dacian draco" label="Lupul Dacic"/>
<link wikidata="Q614747" start="21909" end="21913" title="Anzû (mythology)" label="Anzû"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="21958" end="21965" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="Chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="22003" end="22010" title="Centaur" label="Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q723865" start="22015" end="22029" title="Ichthyocentaur" label="Ichthyocentaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371084" start="22092" end="22102" title="Cockatrice" label="Cockatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="22167" end="22173" title="Dragon" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="22232" end="22239" title="Griffin" label="Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="22271" end="22276" title="Harpy" label="Harpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150986" start="22341" end="22346" title="Siren (mythology)" label="Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q616332" start="22490" end="22497" title="Lamassu" label="Lamassu"/>
<link wikidata="Q335179" start="22546" end="22556" title="Hippogryph" label="Hippogryph"/>
<link wikidata="Q223795" start="22583" end="22592" title="Manticore" label="Manticore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165886" start="22657" end="22660" title="Nue" label="Nue"/>
<link wikidata="Q162797" start="22692" end="22699" title="Pegasus" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="22738" end="22745" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q758079" start="22791" end="22796" title="Pixiu" label="Pixiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="22836" end="22841" title="Qilin" label="Qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="22889" end="22894" title="Satyr" label="Satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q223194" start="22899" end="22903" title="Faun" label="Faun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521202" start="22971" end="22979" title="Sharabha" label="Sharabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q548119" start="23017" end="23024" title="Simurgh" label="Simurgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140415" start="23061" end="23066" title="Sirin" label="Sirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262691" start="23122" end="23131" title="Snow Lion" label="Snow Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073287" start="23173" end="23177" title="Yali (Hindu mythology)" label="Yali"/>
<link wikidata="Q207056" start="23227" end="23230" title="Ziz" label="Ziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155846" start="23278" end="23285" title="Komainu" label="Komainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963796" start="23327" end="23334" title="Chinthe" label="Chinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q705750" start="23386" end="23391" title="Shisa" label="Shisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074728" start="23437" end="23441" title="Nian" label="Nian"/>
<link wikidata="Q487324" start="23506" end="23512" title="Haetae" label="Haetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="23558" end="23563" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807209" start="23801" end="23815" title="Timothy Gantz" label="Gantz, Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328969" start="24090" end="24100" title="Glenn W. Most" label="Most, G.W."/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="24200" end="24222" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="24257" end="24281" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83079" wikidata="Q6464974" url="?curid=83079" title="Sterope">
<text>Sterope (; Ancient Greek: Στερόπη, , from , &quot;steropē&quot;, lightning) was the name of several individuals in Greek mythology:

* Sterope (or Asterope), one of the Pleiades and the wife of Oenomaus (or his mother by Ares).
* Sterope, a Pleuronian princess as the daughter of King Pleuron and Xanthippe. She was the sister of Agenor, Stratonice and Laophonte.
* Sterope, a Calydonian princess as the daughter of King Porthaon and Euryte or Laothoe. She was the sister of Oeneus, Agrius, Melas, Leucopeus, Stratonice and Eurythemiste. Sterope was sometimes said to be the mother of the Sirens by Achelous.
*Sterope, an Arcadian princess as the daughter of Cepheus, king of Tegea.
* Sterope, a princess of Iolcus as the daughter of King Acastus by either Astydamia or Hippolyte.
* Sterope, daughter of Helios and wife of King Eurypylus of Cyrene by whom she became the mother of Lycaon and Leucippus.
* Sterope, one of the Maenads. She followed Dionysus during the god&#x27;s Indian campaign but was slain by Morrheus.
* Sterope, one of the horses of Helios.

Sterope is also the name of one of the stars in the Pleiades star cluster.

==Notes==

== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Hesiod, &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; from &quot;Homeric Hymns, Epic Cycle, Homerica&quot; translated by Evelyn-White, H G. Loeb Classical Library Volume 57. London: William Heinemann, 1914. Online version at theio.com
*Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot; translated by William Henry Denham Rouse (1863–1950), from the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca. 3 Vols.&quot; W.H.D. Rouse. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1940–1942. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6464974" start="0" end="7" title="Sterope" label="Sterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="11" end="24" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="115" end="130" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q748963" start="135" end="142" title="Sterope (Pleiad)" label="Sterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q29655160" start="147" end="155" title="Asterope (Greek mythology)" label="Asterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="169" end="177" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q847890" start="194" end="202" title="Oenomaus" label="Oenomaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="221" end="225" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317636" start="241" end="251" title="Pleuron (Aetolia)" label="Pleuronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411680" start="285" end="292" title="Pleuron (Greek mythology)" label="Pleuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042977" start="297" end="306" title="Xanthippe (mythology)" label="Xanthippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q392617" start="330" end="336" title="Agenor, son of Pleuron" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622228" start="338" end="348" title="Stratonice (mythology)" label="Stratonice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14602040" start="353" end="362" title="Laophonte (mythology)" label="Laophonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="377" end="384" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178970" start="421" end="429" title="Porthaon" label="Porthaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19681430" start="434" end="440" title="Euryte" label="Euryte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641957" start="444" end="451" title="Laothoe" label="Laothoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q749966" start="475" end="481" title="Oeneus" label="Oeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396862" start="483" end="489" title="Agrius of Calydon" label="Agrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854079" start="491" end="496" title="Melas (mythology)" label="Melas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60795356" start="498" end="507" title="Leucopeus" label="Leucopeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622228" start="509" end="519" title="Stratonice (mythology)" label="Stratonice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414155" start="524" end="536" title="Eurythemista" label="Eurythemiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q150986" start="589" end="594" title="Siren (mythology)" label="Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="599" end="607" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q15849193" start="610" end="617" title="Sterope of Tegea" label="Sterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="622" end="629" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509662" start="659" end="666" title="Cepheus (king of Tegea)" label="Cepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645234" start="676" end="681" title="Tegea" label="Tegea"/>
<link wikidata="Q662613" start="708" end="714" title="Iolcus" label="Iolcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q416384" start="739" end="746" title="Acastus" label="Acastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752330" start="757" end="766" title="Astydamia of Iolcus" label="Astydamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210303" start="770" end="779" title="Hippolyte" label="Hippolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="804" end="810" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146975" start="828" end="837" title="Eurypylus" label="Eurypylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="841" end="847" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q52385703" start="881" end="887" title="Lycaon (Greek myth)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114222" start="892" end="901" title="Leucippus (mythology)" label="Leucippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="925" end="932" title="Maenads" label="Maenads"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="947" end="955" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1011" end="1019" title="Morrheus" label="Morrheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="1053" end="1059" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446" start="1062" end="1069" title="Sterope (star)" label="Sterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1169" end="1180" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1481" end="1501" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1687" end="1693" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233074" start="1701" end="1719" title="Catalogue of Women" label="Catalogue of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="1908" end="1927" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="1935" end="1945" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83082" wikidata="Q1498745" url="?curid=83082" title="Hippothoe">
<text>In Greek mythology, Hippothoe (Ancient Greek: Ἱπποθόη &quot;Hippothoê&quot; means &#x27;swift as a mare&#x27;) is the name of five distinct characters.

* Hippothoe, the &quot;lovely&quot; Nereid and one of the 50 marine-nymph daughters of the &#x27;Old Man of the Sea&#x27; Nereus and the Oceanid Doris. Her name means running horses (i.e. waves).
*Hippothoe, a Libyan princess as one of the Danaïdes, daughters of King Danaus. She married and killed her cousin Obrimus, son of King Aegyptus of Egypt.
*Hippothoe, daughter of Mestor, son of Perseus, and of Lysidice, daughter of Pelops. Poseidon abducted Hippothoe from her family and took her to the Echinades islands. There, he sired Taphius who later founded the city of Taphos.
* Hippothoe, one of the Peliades, daughters of Pelias, King of Iolcus. Her mother was either Anaxibia, daughter of Bias, or Phylomache, one of the Niobids.
* Hippothoe, the &#x27;fierce-souled&#x27; Amazon who fought with their queen, Penthesilea at Troy. She was killed by Achilles.

Hippothoe is also the scientific name of &quot;Lycaena hippothoe&quot;, the &quot;Purple-edged Copper&quot; butterfly.

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Kerényi, Carl, &quot;The Gods of the Greeks&quot;, Thames and Hudson, London, 1951.
* Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot; translated by Way. A. S. Loeb Classical Library Volume 19. London: William Heinemann, 1913. Online version at theio.com
* Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot;. Arthur S. Way. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1913. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Tzetzes, John &quot;Posthomerica&quot; translated by Ana Untila.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498745" start="20" end="29" title="Hippothoe" label="Hippothoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="44" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q54230" start="189" end="195" title="Nereids" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="221" end="226" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398720" start="250" end="268" title="Old Man of the Sea" label="Old Man of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189527" start="275" end="281" title="Nereus" label="Nereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182406" start="290" end="297" title="Oceanid" label="Oceanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q726279" start="298" end="303" title="Doris (Oceanid)" label="Doris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="363" end="369" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q724907" start="393" end="401" title="Danaïdes" label="Danaïdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210883" start="421" end="427" title="Danaus" label="Danaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436013" start="463" end="470" title="Bromius (son of Aegyptus)" label="Obrimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q404844" start="484" end="492" title="Aegyptus" label="Aegyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="496" end="501" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924630" start="527" end="533" title="Mestor" label="Mestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="542" end="549" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710149" start="558" end="566" title="Lysidice (daughter of Pelops and Hippodamia)" label="Lysidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="580" end="586" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="588" end="596" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q767387" start="652" end="661" title="Echinades" label="Echinades"/>
<link wikidata="Q362738" start="687" end="694" title="Taphius" label="Taphius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="757" end="765" title="Peliades (mythology)" label="Peliades"/>
<link wikidata="Q182439" start="780" end="786" title="Pelias" label="Pelias"/>
<link wikidata="Q662613" start="796" end="802" title="Iolcus" label="Iolcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42306576" start="826" end="834" title="Anaxibia" label="Anaxibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="848" end="852" title="Bias" label="Bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089271" start="857" end="867" title="Philomache" label="Phylomache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738502" start="880" end="887" title="Niobids" label="Niobids"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="932" end="938" title="Amazons" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379828" start="968" end="979" title="Penthesilea" label="Penthesilea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="983" end="987" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="1007" end="1015" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434641" start="1065" end="1082" title="Lycaena hippothoe" label="Lycaena hippothoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1170" end="1181" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1464" end="1484" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1670" end="1676" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="1972" end="1985" title="Károly Kerényi" label="Kerényi, Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q352702" start="2058" end="2075" title="Quintus Smyrnaeus" label="Quintus Smyrnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="2414" end="2427" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83083" wikidata="Q362738" url="?curid=83083" title="Taphius">
<text>In Greek mythology, Taphius (Ancient Greek: Τάφιος) founded the city Taphos on the island of the same name, and was its king. He also gave his name to the Taphians, a people that inhabited Taphos and nearby islands, which formed part of Odysseus&#x27;s kingdom at the time of the Trojan War. 

== Family ==
According to one genealogy, Taphius was the son of Poseidon and Hippothoë (daughter of Mestor, son of Perseus). However, according to another (more plausible) genealogy, Taphius&#x27;s father was Pterelaus, the son of Lelex, who ruled in Acarnania. Both versions agree that Taphius had a son, also called Pterelaus (&#x27;Pterelaus II&#x27;) who was immortalized by Poseidon who planted a golden hair in his head.

== Mythology ==
Hippothoe was carried off by the god who brought her to the Echinadian Islands where he had intercourse with her. There she conceived Taphius who colonized Taphos and called the people Teleboans, because he had gone far from his native land (“telou ebē” τηλοῦ ἔβη means “&quot;he went far”)&quot;. 

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q362738" start="20" end="27" title="Taphius" label="Taphius"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="29" end="42" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432910" start="69" end="75" title="Taphians" label="Taphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="237" end="245" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="280" end="290" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="358" end="366" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498745" start="371" end="380" title="Hippothoë" label="Hippothoë"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924630" start="394" end="400" title="Mestor" label="Mestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="409" end="416" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087722" start="503" end="512" title="Pterelaus (son of Lelex)" label="Pterelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075456" start="525" end="530" title="Lelex" label="Lelex"/>
<link wikidata="Q416070" start="545" end="554" title="Acarnania" label="Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424817" start="612" end="621" title="Pterelaus (son of Taphius)" label="Pterelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q767387" start="798" end="816" title="Echinadian Islands" label="Echinadian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1068" end="1079" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83084" wikidata="Q2167123" url="?curid=83084" title="Taras (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Taras () was the eponymous founder of the Greek colony of Taras (Tarentum, modern Taranto), in Magna Graecia (today Southern Italy).

== Family ==
Taras was the son of Poseidon and Satyrion, either a Tarentine nymph or a daughter of Minos.

== Mythology ==
When Taras was shipwrecked, his father rescued him by sending a dolphin which he rode to traverse the sea from the promontory of Taenarum to the south of Italy. Brought ashore, Taras founded Tarentum which was named in his honour. According to Pausanias, he was worshiped as a hero who named both the city and the river, Taras after himself.

== Taranto ==
Note that a harbour close by Taranto is still called Torre Saturo (derived from Satyrion). It was in Torre Saturo, almost south of Taranto, that Spartan colonists settled their first colony in Taranto zone. Later, around 706 BC, they conquered the Iapygian city of Taranto. On the coinage of the ancient city of Taras, the son of Poseidon is depicted on a dolphin, sometimes with his father&#x27;s trident in one hand; the same image is depicted on the modern city emblem.

== See also ==
* Arion – another dolphin-riding young man. Saved by dolphins after being captured by pirates whilst returning from Taranto, Taras&#x27;s city. 
* Melicertes – the son of Ino and king Athamas of Boeotia. Ino and Melicertes threw themselves off of a large rock at the Isthmus of Corinth. They were then deified as Palaemon (Melicertes) and Leucothea (Ino). As Palaemon, Melicertes is often depicted mounted on a dolphin.
* Amphitrite – the queen of the sea, carried to Poseidon, her future husband, by Delphinus, after hiding from the god at the Atlas mountains.
* Dionysus – a similar story to Arion&#x27;s ends with Dionysus turning a crew of pirate kidnappers into dolphins, save for one helmsman, who had tried to help Dionysus.
* Apollo – the god came to the site of Delphi, then known as Krisa or Pytho (due to the Python who lived there), shaped like a dolphin, carrying Cretan priests, whom he rescued from a shipwreck, on his back. The site would be named &quot;Delphi&quot; to commemorate this event and Apollo would bear the epithet &quot;Delphinios&quot;.

==Notes==
== References ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167123" start="20" end="25" title="Taras (mythology)" label="Taras"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="37" end="43" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="62" end="67" title="ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="102" end="109" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="115" end="128" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="136" end="150" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="188" end="196" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426963" start="201" end="209" title="Satyrion" label="Satyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="220" end="229" title="Taranto" label="Tarentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="230" end="235" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="253" end="258" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="341" end="348" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="521" end="530" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="779" end="785" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="882" end="890" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q440311" start="915" end="922" title="ancient Greek coinage" label="coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="1032" end="1039" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q312422" start="1125" end="1130" title="Arion" label="Arion"/>
<link wikidata="Q738007" start="1270" end="1280" title="Melicertes" label="Melicertes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223690" start="1294" end="1297" title="Ino (Greek mythology)" label="Ino"/>
<link wikidata="Q143880" start="1307" end="1314" title="Athamas" label="Athamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="1318" end="1325" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215200" start="1390" end="1408" title="Isthmus of Corinth" label="Isthmus of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821610" start="1462" end="1471" title="Leucothea" label="Leucothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180222" start="1545" end="1555" title="Amphitrite" label="Amphitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302" start="1624" end="1633" title="Delphinus" label="Delphinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1687" end="1695" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1857" end="1863" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="1894" end="1900" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="1943" end="1949" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="2000" end="2006" title="Minoan civilization" label="Cretan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83085" wikidata="Q1348237" url="?curid=83085" title="Tarentum">
<text>Tarentum may refer to: 
* Taranto, Apulia, Italy, on the site of the ancient Roman city of Tarentum (formerly the Greek colony of Taras)
**See also History of Taranto
* Tarentum (Campus Martius), also Terentum, an area in or on the edge of the Campus Martius in Rome
* Tarentum, Pennsylvania, United States
** Tarentum Bridge, in the above place 
* ST &quot;Tarentum&quot;, a tug in service with Società Rim. Napoletani (1962–82); originally known as &quot;Empire Bess&quot;

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1348237" start="0" end="8" title="Tarentum" label="Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="26" end="33" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294031" start="148" end="166" title="History of Taranto" label="History of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981110" start="169" end="194" title="Tarentum (Campus Martius)" label="Tarentum (Campus Martius)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187823" start="269" end="291" title="Tarentum, Pennsylvania" label="Tarentum, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538328" start="310" end="325" title="Tarentum Bridge" label="Tarentum Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="349" end="372" title="List of Empire ships - B#Empire Bess" label="ST &amp;quot;Tarentum&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83086" wikidata="Q654379" url="?curid=83086" title="Calydonian boar hunt">
<text>The Calydonian boar hunt is one of the great heroic adventures in Greek legend. It occurred in the generation prior to that of the Trojan War, and stands alongside the other great heroic adventure of that generation, the voyage of the Argonauts, which preceded it. The purpose of the hunt was to kill the Calydonian boar (also called the Aetolian boar), which had been sent by Artemis to ravage the region of Calydon in Aetolia, because its king Oeneus had failed to honour her in his rites to the gods. The hunters, led by the hero Meleager, included many of the foremost heroes of Greece. In most accounts it is also concluded that a great heroine, Atalanta, won its hide by first wounding it with an arrow. This outraged many of the men, leading to a tragic dispute.

==Importance in Greek mythology and art==
Since the Calydonian boar hunt drew together numerous heroes—among whom were many who were venerated as progenitors of their local ruling houses among tribal groups of Hellenes into Classical times—it offered a natural subject in classical art, for it was redolent with the web of myth that gathered around its protagonists on other occasions, around their half-divine descent and their offspring. Like the quest for the Golden Fleece (&quot;Argonautica&quot;) or the Trojan War that took place the following generation, the Calydonian boar hunt is one of the nodes in which much Greek myth comes together.

==Sources==
Both Homer and Hesiod and their listeners were aware of the details of this myth, but no surviving complete account exists: some papyrus fragments found at Oxyrhynchus are all that survive of Stesichorus&#x27; telling; the myth repertory called &quot;Bibliotheke&quot; (&quot;The Library&quot;) contains the gist of the tale, and before that was compiled the Roman poet Ovid told the story in some colorful detail in his &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;.

== Mythology ==

=== The Boar ===
The Calydonian boar is one of several monsters in Greek mythology named for a specific locale. Sent by Artemis to ravage the region of Calydon in Aetolia, it met its end in the Calydonian boar hunt, in which many of the great heroes of the age took part (an exception being Heracles, who vanquished his own Goddess-sent Erymanthian boar separately).

King Oeneus (&quot;wine man&quot;) of Calydon, an ancient city of west-central Greece north of the Gulf of Patras, held annual harvest sacrifices to the gods on the sacred hill. One year the king forgot to include Great &quot;Artemis of the golden throne&quot; in his offerings. Insulted, Artemis, the &quot;Lady of the Bow&quot;, loosed the biggest, most ferocious wild boar imaginable on the countryside of Calydon.

Ovid describes the boar as follows:
:A dreadful boar.—His burning, bloodshot eyes
:seemed coals of living fire, and his rough neck
:was knotted with stiff muscles, and thick-set
:with bristles like sharp spikes. A seething froth
:dripped on his shoulders, and his tusks
:were like the spoils of Ind [India]. Discordant roars
:reverberated from his hideous jaws;
:and lightning—belched forth from his horrid throat—
:scorched the green fields.
::— Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; 8.284–289 (Brookes More translation)

Ovid goes on to say that the boar rampaged throughout the countryside, destroying vineyards and crops, forcing people to take refuge inside their city walls.

According to Strabo, the boar was said to be the offspring of the Crommyonian Sow vanquished by Theseus.

===The Hunt===
Oeneus sent messengers out to look for the best hunters in Greece, offering them the boar&#x27;s pelt and tusks as a prize.


Among those who responded were some of the Argonauts, Oeneus&#x27; own son Meleager, and, remarkably for the hunt&#x27;s eventual success, one woman—the huntress Atalanta, the &quot;indomitable&quot;, who had been suckled by Artemis as a she-bear and raised as a huntress, a proxy for Artemis herself (Kerenyi; Ruck and Staples). Artemis appears to have been divided in her motives, for it was also said that she had sent the young huntress because she knew her presence would be a source of division, and so it was: many of the men, led by Kepheus and Ankaios, refused to hunt alongside a woman. It was the smitten Meleager who convinced them. Nonetheless it was Atalanta who first succeeded in wounding the boar with an arrow, although Meleager finished it off, and offered the prize to Atalanta, who had drawn first blood. But the sons of Thestius, who considered it disgraceful that a woman should get the trophy where men were involved, took the skin from her, saying that it was properly theirs by right of birth, if Meleager chose not to accept it. Outraged by this, Meleager slew the sons of Thestius and again gave the skin to Atalanta (&quot;Bibliotheke&quot;). Meleager&#x27;s mother, sister of Meleager&#x27;s slain uncles, took the fatal brand from the chest where she had kept it (see Meleager) and threw it once more on the fire; as it was consumed, Meleager died on the spot, as the Fates had foretold. Thus Artemis achieved her revenge against King Oeneus.

During the hunt, Peleus accidentally killed his host, Eurytion. In the course of the hunt and its aftermath, many of the hunters turned upon one another, contesting the spoils, and so the Goddess continued to be revenged. According to Homer &quot;the goddess brought to pass much clamour and shouting concerning his head and shaggy hide, between the Curetes and the great-souled Aetolians.&quot;

The boar&#x27;s hide that was preserved in the Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea in Laconia was reputedly that of the Calydonian Boar, &quot;rotted by age and by now altogether without bristles&quot; by the time Pausanias saw it in the second century CE. He noted that the tusks had been taken to Rome as booty from the defeated allies of Mark Anthony by Augustus; &quot;one of the tusks of the Calydonian boar has been broken&quot;, Pausanias reports, &quot;the remaining one is kept in the gardens of the emperor, in a sanctuary of Dionysus, and is about half a fathom long&quot;, The Calydonian boar hunt was the theme of the temple&#x27;s main pediment.

===The Hunters===
According to the &quot;Iliad&quot;, the heroes who participated in the hunt assembled from all over Greece. Bacchylides has Meleager describe himself and the rest of the hunters as &quot;the best of the Hellenes&quot;.

The table lists:
*Those seen by Pausanias on the Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea, as well as another hero, Ischepolis, mentioned by Pausanias.
*Those listed by Latin mythographer Hyginus.
*Those noted in Ovid&#x27;s list from the 8th Book of his &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;.
*Those listed by the mythographer Apollodorus.

==See also==
* Erymanthian boar

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Aymard, J., &quot;Essai sur les chasses romaines&quot;, Paris 1951.
* Bacchylides, &quot;Odes&quot;, translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1991. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Diodorus Siculus: The Library of History&quot;. translated by C. H. Oldfather, twelve volumes, Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Online version by Bill Thayer.
* Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;Fabulae&quot; in &quot;Apollodorus&#x27; &quot;Library&quot; and Hyginus&#x27; &quot;Fabulae&quot;: Two Handbooks of Greek Mythology, Translated, with Introductions by R. Scott Smith and Stephen M. Trzaskoma&quot;, Hackett Publishing Company, 2007. .
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Kerényi, Karl (1959), &quot;The Heroes of the Greeks&quot;, Thames and Hudson, London, 1959.
* Mayor, Adrienne, &quot;The First Fossil Hunters: Dinosaurs, Mammoths, and Myth in Greek and Roman Times&quot;, Princeton University Press, 2011. .
* Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, Brookes More, Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Ovid. &quot;Metamorphoses, Volume I: Books 1-8&quot;. Translated by Frank Justus Miller. Revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library No. 42. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1977, first published 1916. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Parada, Carlos, &quot;Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology&quot;, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. .
* Pausanias, &quot;Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Rose, Carol, &quot;Giants, Monsters, and Dragons: An Encyclopedia of Folklore, Legend, and Myth&quot;, W. W. Norton, 2001. .
* Ruck, Carl A.P., and Danny Staples, 1994. &quot;The World of Classical Myth&quot;, p. 196
* Strabo, &quot;Geography&quot;, translated by Horace Leonard Jones; Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. (1924). LacusCurtis, Online version at the Perseus Digital Library, Books 6–14.
* Swinburne, Algernon Charles. &quot;Atalanta in Calydon&quot;*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q654379" start="4" end="24" title="Calydonian boar hunt" label="Calydonian boar hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="131" end="141" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="235" end="244" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q654379" start="305" end="320" title="Calydonian boar hunt" label="Calydonian boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q654379" start="338" end="351" title="Calydonian boar hunt" label="Aetolian boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="377" end="384" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="409" end="416" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="420" end="427" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749966" start="446" end="452" title="Oeneus" label="Oeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321541" start="533" end="541" title="Meleager" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q190323" start="651" end="659" title="Atalanta" label="Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="981" end="989" title="Greeks" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212262" start="1234" end="1247" title="Golden Fleece" label="Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q739529" start="1255" end="1266" title="Argonautica" label="Argonautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1281" end="1291" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1438" end="1443" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1448" end="1454" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="1562" end="1569" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622640" start="1589" end="1600" title="Oxyrhynchus" label="Oxyrhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="1625" end="1636" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1684" end="1695" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1803" end="1807" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="1860" end="1873" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="2062" end="2069" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="2190" end="2198" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q334456" start="2236" end="2252" title="Erymanthian boar" label="Erymanthian boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q749966" start="2272" end="2278" title="Oeneus" label="Oeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="2305" end="2312" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2346" end="2352" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q934883" start="2366" end="2380" title="Gulf of Patras" label="Gulf of Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2633" end="2642" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2686" end="2690" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="3133" end="3137" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="3145" end="3158" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3375" end="3381" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751992" start="3428" end="3443" title="Crommyonian Sow" label="Crommyonian Sow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="3458" end="3465" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="3652" end="3661" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q321541" start="3684" end="3692" title="Meleager" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q190323" start="3771" end="3779" title="Atalanta" label="Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q768822" start="4451" end="4459" title="Thestius" label="Thestius"/>
<link wikidata="Q321541" start="4908" end="4916" title="Meleager" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="5101" end="5107" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="5538" end="5549" title="Athena" label="Athena Alea"/>
<link wikidata="Q645234" start="5553" end="5558" title="Tegea" label="Tegea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="5562" end="5569" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5690" end="5699" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="5817" end="5829" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5833" end="5841" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502423" start="6042" end="6048" title="Fathom" label="fathom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="6178" end="6183" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="6263" end="6274" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="6407" end="6416" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983230" start="6424" end="6445" title="Temple of Athena Alea" label="Temple of Athena Alea"/>
<link wikidata="Q645234" start="6449" end="6454" title="Tegea" label="Tegea"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="6553" end="6560" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="6578" end="6582" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="6626" end="6639" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="6681" end="6692" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334456" start="6710" end="6726" title="Erymanthian boar" label="Erymanthian boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="6758" end="6769" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="6920" end="6944" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="7102" end="7113" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="7225" end="7241" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="7344" end="7366" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="7394" end="7418" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="7668" end="7689" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="7697" end="7704" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="7950" end="7955" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="8071" end="8095" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="8184" end="8197" title="Károly Kerényi" label="Kerényi, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685712" start="8279" end="8294" title="Adrienne Mayor" label="Mayor, Adrienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="8428" end="8432" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="8440" end="8453" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="8562" end="8566" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="8574" end="8587" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="8675" end="8697" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="8732" end="8756" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="8942" end="8951" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="9330" end="9342" title="W. W. Norton" label="W. W. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="9446" end="9452" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="9454" end="9475" title="Geographica" label="&amp;quot;Geography&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="9679" end="9688" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Swinburne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83089" wikidata="Q112001" url="?curid=83089" title="Taygete">
<text>In Classical Greek mythology, Taygete (; , , ) was a nymph, one of the Pleiades according to the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; (3.10.1) and a companion of Artemis, in her archaic role as &quot;potnia theron&quot;, &quot;Mistress of the animals&quot;, with its likely roots in prehistory. Mount Taygetos in Laconia, dedicated to the goddess, was her haunt.

The Taygetus mountain on the Peloponnese was named after her.

== Mythology ==
As he mastered each of the local nymphs one by one, Olympic Zeus pursued Taygete, who invoked her protectress Artemis. The goddess turned Taygete into a doe with golden horns, any distinction between the Titaness in her human form and in her doe form is blurred: the nymph who hunted the doe in the company of Artemis &quot;is&quot; the doe herself. As Pindar conceived the myth-element in his third Olympian Ode, &quot;the doe with the golden horns, which once Taygete had inscribed as a sacred dedication to Artemis Orthosia&quot;, (&quot;right-minded&quot; Artemis) was the very Ceryneian Hind that Heracles later pursued. For the poet, the transformation was incomplete, and the doe-form had become an offering. Pindar, who was a very knowledgeable mythographer, hints that the mythic doe, even when slain and offered to Artemis, also &quot;continues to exist&quot;, to be hunted once again (although not killed) by Heracles at a later time. Karl Kerenyi points out (&quot;The Heroes of the Greeks&quot;) &quot;It is not easy to differentiate between the divine beast, the heroine and the goddess&quot;.

According to Pausanias (3.1.2, etc.) Taygete conceived Lacedaemon, the mythical founder of Sparta, through Zeus, and Eurotas. Pausanias noted, at Amyclae, that the rape of Taygete was represented on the throne.

According to Pseudo-Plutarch, Taygete was the wife of Lacedaemon, sometimes referred to as Sparta, whose name was given to the city of Sparta. Their son was named Himerus.

In a rare variant of the myth, Taygete was called the daughter of Agenor.

==Notes==
==References==
*Ruck, Carl A.P., and Danny Staples, 1994. &quot;The World of Classical Myth&quot; (Carolina Academic Press)
*Harry Thurston Peck, &quot;Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities&quot;, 1898. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library: &quot;Taygete&quot;
*Robbins, Emmet. &quot;Heracles, the Hyperboreans, and the Hind: Pindar, &quot;OL. 3&quot;, &quot;Phoenix&quot; 36.4 (Winter 1982), pp. 295–305.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="13" end="28" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q112001" start="30" end="37" title="Taygete" label="Taygete"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="53" end="58" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="71" end="79" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="103" end="114" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="149" end="156" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q715705" start="187" end="200" title="potnia theron" label="potnia theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q515809" start="282" end="296" title="Taygetus" label="Mount Taygetos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="300" end="307" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515809" start="355" end="363" title="Taygetus" label="Taygetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="380" end="391" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="583" end="586" title="Deer" label="doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="634" end="639" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="783" end="789" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q253855" start="804" end="816" title="Mytheme" label="myth-element"/>
<link wikidata="Q550466" start="940" end="956" title="Sanctuary of Artemis Orthia" label="Artemis Orthosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466882" start="1012" end="1026" title="Ceryneian Hind" label="Ceryneian Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1032" end="1040" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="1376" end="1388" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Karl Kerenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1552" end="1561" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065774" start="1594" end="1604" title="Lacedaemon (mythology)" label="Lacedaemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378335" start="1656" end="1663" title="Eurotas" label="Eurotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13074886" start="1685" end="1692" title="Amyclae" label="Amyclae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657275" start="1764" end="1779" title="Pseudo-Plutarch" label="Pseudo-Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296243" start="1842" end="1848" title="Sparta (mythology)" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1914" end="1921" title="Himerus (mythology)" label="Himerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392631" start="1990" end="1996" title="Agenor" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672840" start="2134" end="2153" title="Harry Thurston Peck" label="Harry Thurston Peck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83090" wikidata="Q2297463" url="?curid=83090" title="Telemus">
<text>Telemus () was a figure of Greek mythology, a prophet, son of Eurymus. Telemus warned the Cyclops Polyphemus that he would lose his sight to a man named Odysseus.

== Note ==
== References ==

* Homer, &quot;The Odyssey&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2297463" start="0" end="7" title="Telemus" label="Telemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="27" end="42" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62" end="69" title="Eurymus (mythology)" label="Eurymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="90" end="97" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="98" end="108" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="153" end="161" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="195" end="200" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="202" end="225" title="Odyssey" label="&amp;quot;The Odyssey&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83094" wikidata="Q1138506" url="?curid=83094" title="Tereus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Tereus (; Ancient Greek: Τηρεύς) was a Thracian king, the son of Ares and the naiad Bistonis. He was the brother of Dryas. Tereus was the husband of the Athenian princess Procne and the father of Itys.

== Mythology ==
When Tereus desired his wife&#x27;s sister, Philomela, he came to Athens to his father-in-law Pandion to ask for his other daughter in marriage, stating that Procne had died. Pandion granted him the favour, and sent Philomela and guards along with her. But Tereus threw the guards into the sea, and finding Philomela on a mountain, forced himself upon her. He then cut her tongue out and held her captive so she could never tell anyone. After he returned to Thrace, Tereus gave Philomela to King Lynceus and told his wife that her sister had died. Philomela wove letters in a tapestry depicting Tereus&#x27;s crime and sent it secretly to Procne. Lynceus&#x27; wife Lathusa who was a friend of Procne, at once sent the concubine (Philomela) to her. 

When Procne recognized her sister and knew the impious deed of Tereus, the two planned to return the favour to the king. Meanwhile, it was revealed to Tereus by prodigies that death by a relative&#x27;s hand was coming to his son Itys. When he heard this, thinking that his brother Dryas was plotting his son&#x27;s death, he killed the innocent man. Procne, however, killed her son Itys by Tereus, served his flesh in a meal at his father&#x27;s table in revenge, and fled with her sister.

When Tereus learned of the crime she had done, he pursued the sisters and tried to kill them but all three were changed by the Olympian Gods into birds out of pity: Tereus became a hoopoe or a hawk; Procne became the swallow whose song is a song of mourning for the loss of her child; Philomela became the nightingale. Incidentally, the female nightingale has no song. (Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae&quot;, 45).

A very similar story was told about Polytechnus.

== Other usage ==
Tereus was also a common given name among Thracians.

The Attic playwrights Sophocles and Philocles both wrote plays entitled &quot;Tereus&quot; on the subject of the story of Tereus.

Shakespeare refers to Tereus in &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot;, after Chiron and Demetrius have raped Lavinia and cut out her tongue and also both her hands. He also makes reference to Tereus in &quot;Cymbeline&quot;, when Iachimo spies upon the sleeping Imogen to gather false evidence so he can persuade Posthumus he has seduced her.

The transformed Tereus is a character in &quot;The Birds&quot; by Aristophanes.

==Modern adaptations==
*&quot;The Love of the Nightingale&quot;, play by Timberlake Wertenbaker
*&quot;The Love of the Nightingale&quot;, opera by Richard Mills to a libretto from the above play

==References==
== External links ==
* &quot;The New Tereus&quot; by Robert Lalonde</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="20" end="26" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="30" end="43" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="59" end="67" title="Thracians" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="85" end="89" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q11909453" start="104" end="112" title="Bistonis" label="Bistonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28121924" start="136" end="141" title="Dryas of Calydon" label="Dryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="191" end="197" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675360" start="216" end="220" title="Itys" label="Itys"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="283" end="292" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="333" end="340" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36026658" start="735" end="742" title="Lynceus (mythology)" label="Lynceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="815" end="823" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="905" end="912" title="Lathusa" label="Lathusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="1389" end="1405" title="human cannibalism" label="served his flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="1609" end="1622" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977" start="1663" end="1669" title="hoopoe" label="hoopoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39861" start="1699" end="1706" title="swallow" label="swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393" start="1788" end="1799" title="nightingale" label="nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1852" end="1859" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116482987" start="1924" end="1935" title="Polytechnus" label="Polytechnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2014" end="2019" title="Athens" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="2032" end="2041" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186040" start="2046" end="2055" title="Philocles" label="Philocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984261" start="2088" end="2094" title="Tereus (play)" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2141" end="2152" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="2179" end="2195" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q730212" start="2340" end="2349" title="Cymbeline" label="Cymbeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164079" start="2523" end="2532" title="The Birds (play)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="2542" end="2554" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749005" start="2587" end="2614" title="The Love of the Nightingale" label="The Love of the Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804690" start="2630" end="2652" title="Timberlake Wertenbaker" label="Timberlake Wertenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749006" start="2660" end="2687" title="The Love of the Nightingale (opera)" label="The Love of the Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="2695" end="2700" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327820" start="2704" end="2717" title="Richard Mills (composer)" label="Richard Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="2723" end="2731" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83096" wikidata="Q115449" url="?curid=83096" title="Philomela">
<text>Philomela () or Philomel (; , ; ) is a minor figure in Greek mythology who is frequently invoked as a direct and figurative symbol in literary and artistic works in the Western canon.

== Family ==
Philomela was the younger of two daughters of Pandion I, King of Athens, and the naiad Zeuxippe. Her sister, Procne, was the wife of King Tereus of Thrace. Philomela&#x27;s other siblings were Erechtheus, Butes and possibly Teuthras.

==Mythology==
While the myth has several variations, the general depiction is that Philomela, after being raped and mutilated by her sister&#x27;s husband, Tereus, obtains her revenge and is transformed into a nightingale (&quot;Luscinia megarhynchos&quot;), a bird renowned for its song. Because of the violence associated with the myth, the song of the nightingale is often depicted or interpreted as a sorrowful lament. In nature, the female nightingale is mute, and only the male of the species sings.

Ovid and other writers have made the association that the etymology of her name was &quot;lover of song&quot;, derived from the Greek and (&quot;song&quot;) instead of (&quot;fruit&quot; or &quot;sheep&quot;), which means &quot;lover of fruit&quot;, &quot;lover of apples&quot;, or &quot;lover of sheep&quot;.

The most complete and extant rendering of the story of Philomela, Procne, and Tereus can be found in Book VI of the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; of the Roman poet Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 BC – 17/18 AD), where the story reaches its full development during antiquity. It is likely that Ovid relied upon Greek and Latin sources that were available in his era such as the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; of Pseudo-Apollodorus (2nd century BC), or sources that are no longer extant or exist today only in fragments—especially Sophocles&#x27; tragic drama &quot;Tereus&quot; (5th century BC).

According to Ovid, in the fifth year of Procne&#x27;s marriage to Tereus, King of Thrace and son of Ares, she asked her husband to &quot;Let me at Athens my dear sister see / Or let her come to Thrace, and visit me.&quot; Tereus agreed to travel to Athens and escort her sister, Philomela, to Thrace. King Pandion of Athens, the father of Philomela and Procne, was apprehensive about letting his one remaining daughter leave his home and protection and asks Tereus to protect her as if he were her father. Tereus agrees. However, Tereus lusted for Philomela when he first saw her, and that lust grew during the course of the return voyage to Thrace.
Arriving in Thrace, he forced her to a cabin or lodge in the woods and raped her. After the assault, Tereus threatened her and advised her to keep silent. Philomela was defiant and angered Tereus. In his rage, he cut out her tongue and abandoned her in the cabin. In Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; Philomela&#x27;s defiant speech is rendered (in an 18th-century English translation) as:
&lt;poem&gt;
Still my revenge shall take its proper time,
And suit the baseness of your hellish crime.
My self, abandon&#x27;d, and devoid of shame,
Thro&#x27; the wide world your actions will proclaim;
Or tho&#x27; I&#x27;m prison&#x27;d in this lonely den,
Obscur&#x27;d, and bury&#x27;d from the sight of men,
My mournful voice the pitying rocks shall move,
And my complainings echo thro&#x27; the grove.
Hear me, o Heav&#x27;n! and, if a God be there,
Let him regard me, and accept my pray&#x27;r.&lt;/poem&gt;
Philomela was unable to speak because of her injuries, and so she wove a tapestry (or a robe) that told her story and sent it to Procne. Procne was incensed by her husband&#x27;s actions and killed their son Itys (or &quot;Itylos&quot;) in revenge. She boiled Itys and served him as a meal for Tereus. After Tereus ate Itys, the sisters presented Tereus with the severed head of his son, revealing the conspiracy. Tereus grabbed an axe and chased the sisters intending to kill them. They fled but were almost overtaken by Tereus at Daulia in Phocis. The sisters desperately prayed to the gods to be turned into birds and escape Tereus&#x27; rage and vengeance. The gods transformed Procne into a swallow and Philomela into a nightingale. Subsequently, the gods transformed Tereus into a hoopoe.

===Variations on the myth===

It is typical for myths from antiquity to have been altered over the passage of time or for competing variations of the myth to emerge. With the story of Philomela, most of the variations concern which sister became the nightingale or the swallow, and into what type of bird Tereus was transformed. In Greek texts like Achilles Tatius and the Bibliotheca of Pseudo-Apollodorus, Philomela is transformed into a swallow and Procne into a nightingale, but in Latin texts Philomela is the nightingale and Procne is the swallow. The description of Tereus as an &quot;epops&quot; has generally been translated as a hoopoe (scientific name: &quot;Upupa epops&quot;). Since many of the earlier sources are no longer extant, or remain only in fragments, Ovid&#x27;s version of the myth has been the most lasting and influential upon later works.

Early Greek sources have it that Philomela was turned into a swallow, which has no song; Procne was turned into a nightingale, singing a beautiful but sad song in remorse. Later sources, among them Hyginus and in modern literature the English romantic poets like Keats write that although she was tongueless, Philomela was turned into a nightingale, and Procne into a swallow. Eustathius&#x27; version of the story has the sisters reversed, so that Philomela married Tereus and that Tereus lusted after Procne.

It is salient to note that in taxonomy and binomial nomenclature, the genus name of the martins (the larger-bodied among swallow genera) is &quot;Progne&quot;, a Latinized form of Procne. Other related genera named after the myth include the Crag Martins &quot;Ptyonoprogne&quot;, and Saw-wings &quot;Psalidoprocne&quot;. Coincidentally, although most of the depictions of the nightingale and its song in art and literature are of female nightingales, the female of the species does not sing—it is the male of the species who sings its characteristic song.

In an early account, Sophocles wrote that Tereus was turned into a large-beaked bird whom some scholars translate as a hawk while a number of retellings and other works (including Aristophanes&#x27; ancient comedy &quot;The Birds&quot;) hold that Tereus was instead changed into a hoopoe. Various later translations of Ovid state that Tereus was transformed into other birds than the hawk and hoopoe, including references by Dryden and Gower to the lapwing.

Several writers omit key details of the story. According to Pausanias, Tereus was so remorseful for his actions against Philomela and Itys (the nature of the actions is not described) that he kills himself. Then two birds appear as the women lament his death. Many later sources omit Tereus&#x27; tongue-cutting mutilation of Philomela altogether.

According to Thucydides, Tereus was not King of Thrace, but rather from Daulia in Phocis, a city inhabited by Thracians. Thucydides cites as proof of this that poets who mention the nightingale refer to it as a &quot;Daulian bird&quot;. It is thought that Thucydides commented on the myth in his famous work on the Peloponnesian War because Sophocles&#x27; play confused the mythical Tereus with contemporary ruler Teres I of Thrace.

In a variation of the myth set in Asia Minor, Philomela is called Chelidon (&quot;swallow&quot;) and her sister Aëdon (&quot;nightingale&quot;).

===Elements borrowed from other myths and stories===
The story of Philomela, Procne, and Tereus is largely influenced by Sophocles&#x27; lost tragedy &quot;Tereus&quot;. Scholar Jenny Marsh claims Sophocles borrowed certain plot elements from Euripides&#x27; drama &quot;Medea&quot;—notably a wife killing her child in an act of revenge against her husband—and incorporated them in his tragedy &quot;Tereus&quot;. She implies that the infanticide of Itys did not appear in the Tereus myth until Sophocles&#x27; play and that it was introduced because of what was borrowed from Euripides.

It is possible that social and political themes have woven their way into the story as a contrast between Athenians who believed themselves to be the hegemonic power in Greece and the more civilized of the Greek peoples, and the Thracians who were considered to be a &quot;barbaric race&quot;. It is possible that these elements were woven into Sophocles&#x27; play &quot;Tereus&quot; and other works of the period.

==Appearances in the Western canon==
The material of the Philomela myth has been used in various creative works—artistic and literary—for the past 2,500 years. Over the centuries, the myth has been associated with the image of the nightingale and its song described as both exceedingly beautiful and sorrowful. The continued use of the image in artistic, literary, and musical works has reinforced this association.

===From antiquity and the influence of Ovid===

Beginning with Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, ancient dramatists and poets evoked the story of Philomela and the nightingale in their works. Most notably, it was the core of the tragedy &quot;Tereus&quot; by Sophocles (lost, extant only in fragments) and later in a set of plays by Philocles, the nephew of the great playwright Aeschylus. In Aeschylus&#x27;s &quot;Agamemnon&quot;, the prophetess Cassandra has a visionary premonition of her own death in which she mentioned the nightingale and Itys, lamenting:
&lt;poem&gt;
Ah for thy fate, O shrill-voiced nightingale!
Some solace for thy woes did Heaven afford,
Clothed thee with soft brown plumes, and life apart from wail(ing)—
&lt;/poem&gt;

In his &quot;Poetics&quot;, Aristotle points to the &quot;voice of the shuttle&quot; in Sophocles′ tragedy &quot;Tereus&quot; as an example of a poetic device that aids in the &quot;recognition&quot;—the change from ignorance to knowledge—of what has happened earlier in the plot. Such a device, according to Aristotle, is ″contrived″ by the poet, and thus is &quot;inartistic&quot;. The connection between the nightingale&#x27;s song and poetry is evoked by Aristophanes in his comedy &quot;The Birds&quot; and in the poetry of Callimachus. Roman poet Virgil compares the mourning of Orpheus for Eurydice to the &quot;lament of the nightingale&quot;.

While Ovid&#x27;s retelling of the myth is the more famous version of the story, he had several ancient sources on which to rely before he finished the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; in A.D. 8. Many of these sources were doubtless available to Ovid during his lifetime but have been lost or come to us at present only in fragments. In his version, Ovid recast and combined many elements from these ancient sources. Because his is the most complete, lasting version of the myth, it is the basis for many later works.

In the 12th century, French trouvère (troubadour) Chrétien de Troyes, adapted many of the myths recounted in Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; into Old French. However, de Troyes was not alone in adapting Ovid&#x27;s material. Geoffrey Chaucer recounted the story in his unfinished work &quot;The Legend of Good Women&quot; and briefly alluded to the myth in his epic poem &quot;Troilus and Criseyde&quot;. John Gower included the tale in his &quot;Confessio Amantis&quot;. References to Philomela are common in the motets of the ars nova, ars subtilior, and ars mutandi musical eras of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries.

===In Elizabethan and Jacobean England===
Throughout the late Renaissance and Elizabethan eras, the image of Philomela and the nightingale incorporated elements of mourning and beauty after being subjected to an act of violence. In his long poem &quot;The Steele Glas&quot; (1576), poet George Gascoigne (1535–1577) depicts &quot;Philomel&quot; as the representative of poetry (Poesys), her sister Progne as satire (Satyra), and Tereus as &quot;vayne Delight&quot;. The characterization of Philomela and the nightingale was that of a woman choosing to exercise her will in recovering her voice and resisting those forces which attempts to silence her. Critics have pointed to Gascoigne&#x27;s use of the Philomela myth as a personal appeal and that he was fighting in verse a battle with his enemies who violently opposed his poems. In Gascoigne&#x27;s poem &quot;The complaynt of Philomene&quot; (1576), the myth is employed to depict punishment and control.

In &quot;The Nymph&#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd&quot;, Sir Walter Raleigh (1554–1618) relays consolation regarding the nymph&#x27;s harsh rejection of the shepherd&#x27;s romantic advances in the spirit of &quot;time heals all wounds&quot; by citing in the second stanza (among several examples) that eventually, with the passage of time, Philomel would become &quot;dumb&quot; to her own pain and that her attention would be drawn away from the pain by the events of life to come.

In Sir Philip Sidney&#x27;s (1554–1586) courtly love poem &quot;The Nightingale&quot;, the narrator, who is in love with a woman he cannot have, compares his own romantic situation to that of Philomela&#x27;s plight and claims that he has more reason to be sad. However, recent literary criticism has labelled this claim as sexist and an unfortunate marginalization of the traumatic rape of Philomela. Sidney argues that the rape was an &quot;excess of love&quot; and less severe than being deprived of love as attested by the line, &quot;Since wanting is more woe than too much having.&quot;

Playwright and poet William Shakespeare (1564–1616) makes frequent use of the Philomela myth—most notably in his tragedy &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot; (c. 1588–1593) where characters directly reference Tereus and Philomela in commenting on rape and mutilation of Lavinia by Aaron, Chiron, and Demetrius. Prominent allusions to Philomela also occur in the depiction of Lucrece in &quot;The Rape of Lucrece&quot;, in the depiction of Imogen in &quot;Cymbeline,&quot; and in Titania&#x27;s lullaby in &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; where she asks Philomel to &quot;sing in our sweet lullaby&quot;. In Sonnet 102, Shakespeare addresses his lover (the &quot;fair youth&quot;) and compares his love poetry to the song of the nightingale, noting that &quot;her mournful hymns did hush the night&quot; (line 10), and that as a poet would &quot;hold his tongue&quot; (line 13) in deference to the more beautiful nightingale&#x27;s song so that he &quot;not dull you with my song&quot; (line 14). Emilia Lanier (1569–1645), a poet who is considered by some scholars to be the woman referred to in the poetry of William Shakespeare as &quot;Dark Lady&quot;, makes several references to Philomela in her patronage poem &quot;The Description of Cookeham&quot; in &quot;Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum&quot; (1611). Lanier&#x27;s poem, dedicated to Margaret Clifford, Countess of Cumberland and her daughter Lady Anne Clifford refers to Philomela&#x27;s &quot;sundry layes&quot;(line 31) and later to her &quot;mournful ditty&quot; (line 189).

The image of the nightingale appears frequently in poetry of the period with it and its song described by poets as an example of &quot;joyance&quot; and gaiety or as an example of melancholy, sad, sorrowful, and mourning. However, many use the nightingale as a symbol of sorrow but without a direct reference to the Philomela myth.

===In Classical and Romantic works===

Poets in the Romantic Era recast the myth and adapted the image of the nightingale with its song to be a poet and &quot;master of a superior art that could inspire the human poet&quot;. For some romantic poets, the nightingale even began to take on qualities of the muse. John Keats (1795–1821), in &quot;Ode to a Nightingale&quot; (1819) idealizes the nightingale as a poet who has achieved the poetry that Keats himself longs to write. Keats directly employs the Philomel myth in &quot;The Eve of St. Agnes&quot; (1820) where the rape of Madeline by Porphyro mirrors the rape of Philomela by Tereus. Keats&#x27; contemporary, poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822) invoked a similar image of the nightingale, writing in his &quot;A Defence of Poetry&quot; that &quot;a poet is a nightingale who sits in darkness and sings to cheer its own solitude with sweet sounds; his auditors are as men entranced by the melody of an unseen musician, who feel that they are moved and softened, yet know not whence or why.&quot;

In France, &quot;Philomèle&quot; was an operatic stage production of the story, produced by Louis Lacoste during the reign of Louis XIV.

First published in the collection &quot;Lyrical Ballads&quot;, &quot;The Nightingale&quot; (1798) is an effort by Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834) to move away from associations that the nightingale&#x27;s song was one of melancholy and identified it with the joyous experience of nature. He remarked that &quot;in nature there is nothing melancholy&quot;, (line 15) expressing hope &quot;we may not thus profane / Nature&#x27;s sweet voices, always full of love / And joyance!&quot; (lines 40–42).

At the poem&#x27;s conclusion, Coleridge writes of a father taking his crying son outside in the night:
&lt;poem&gt;
And he beheld the moon, and, hushed at once,
Suspends his sobs, and laughs most silently,
While his fair eyes, that swam with undropped tears,&#x27;
Did glitter in the yellow moon-beam! Well!—
It is a father&#x27;s tale: But if that Heaven
Should give me life, his childhood shall grow up
Familiar with these songs, that with the night
He may associate joy.—
&lt;/poem&gt;
Coleridge and his friend William Wordsworth (1770–1850), who called the nightingale a &quot;fiery heart&quot;, depicted it &quot;as an instance of natural poetic creation&quot;, and the &quot;voice of nature&quot;.

Other notable mentions include:
*In William Makepeace Thackeray&#x27;s 1847–1848 serial &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, Becky Sharp performs charades of Clytemnestra (kingslayer) and Philomela (the ravished mute of king, who prompted his slaying) before the Prince Regent of England. Further, her performance of Philomela is styled after the play from the era of Louis XIV, alluding to the possibility of her becoming another Marquise de Maintenon.
*In the poem &quot;Philomela&quot; (1853) by English poet Matthew Arnold (1822–1888), the poet asks upon hearing the crying of a fleeing nightingale if it can find peace and healing in the English countryside far away from Greece, although lamenting its pain and passion &quot;eternal&quot;.
*In his 1881 poem &quot;&quot;, Oscar Wilde describes Itys as the symbol of Greek art and pleasure is contrasted with Christ. The landscape of Greece is also compared to the landscape of England, specifically Kent and Oxford. 
*Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837–1909) wrote a poem called &quot;Itylus&quot; based on the story in which Philomela and Procne, after being transformed into the nightingale and swallow, ask when they will be able to forget the grief of having slain Itylus—the answer being they will forget when the world ends. He also wrote the lyrical tragedy &quot;Erechtheus&quot; (1876) which concerns Philomela&#x27;s brother.
*English poet Ann Yearsley (1753–1806) in lamenting the sufferings of African slaves invokes the myth and challenges that her song &quot;shall teach sad Philomel a louder note,&quot; in her abolitionist poem &quot;A Poem on the Inhumanity of the Slave-Trade&quot; (1788)
*In &quot;A la Juventud Filipina&quot;, Filipino national hero José Rizal (1861–1896), used the image of Philomel as inspiration for young Filipinos to use their voices to speak of Spanish injustice and colonial oppression.

===In modern works===
The Philomela myth is perpetuated largely through its appearance as a powerful device in poetry. In the 20th century, American-British poet T. S. Eliot (1888–1965) directly referenced the myth in his most famous poem, &quot;The Waste Land&quot; (1922), where he describes,
&lt;poem&gt;
The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king
So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale
Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
&quot;Jug Jug&quot; to dirty ears.
&lt;/poem&gt;
Eliot employs the myth to depict themes of sorrow, pain, and that the only recovery or regeneration possible is through revenge. Several of these mentions reference other poets&#x27; renderings of the myth, including those of Ovid and Gascoigne. Eliot&#x27;s references to the nightingales singing by the convent in &quot;Sweeney and the Nightingales&quot; (1919–1920) is a direct reference to the murder of Agamemnon in the tragedy by Aeschylus—wherein the Greek dramatist directly evoked the Philomela myth. The poem describes Sweeney as a brute and that two women in the poem are conspiring against him for his mistreatment of them. This mirrors not only the elements of Agamemnon&#x27;s death in Aeschylus&#x27; play but the sister&#x27;s revenge against Tereus in the myth.

In the poem &quot;To the Nightingale&quot;, Argentine poet and fabulist, Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986), compares his efforts as a poet to the bird&#x27;s lament though never having heard it. He describes its song as &quot;encrusted with mythology&quot; and that the evolution of the myth has distorted it—that the opinions of other poets and writers have kept both poet and reader from actually hearing the original sound and knowing the essence of the song.

Several artists have applied Ovid&#x27;s account to new translations or reworkings, or adapted the story for the stage. Leonard Quirino notes that the plot of Tennessee Williams&#x27;s play &quot;A Streetcar Named Desire&quot; &quot;is modeled on the legend of Tereus&quot;.

British poet Ted Hughes (1930–1998) used the myth in his 1997 work &quot;Tales from Ovid&quot; (1997) which was a loose translation and retelling of twenty-four tales from Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;. Both Israeli dramatist Hanoch Levin (in &quot;The Great Whore of Babylon&quot;) and English playwright Joanna Laurens (in &quot;The Three Birds&quot;) wrote plays based on the story. The story was adapted into an opera by Scottish composer James Dillon in 2004, and a 1964 vocal composition by American composer Milton Babbitt with text by John Hollander.

The reference to Philomela also exists in the name of a Bengali music troupe in Calcutta, India, called &quot;Nagar Philomel&quot; (The city that loves song), formed in 1983.

Several female writers have used the Philomela myth in exploring the subject of rape, women and power (empowerment) and feminist themes, , and Timberlake Wertenbaker in her play &quot;The Love of the Nightingale&quot; (1989) (later adapted into an opera of the same name composed by Richard Mills). More recently, poet and author Melissa Studdard brought new life to the myth in her poem &quot;Philomela&#x27;s tongue says&quot; (2019), published in &quot;Poetry&quot; magazine&#x27;s May 2019 edition.

==See also==

* Child cannibalism
* List of rape victims from ancient history and mythology
* 196 Philomela, main-belt asteroid

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Homer, &quot;The Odyssey&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Stephanus of Byzantium, &quot;Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt,&quot; edited by August Meineike (1790–1870), published 1849. A few entries from this important ancient handbook of place names have been translated by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="0" end="9" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="16" end="24" title="Philomela" label="Philomel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="55" end="70" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="124" end="130" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q621154" start="169" end="182" title="Western canon" label="Western canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q865111" start="244" end="253" title="Pandion I" label="Pandion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="255" end="269" title="King of Athens" label="King of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="279" end="284" title="naiad" label="naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28071422" start="285" end="293" title="Zeuxippe" label="Zeuxippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="307" end="313" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="336" end="342" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="346" end="352" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="391" end="401" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56234353" start="403" end="408" title="Butes" label="Butes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108365426" start="422" end="430" title="Teuthras (mythology)" label="Teuthras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="589" end="595" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393" start="643" end="654" title="nightingale" label="nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471717" start="848" end="854" title="lament" label="lament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="940" end="944" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="998" end="1007" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1068" end="1073" title="Greek Language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="1373" end="1386" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1411" end="1415" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1624" end="1669" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="&amp;quot;Bibliotheca&amp;quot; of Pseudo-Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="1769" end="1778" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984261" start="1804" end="1810" title="Tereus (Sophocles)" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="1902" end="1908" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="1918" end="1924" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="1936" end="1940" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2085" end="2091" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="2373" end="2377" title="lust" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="2557" end="2561" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2753" end="2757" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="3461" end="3465" title="weaving" label="wove"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="3468" end="3476" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q345127" start="3483" end="3487" title="robe" label="robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="3664" end="3684" title="Human cannibalism" label="served him as a meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39861" start="4091" end="4098" title="swallow" label="swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393" start="4120" end="4131" title="nightingale" label="nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977" start="4182" end="4188" title="hoopoe" label="hoopoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="5257" end="5264" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="5322" end="5327" title="John Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="5436" end="5446" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="5601" end="5609" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="5614" end="5635" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="5641" end="5646" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q665719" start="5717" end="5723" title="Progne" label="Progne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192748" start="5832" end="5844" title="Ptyonoprogne" label="Ptyonoprogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061396" start="5872" end="5885" title="Psalidoprocne" label="Psalidoprocne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="6150" end="6159" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="6248" end="6252" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="6309" end="6321" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164079" start="6349" end="6358" title="The Birds (play)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q289448" start="6578" end="6585" title="lapwing" label="lapwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="6648" end="6657" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="6950" end="6960" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172948" start="7009" end="7015" title="Daulia" label="Daulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="7019" end="7025" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="7252" end="7269" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172765" start="7352" end="7359" title="Teres I" label="Teres I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7406" end="7416" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18009936" start="7438" end="7446" title="Chelidon (mythology)" label="Chelidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q368853" start="7484" end="7489" title="Aëdon" label="Aëdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="7761" end="7770" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="7789" end="7794" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="9004" end="9009" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="9023" end="9030" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984261" start="9184" end="9190" title="Tereus (Sophocles)" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="9200" end="9209" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186040" start="9274" end="9283" title="Philocles" label="Philocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="9320" end="9329" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="9357" end="9366" title="Agamemnon (play)" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="9389" end="9398" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="9703" end="9710" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9718" end="9727" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="9778" end="9787" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="10149" end="10161" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164079" start="10182" end="10191" title="The Birds (play)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="10219" end="10230" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="10243" end="10249" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="10275" end="10282" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208588" start="10287" end="10295" title="Eurydice" label="Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996467" start="10883" end="10891" title="trouvère" label="trouvère"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="10905" end="10923" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="11007" end="11017" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="11086" end="11102" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125810" start="11152" end="11176" title="The Legend of Good Women" label="The Legend of Good Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527101" start="11238" end="11258" title="Troilus and Criseyde" label="Troilus and Criseyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q365133" start="11266" end="11276" title="John Gower" label="John Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992424" start="11308" end="11325" title="Confessio Amantis" label="Confessio Amantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="11375" end="11380" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210854" start="11389" end="11397" title="ars nova" label="ars nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q704073" start="11399" end="11412" title="ars subtilior" label="ars subtilior"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="11717" end="11725" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q333528" start="11785" end="11801" title="George Gascoigne" label="George Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754542" start="12468" end="12506" title="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd" label="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="12518" end="12532" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="12578" end="12583" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="12949" end="12962" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="12982" end="12994" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="13266" end="13272" title="Sexism" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="13556" end="13575" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="13663" end="13679" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398793" start="13920" end="13939" title="The Rape of Lucrece" label="The Rape of Lucrece"/>
<link wikidata="Q730212" start="13983" end="13992" title="Cymbeline" label="Cymbeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332221" start="14007" end="14014" title="Titania (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="14039" end="14069" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490503" start="14145" end="14155" title="Sonnet 102" label="Sonnet 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656783" start="14534" end="14547" title="Emilia Lanier" label="Emilia Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9197856" start="14677" end="14686" title="The Dark Lady" label="Dark Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605533" start="14875" end="14916" title="Margaret Clifford, Countess of Cumberland" label="Margaret Clifford, Countess of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943112" start="14934" end="14952" title="Lady Anne Clifford" label="Lady Anne Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="15456" end="15468" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="15715" end="15725" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349126" start="15748" end="15768" title="Ode to a Nightingale" label="Ode to a Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732639" start="15931" end="15951" title="The Eve of St. Agnes" label="The Eve of St. Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="16076" end="16096" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707362" start="16174" end="16193" title="A Defence of Poetry" label="A Defence of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939176" start="16477" end="16486" title="Philomèle" label="Philomèle"/>
<link wikidata="Q662073" start="16500" end="16508" title="French opera" label="operatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263492" start="16552" end="16565" title="Louis Lacoste (composer)" label="Louis Lacoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="16586" end="16595" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="16712" end="16735" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="17616" end="17634" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="17843" end="17870" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="17888" end="17894" title="serial novel" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="17901" end="17912" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878872" start="17920" end="17931" title="Becky Sharp (character)" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144077" start="17941" end="17949" title="charades" label="charades"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="17953" end="17965" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="18058" end="18071" title="George IV" label="Prince Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="18075" end="18082" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939176" start="18138" end="18146" title="Philomèle" label="the play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="18163" end="18172" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q230670" start="18226" end="18247" title="Marquise de Maintenon" label="Marquise de Maintenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="18307" end="18321" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="18573" end="18584" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="18769" end="18795" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766761" start="19199" end="19211" title="Ann Yearsley" label="Ann Yearsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="19519" end="19529" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="19843" end="19854" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="19927" end="19941" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="20630" end="20639" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="21075" end="21092" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="21621" end="21639" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q842106" start="21658" end="21682" title="A Streetcar Named Desire" label="A Streetcar Named Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="21751" end="21761" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679254" start="21811" end="21826" title="Tales from Ovid" label="Tales from Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576676" start="21972" end="21984" title="Hanoch Levin" label="Hanoch Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100849" start="22052" end="22066" title="Joanna Laurens" label="Joanna Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q709092" start="22189" end="22201" title="James Dillon (composer)" label="James Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186114" start="22222" end="22239" title="Philomel (Babbitt)" label="vocal composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q318518" start="22261" end="22275" title="Milton Babbitt" label="Milton Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809343" start="22289" end="22303" title="John Hollander" label="John Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22585" end="22596" title="Empowerment#Empowerment of women" label="empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="22602" end="22610" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804690" start="22625" end="22647" title="Timberlake Wertenbaker" label="Timberlake Wertenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749005" start="22666" end="22693" title="The Love of the Nightingale" label="The Love of the Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749006" start="22730" end="22752" title="The Love of the Nightingale (opera)" label="opera of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327820" start="22765" end="22778" title="Richard Mills (composer)" label="Richard Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812889" start="22812" end="22828" title="Melissa Studdard" label="Melissa Studdard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207482" start="22938" end="22944" title="Poetry (magazine)" label="Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097826" start="23002" end="23019" title="Child cannibalism" label="Child cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211519" start="23022" end="23077" title="List of rape victims from ancient history and mythology" label="List of rape victims from ancient history and mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q146374" start="23080" end="23093" title="196 Philomela" label="196 Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="23145" end="23156" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="23440" end="23445" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="23447" end="23470" title="Odyssey" label="&amp;quot;The Odyssey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="23712" end="23721" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="24120" end="24142" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83098" wikidata="Q1675360" url="?curid=83098" title="Itys">
<text>In Greek mythology, Itys () is a minor mythological character, the son of Tereus, a king of Thrace, by his Athenian wife Procne. Itys was murdered by his own mother and served to be consumed during dinner by his father, as part of a revenge plan against Tereus for assaulting and raping Philomela, Procne&#x27;s sister. His immediate family were all transformed into birds afterwards, and in some versions Itys too joins them in the avian kingdom. Itys&#x27; story survives in several accounts, the most extensive and famous among them being Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;. His myth had been known since at least the sixth century BC.

== Family ==
Itys was the son of Procne, a princess of Athens, and Tereus, a Thracian king, thus nephew to Philomela. Through his father he was a grandson of the god of war Ares.

== Mythology ==
Itys was born and raised in Thrace. At some point his father Tereus raped Itys&#x27; maternal aunt Philomela while escorting her to Thrace on her visit to her sister Procne. Tereus cut Philomela&#x27;s tongue so she could never be able to tell anyone her story, and abandoned her. Philomela however managed to weave a tapestry or robe with her story and sent it to her sister. In rage, Procne slew Itys, seeing him as but an image of his father, boiled him and served him as a meal to Tereus. After he finished his meal, the two sisters presented him with the disembodied head of Itys. Once he realised what had happened, Tereus hunted down the two sisters, who prayed to the gods. All three were transformed into birds. Depending on the myth&#x27;s version, either Philomela or Procne is turned into either the silent swallow or the singing nightingale which continued to mourn her slain son in her new life. &quot;Itys&quot; was also the name for the plaintive cry of the nightingale.

Pausanias on the other hand writes that Tereus was so remorseful for his actions against Philomela and Itys&#x27;s fate at the hands of the women (the nature of which is not described in clear detail) that he killed himself. Eustathius&#x27;s version of the story has the sisters reversed, so that Philomela married Tereus and became the mother of Itys.

In some texts, Itys is called Itylus instead, another mythological bird who was killed by his mother Aëdon, who then transformed into a nightingale. In one variation of the myth, Procne is called Aëdon and his father Polytechnus.

The fullest surviving account of Itys&#x27; tale comes to us via the Roman poet Ovid and his narrative poem the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;; however, the myth itself is much older, and Ovid&#x27;s telling was largely influenced by Sophocles&#x27;s now lost tragedy &quot;Tereus&quot;. Scholar Jenny Marsh theorized that Sophocles must had borrowed certain elements of the plot from Euripides&#x27;s drama &quot;Medea&quot;.

She argues that the element of the enraged wife killing her child in an act of revenge against her husband&#x27;s actions was directly borrowed from Euripides and incorporated in his tragedy. If accurate, that would mean that the infanticide of Itys did not appear in the myth of Procne and Philomela until Sophocles. Tellingly, the chorus in &quot;Medea&quot; state that they know only of one woman sans Medea herself that killed her children (Ino) without taking Procne into account.

In some versions, Itys himself was transformed into a bird like the rest of his family, specifically a pheasant, to be admired for its fine plumage. This element is not present in Ovid and most authors, who instead have Itys unceremoniously killed and eaten.

== See also ==
* Iphigenia
* Harpalyce
* Lycaon
* Procne and Itys (sculpture)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Antoninus Liberalis, &quot;The Metamorphoses of Antoninus Liberalis&quot; translated by Francis Celoria (Routledge 1992). Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* 
* Maurus Servius Honoratus, &quot;In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii;&quot; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675360" start="20" end="24" title="Itys" label="Itys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="74" end="80" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="92" end="98" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="121" end="127" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="287" end="296" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="542" end="546" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="560" end="573" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="676" end="682" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="698" end="704" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="710" end="716" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="720" end="728" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="750" end="759" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="816" end="820" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q39861" start="1658" end="1665" title="swallow" label="swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393" start="1681" end="1692" title="nightingale" label="nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1827" end="1836" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="2052" end="2062" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675357" start="2212" end="2218" title="Itylus" label="Itylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q368853" start="2283" end="2288" title="Aëdon" label="Aëdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116482987" start="2399" end="2410" title="Polytechnus" label="Polytechnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2493" end="2497" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="2531" end="2544" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="2642" end="2651" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984261" start="2682" end="2688" title="Tereus (play)" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="2793" end="2802" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="2822" end="2827" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q174278" start="3241" end="3246" title="Medea" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223690" start="3281" end="3284" title="Ino (mythology)" label="Ino"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="3426" end="3434" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="3600" end="3609" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289051" start="3612" end="3621" title="Harpalyce (daughter of Clymenus)" label="Harpalyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="3624" end="3630" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124031959" start="3633" end="3660" title="Procne and Itys (sculpture)" label="Procne and Itys (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="3712" end="3731" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="3881" end="3905" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Maurus Servius Honoratus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83099" wikidata="Q853014" url="?curid=83099" title="Thamyris">
<text>In Greek mythology, Thamyris (Ancient Greek: Θάμυρις, &quot;Thámuris&quot;) was a Thracian singer. He is notable in Greek mythology for reportedly being a lover of Hyacinth and thus to have been the first male to have loved another male, but when his songs failed to win his love from the god Apollo, he challenged the Nine Muses to a competition and lost.

== Family ==
Thamyris was the son of Philammon and the nymph Argiope from Mount Parnassus. One account makes him the father of Menippe, who became the mother of Orpheus by Oeagrus.

== Mythology ==

=== Early years ===
When Philammon refused to take Argiope into his house as his wife, the girl left Peloponnese and went to the country of the Odrysians in Thrace where she gave birth to a son, Thamyris. When the boy reached puberty, he became so accomplished in singing to the cithara that the Scythians made him their king even though he was an interloper.

According to Diodorus the mythical singer Linus took three pupils: Heracles, Thamyris, and Orpheus, which neatly settles Thamyris&#x27; legendary chronology. When Pliny the Elder briefly sketches the origins of music, he credits Thamyris with inventing the Dorian mode and with being the first to play the cithara as a solo instrument with no vocal accompaniment.

Thamyris is said to have been enamored of Hyacinth (who however spurned him for the god Apollo), and thus to have been the first man to have loved another male.

=== Contest with Muses ===
While returning from Oechalia, Thamyris paused at the ford of the river Alpheus and boasted that he could surpass the Muses – the daughters of Zeus – in singing. But they were angry and stilled his singing forever, robbing him of the divine powers of song and playing the lyre anymore. The story is mentioned briefly in the &quot;Iliad&quot;. According to Apollodorus in the &quot;Library&quot;, the Muses instead punished him by gouging out his eyes.

This allusion is taken up in Euripides&#x27; &quot;Rhesus&quot;, and in the scholia on the &quot;Iliad&quot;. These later sources add the details that Thamyris had demanded as his prize for winning the contest either the privilege of having sex with all the Muses or of marrying one of them; and that after his death he was further punished in Hades. Ancient scholia emphasized that the episode was meant to illustrate that poetic inspiration was a gift of the gods, and could be taken away by them.

==Other==
Thamyris is also the name of a Theban who was killed by Actor.

== Legacy ==
Thamyris Glacier on Anvers Island in Antarctica is named after Thamyris.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Conon&quot;, Fifty Narrations, surviving as one-paragraph summaries in the Bibliotheca (Library) of Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople&quot; translated from the Greek by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888–1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* John Tzetzes, &quot;Book of Histories,&quot; Book I translated by Ana Untila from the original Greek of T. Kiessling&#x27;s edition of 1826. Online version at theoi.com
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pliny the Elder, &quot;The Natural History.&quot; John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S. H.T. Riley, Esq., B.A. London. Taylor and Francis, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. 1855. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pliny the Elder, &quot;Naturalis Historia.&quot; Karl Friedrich Theodor Mayhoff. Lipsiae. Teubner. 1906. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pseudo-Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.

== External links ==
* Donatella Restani, &quot;Music and myth in ancient Greece&quot; with literary references to Thamyris</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q853014" start="20" end="28" title="Thamyris" label="Thamyris"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="30" end="43" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="82" end="90" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207273" start="164" end="172" title="Hyacinth (mythology)" label="Hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="293" end="299" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="324" end="329" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q53606" start="395" end="404" title="Philammon" label="Philammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="413" end="418" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q29655288" start="419" end="426" title="Argiope (mythology)" label="Argiope"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="432" end="447" title="Mount Parnassus" label="Mount Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555647" start="485" end="492" title="Menippe (mythology)" label="Menippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="519" end="526" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539620" start="530" end="537" title="Oeagrus" label="Oeagrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="658" end="669" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q870517" start="701" end="710" title="Odrysian kingdom" label="Odrysians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="714" end="720" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="853" end="862" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="931" end="939" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315253" start="960" end="965" title="Linus (mythology)" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="985" end="993" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="1009" end="1016" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1081" end="1096" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q960729" start="1175" end="1186" title="Dorian mode" label="Dorian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="1224" end="1231" title="cithara" label="cithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q207273" start="1325" end="1333" title="Hyacinth (mythology)" label="Hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1371" end="1377" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594069" start="1493" end="1501" title="Oechalia (Thessaly)" label="Oechalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q911084" start="1544" end="1551" title="Alpheus (deity)" label="Alpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="1590" end="1595" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1802" end="1807" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1853" end="1860" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1954" end="1963" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="2001" end="2008" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="2269" end="2274" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="2467" end="2473" title="Thebes (Greece)" label="Theban"/>
<link wikidata="Q557214" start="2492" end="2497" title="Actor (mythology)" label="Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710076" start="2513" end="2529" title="Thamyris Glacier" label="Thamyris Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q612965" start="2533" end="2546" title="Anvers Island" label="Anvers Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2550" end="2560" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q709305" start="2617" end="2622" title="Conon (mythographer)" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2849" end="2865" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="2916" end="2939" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="2957" end="2979" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3354" end="3359" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3361" end="3382" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="3725" end="3737" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3896" end="3905" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4304" end="4319" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="4677" end="4695" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Pseudo-Apollodorus"/>
</links>
</doc>
