<doc id="80135" wikidata="Q499451" url="?curid=80135" title="Rutgers University">
<text>Rutgers University ( ), officially Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, is a public land-grant research university consisting of three campuses in New Jersey. Chartered in 1766, Rutgers was originally called Queen&#x27;s College and was affiliated with the Dutch Reformed Church. It is the eighth-oldest college in the United States, the second-oldest in New Jersey (after Princeton University), and one of nine colonial colleges that were chartered before the American Revolution.

In 1825, Queen&#x27;s College was renamed Rutgers College in honor of Colonel Henry Rutgers, whose substantial gift to the school had stabilized its finances during a period of uncertainty. For most of its existence, Rutgers was a private liberal arts college. It has evolved into a coeducational public research university since being designated the State University of New Jersey by the state&#x27;s legislature in 1945 and 1956.

Rutgers has several distinct campuses. Since colonial times, its historic core has been located along College Avenue in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Rutgers University–New Brunswick also includes the landscaped campus of Douglass College, a women&#x27;s college that was traditionally paired with Rutgers. It also comprises the campus of Rutgers School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, which includes the College Farm and Rutgers Gardens, as well as both the Busch and Livingston campuses in Piscataway. Apart from the New Brunswick core, campuses at Rutgers University–Newark, Rutgers University–Camden, and Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences complete the university&#x27;s main footprint. The university has additional facilities throughout the state, including oceanographic research facilities at the Jersey Shore.

Rutgers is a land-grant, sea-grant, and space-grant university, as well as the largest university in the state. Instruction is offered by 9,000 faculty members in 175 academic departments to over 45,000 undergraduate students and more than 20,000 graduate and professional students. The university is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education and is a member of the Association of American Universities and the Universities Research Association.

==History==
===18th century===
Two decades after the College of New Jersey, which is now Princeton University, was established in 1746 by the New Light Presbyterians, ministers of the Dutch Reformed Church, seeking autonomy in ecclesiastical affairs in the Thirteen Colonies, sought to establish a college to train those who wanted to become ministers within the church. 
Through several years of effort by Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen (1691–1747) and Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh (1736–1790), later the college&#x27;s first president, Queen&#x27;s College received its charter on November 10, 1766, from New Jersey&#x27;s last royal governor, William Franklin (1730–1813), the son of Benjamin Franklin. The original charter established the college under the corporate name the trustees of Queen&#x27;s College, in New-Jersey, named in honor of Queen Charlotte (1744–1818), and created both the college and the Queen&#x27;s College Grammar School, intended to be a preparatory school affiliated and governed by the college. The Grammar School, today the private Rutgers Preparatory School, was a part of the college community until 1959. New Brunswick was chosen as the location over Hackensack because the New Brunswick Dutch had the support of the Anglican population, making the royal charter easier to obtain.

The original purpose of Queen&#x27;s College was to &quot;educate the youth in language, liberal, the divinity, and useful arts and sciences&quot; and for the training of future ministers for the Dutch Reformed Church.

In 1771, the college admitted its first students, which included a single sophomore and a handful of first-year students taught by a lone instructor, and granted its first degree in 1774, to Matthew Leydt. Despite the religious nature of the early college, the first classes were held at a tavern called the Sign of the Red Lion. When the Revolutionary War broke out and taverns were suspected by the British as being hotbeds of rebel activity, the college abandoned the tavern and held classes in private homes.

Like many colleges founded in the U.S. during this time, Rutgers benefited from slave labor and funds derived from purchasing and selling slaves. Research undertaken at the university in the 2010s began to uncover and document these connections, including the university&#x27;s foundation on land taken from the indigenous Lenape people.

===19th century===

In its early years, due to a lack of funds, Queen&#x27;s College was closed for two extended periods. Early trustees considered merging the college with the College of New Jersey, in Princeton, but the measure failed by one vote. They later considered relocating it to New York City. In 1808, after raising $12,000, the college temporarily reopened and broke ground on a building of its own, called &quot;Old Queens,&quot; designed by architect John McComb, Jr. The college&#x27;s third president, Ira Condict, laid the cornerstone on April 27, 1809. Shortly after, the New Brunswick Theological Seminary, founded in 1784, relocated from Brooklyn, to New Brunswick, and shared facilities with Queen&#x27;s College and the Queen&#x27;s College Grammar School, and all three institutions were then overseen by the Reformed Church in America. During those formative years, all three institutions fit into Old Queens. In 1830, Queen&#x27;s College Grammar School moved across the street, and in 1856, the seminary relocated to a seven-acre (28,000 m2) tract less than one-half mile (800 m) away.

After several years of closure resulting from an economic depression after the War of 1812, Queen&#x27;s College reopened in 1825 and was renamed &quot;Rutgers College&quot; in honor of American Revolutionary War hero Henry Rutgers (1745–1830). According to the board of trustees, Colonel Rutgers was honored because he epitomized Christian ethics. A year after the school was renamed, it received two donations from its namesake: a $200 bell still hanging from the cupola of Old Queen&#x27;s and a $5,000 bond () which placed the college on sound financial footing.

Rutgers College became the land-grant college of New Jersey in 1864 under the Morrill Act of 1862, resulting in the establishment of the Rutgers Scientific School, featuring departments of agriculture, engineering, and chemistry. The Rutgers Scientific School would expand over the years to grow into the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station (1880) and divide into the College of Engineering (1914) and the College of Agriculture (1921). Rutgers created the New Jersey College for Women in 1918, and the School of Education in 1924.

===20th century===

With the development of graduate education, and the continued expansion of the institution, the collection of schools became Rutgers University in 1924. Rutgers College continued as a liberal arts college within the university. Later, University College (1945) was founded to serve part-time, commuting students and Livingston College (1969) was created by the Rutgers Trustees, ensuring that the interests of ethnically diverse New Jersey students were met.

Rutgers was designated the state university of New Jersey by acts of the New Jersey Legislature in 1945 and 1956. Although Rutgers thus became a public university, it still retains—as the successor to the private college founded and chartered in 1766—some important private rights and protections from unilateral state efforts to change its fundamental character and mission.

The newly-designated state university absorbed the University of Newark (1935) in 1946 and then the College of South Jersey and South Jersey Law School, in 1950. These two institutions became Rutgers University–Newark and Rutgers University–Camden, respectively. On September 10, 1970, after much debate, the board of governors voted to admit women into Rutgers College.

There were setbacks in the growth of the university. In 1967, the Rutgers Physics Department had a Centers of Excellence Grant from the NSF which allowed the physics department to hire several faculty each year. These faculty were to be paid by the grant for three years, but after that time any faculty hired with the associate or full professor designation would become tenured. The governor and the chancellor forced Rutgers to lose this grant by rejecting the condition that tenure be granted.

In 1970, the newly formed Rutgers Medical School hired major faculty members from other institutions. In 1971, the governor&#x27;s office separated Rutgers Medical School from Rutgers University and made it part of New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, and many faculty left the medical school, including the dean of the medical school, Dewitt Stetten, who later became the director of the National Institutes of Health. As a result of the separation of the medical school from Rutgers University, Ph.D. programs that had been started in the medical center were lost, and students had to seek other institutions to finish their degrees. After the dissolution of the University of Medicine and Dentistry in 2013, the medical school again became part of the university.

Before 1982, separate liberal arts faculties existed in the several separate &quot;residential colleges&quot; (Rutgers, Douglass, Livingston, University, and Cook colleges) at Rutgers–New Brunswick.

In 1982, under president Edward J. Bloustein, the liberal arts faculties of these five institutions were centralized into one college, the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, which itself had no students. The separate residential colleges persisted for students, and while instructors for classes were now drawn from the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, separate standards for admission, good standing, and graduation continued for students, depending on which residential college they were enrolled in. In January 1987, around 2,800 non-teaching employees went on strike for increased salaries, which ended after nine days after an agreement with the administration was made.

===21st century===
In 2007, Rutgers New Brunswick, Douglass, Livingston, and University Colleges, along with the Faculty of Arts and Sciences were merged into the new &quot;School of Arts and Sciences&quot; with one set of admissions criteria, curriculum, and graduation requirements. At this time, the liberal arts components of Cook College were absorbed into the School of Arts and Sciences as well, while the other aspects of that college remained, but as the School of Environmental and Biological Sciences. These changes in 2007 ended the 241-year history of Rutgers College as a distinct institution.

Students at the 2011 Rutgers tuition protests fought against rising education costs and diminished state subsidies. Campus groups (including the Rutgers Student Union, the Rutgers One Coalition, and the Rutgers University Student Assembly (RUSA), supported by New Jersey United Students (NJUS), mobilized to keep the increase in annual student financial obligation to a minimum through marches, sit-ins, letters to administration officials and forums.

In 2011, there was an attempt by then New Jersey governor Chris Christie and members of the legislature to merge Rutgers–Camden into Rowan University, it ultimately was rejected in part due to several on-campus protests and pushback from Camden faculty, students, and alumni.

On June 20, 2012, the outgoing president of Rutgers University, Richard L. McCormick, announced that Rutgers will &quot;integrate five acres along George Street between Seminary Place and Bishop Place into the College Avenue Campus.&quot; Most of the block had been occupied by the New Brunswick Theological Seminary. Rutgers agreed to rebuild the seminary in exchange for the land it gave up.

In 2013, most of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey was integrated with Rutgers University and, along with several existing Rutgers units, was reformed as Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences. This merger attached the New Jersey Medical School and Robert Wood Johnson Medical School to Rutgers University.

In 2013, Rutgers changed part of its alma mater, &quot;On the Banks of the Old Raritan.&quot; Where the lyrics had stated, &quot;My father sent me to old Rutgers, and resolved that I should be a man,&quot; now they state, &quot;From far and near we came to Rutgers, and resolved to learn all that we can.&quot; The alma mater for the Camden campus &quot;On the Banks of the Old Delaware&quot; are lyrically similar aside from the river name.

In 2016, Rutgers celebrated its 250th anniversary. On May 15, President Barack Obama became the first sitting president to speak at the university&#x27;s commencement. The university held a variety of celebrations, academic programs, and commemorative events which culminated on the 250th anniversary date, November 10, 2016. Rutgers invited multiple notable alumni from around the world to the celebration. Steven Van Zandt was the commencement speaker the following year and received an honorary doctorate.

In November 2016, Rutgers released research findings that revealed: &quot;an untold history of some of the institution&#x27;s founders as slave owners and the displacement of the Native Americans who once occupied land that was later transferred to the college.&quot;

In January 2020, Jonathan Holloway made history as the first African American and person of color to be named president of Rutgers. On April 9, 2023, three unions voted to go on the first strike by academics in the university&#x27;s 257-year history, citing the lack of progress on contract talks between union representatives and university officials. As a result, classes and research were suspended until a tentative agreement was reached on April 15, 2023. Five months later, in September, the university&#x27;s faculty senate voted &quot;no confidence&quot; in Holloway; in addition to issues related to the strikes, the motion also cited Halloway&#x27;s decision to dismiss the chancellor of the university&#x27;s Newark campus and his proposal to merge the university&#x27;s two medical schools.

==Organization and administration==
===University president===
Since 1785, twenty-one men have served as the institution&#x27;s president, beginning with Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh, a Dutch Reformed minister who was responsible for establishing the college. Before 1930, most of the university&#x27;s presidents were clergy affiliated with Christian denominations in the Reformed tradition (either Dutch or German Reformed, or Presbyterian). Two presidents were alumni of Rutgers College—William H. S. Demarest (Class of 1883) and Philip Milledoler Brett (Class of 1892).

The president serves in an &quot;ex officio&quot; capacity as a presiding officer within the university&#x27;s 59-member board of trustees and its eleven-member board of governors, and is appointed by these boards to oversee the day-to-day operations of the university across its campuses. He is charged with implementing &quot;board policies with the help and advice of senior administrators and other members of the university community.&quot; The president is responsible only to those two governing boards—there is no oversight by state officials. Frequently, the president also occupies a professorship in his academic discipline and engages in instructing students.

The current president is Jonathan Holloway, who assumed the role on July 1, 2020.

===Governing boards===
Governance at Rutgers University rests with a board of trustees consisting of 41 members, and a board of governors consisting of 15 voting members: eight are appointed by the Governor of New Jersey and seven chosen by and from among the board of trustees. The trustees constitute chiefly an advisory body to the board of governors and are the fiduciary overseers of the property and assets of the university that existed before the institution became the State University of New Jersey in 1945. The initial reluctance of the trustees (still acting as a private corporate body) to cede control of certain business affairs to the state government for direction and oversight caused the state to establish the Board of governors in 1956. Today, the board of governors maintains much of the corporate control of the university.

The members of the board of trustees are voted upon by different constituencies or appointed. &quot;Two faculty and two students are elected by the University Senate as nonvoting representatives. The 59 voting members are chosen in the following way as mandated by state law: 20 charter members (of whom at least three shall be women), 16 alumni members nominated by the nominating committee of the board of trustees, and five public members appointed by the governor of the state with confirmation by the New Jersey Senate.

===Affiliations===

* Association of American Universities
* Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools
* Big Ten Academic Alliance
* Universities Research Association
* Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
* Big Ten Conference

==Locations and divisions==

Rutgers University has three campuses in New Jersey. The New Brunswick Campus, located in New Brunswick and adjacent Piscataway, is the largest campus of the university. The Newark Campus in Newark and the Camden Campus in Camden are located in the northern and southern parts of the state, respectively. Combined, these campuses comprise 33 degree-granting schools and colleges, offering undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels of study. The university is centrally administered from New Brunswick, although chancellors at the Newark and Camden campuses hold significant autonomy for some academic issues.

===Rutgers–New Brunswick===
The New Brunswick Campus (or Rutgers–New Brunswick) is the largest campus and the site of the original Rutgers College. Spread across six municipalities in Middlesex County, New Jersey, it lies chiefly in the City of New Brunswick and adjacent Piscataway and is composed of five smaller campuses and a few buildings in downtown New Brunswick. The historic College Avenue Campus is close to downtown New Brunswick and includes the seat of the university, Old Queens and other nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century buildings that constitute the Queens Campus and Voorhees Mall. Its proximity to New Brunswick&#x27;s train station and numerous food vendors located downtown, in addition to a large amount of off-campus housing and fraternity and sorority houses, make this a popular weekend destination.

Across the city, Douglass Campus and Cook Campus are intertwined and often referred to as the Cook/Douglass Campus. Cook Campus has extensive farms and woods that reach North Brunswick and East Brunswick. Separated by the Raritan River is Busch Campus, in Piscataway, and Livingston Campus, also mainly in Piscataway but including remote sections of land extending into Edison and Highland Park. The Busch Campus is noted as the home of Rutgers&#x27; highly ranked Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, as well as the golf course and football stadium. The Livingston campus is home to Jersey Mike&#x27;s Arena (formerly the Rutgers Athletic Center [RAC]), a trapezoidal building that is home to many sports teams, notably the men&#x27;s basketball team. Additionally, this campus has undergone many renovations and is regarded as the most &quot;modern&quot; campus. The campus entrance is delineated by the all-glass Rutgers Business School building known as &quot;100 Rock&quot; (because of the building&#x27;s Piscataway address, 100 Rockafeller Road). Rutgers Campus Buses transport students between the various campuses.

As of 2010, the New Brunswick-Piscataway campuses include 19 undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including the School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Communication and Information, the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy, the School of Engineering, the School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, the Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, the Graduate School, the Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology, the Graduate School of Education, the School of Management and Labor Relations, Mason Gross School of the Arts, the College of Nursing, the Rutgers Business School and the School of Social Work. , 40,434 students (31,593 undergraduates and 8,841 graduate students) were enrolled at the New Brunswick-Piscataway campus. The New Brunswick-Piscataway campus includes a Business School building on the Livingston Campus.

===Rutgers–Newark===
The Newark Campus (or Rutgers–Newark) consists of eight undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including Newark College of Arts and Sciences, University College, School of Criminal Justice, Graduate School, School of Nursing, School of Public Affairs and Administration, Rutgers Business School and the Newark location of the Rutgers Law School. , 7,666 undergraduates and 4,345 graduate students (total 12,011) are enrolled at the Newark campus. Originally the University of Newark, the campus was renamed and rebranded as Rutgers–Newark in 1945.

===Rutgers–Camden===

The Camden Campus (or Rutgers–Camden) consists of six undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including Camden College of Arts and Sciences, University College, Graduate School, Rutgers School of Business–Camden, Rutgers School of Nursing–Camden, and the Camden location of the Rutgers Law School. The schools are located in the Cooper&#x27;s Grant and Central Waterfront neighborhoods of Camden. , 4,708 undergraduates and 1,635 graduate students (total 6,343) are enrolled at the Camden campus.

The campus was founded as the College of South Jersey and South Jersey Law School in the 1920s, and became part of Rutgers in 1950.

===Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences===

The Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences (RBHS) is a division of the university that serves as an umbrella organization for schools, centers, and institutes from Rutgers University and the old University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. The organization was incorporated into the university following the 2013 merger of Rutgers and UMDNJ. While its various facilities are spread across several locations statewide, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences is considered a &quot;campus&quot; for certain organizational purposes, such as the appointment of a separate chancellor. In July 2023, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences renamed to Rutgers Health.

RBHS comprises nine schools and other research centers and institutes including; Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, New Jersey Medical School, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, School of Nursing, School of Dental Medicine, School of Health Related Professions, the School of Public Health, Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Environmental and the Occupational Health Sciences Institute, Brain Health Institute, and the Institute for Health, Health Care Policy, and Aging Research. The programs are offered at different location sites across New Jersey in New Brunswick, Newark, Blackwood, Stratford and Scotch Plains, New Jersey.

===Rutgers-Online===
As of 2015, Rutgers offered a total of 11 fully online degree programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Online degree programs at Rutgers must meet the same academic expectations, in terms of both teaching and learning outcomes, as traditional on-campus programs. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a majority of courses were conducted through remote instruction.

===Off-campus===
Rutgers offers classes at several off-campus sites in affiliation with community colleges and other state colleges throughout New Jersey. These partnerships are designed to enable students to achieve a seamless transfer to Rutgers and to take all of their Rutgers classes in a select number of the most popular majors at the community college campus. The collaborative effort provides access to Rutgers faculty teaching Rutgers courses, at a convenient location, but it is also one of the few programs that cater exclusively to the non-traditional student population. Rutgers&#x27; current partners include Atlantic Cape, Brookdale, Mercer, Morris, Camden, and Raritan Valley community colleges.

==Academics==

The university offers more than 100 distinct bachelor, 100 masters, and 80 doctoral and professional degree programs across 175 academic departments, 29 degree-granting schools, and colleges, 16 of which offer graduate programs of study.

It is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools (1921), and in 1989, became a member of the Association of American Universities, an organization of the 62 leading research universities in North America. Rutgers–New Brunswick is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot;. Rutgers–Newark and Rutgers–Camden are classified by the same organization as &quot;R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity&quot;.

===Admissions===

==== Undergraduate ====

&quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; considers the New Brunswick campus of Rutgers University to be a &quot;more selective&quot; school in terms of the rigor of its admissions processes. For the Class of 2025 (enrolling fall 2021), the New Brunswick campus received 43,161 applications and accepted 29,419 (68.2%). The number enrolling was 7,105; the yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who enroll) was 24.2%. The freshman retention rate is 94%, with 83.8% going on to graduate within six years.

Of the 45% of the incoming freshman class who submitted SAT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite scores were 1240-1470. Of the 7% of enrolled freshmen in 2021 who submitted ACT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite score was between 27 and 33.

Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey is a college-sponsor of the National Merit Scholarship Program and sponsored 21 Merit Scholarship awards in 2020. In the 2020–2021 academic year, 29 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.

===Financial aid===

As a state university, Rutgers charges two separate rates for tuition and fees depending on an enrolled student&#x27;s residency. The &quot;Office of Institutional Research and Academic Planning&quot; estimates that costs in-state students of attending Rutgers would amount to $25,566 for an undergraduate living on-campus and $30,069 for a graduate student. For an out-of-state student, the costs rise to $38,228 and $39,069 respectively. As of the 2024–2025 academic school year, the estimated cost of tuition for in-state students is $14,222, $33,734 for out-of-state students, and $15,0332 for Room and Board.

In the 2010–2011 academic year, undergraduate students at Rutgers, through a combination of federal (53.5%), state (23.6%), university (18.1%), and private (4.8%) scholarships, loans, and grants, received $492,260,845 of financial aid. 81.4% of all undergraduates, or 34,473 students, received some form of financial aid. During the same period, graduate students, through a combination of federal (61.9%), state (1.8%), university (34.5%), and private (1.9%) scholarships, loans, and grants received $182,384,256 of financial aid. 81.5% of all graduate students, or 11,852 students received some form of financial aid.

Alongside Pell and TAG grant which are well-known federal and state aids, Rutgers provides EOF grant, merit based scholarships such as SAS Excellence Award, Scarlet Guarantee, and many other forms of aid. Rutgers is an active participant of the EOF program giving financially or academically disadvantaged students resources to success. Furthermore, the Scarlet Guarantee covers any tuition cost for students whose aid might not if the student&#x27;s household income is below a certain amount. Apart from need based aid, Rutgers University have a list of Scholarships which first-time or continuing students can apply to based upon GPA and/or extra-curriculum involvement. The University also offers multiple opportunities for students to earn while in college through Federal Work Study, on-campus employment, and internships. 

In 2007, the university&#x27;s Office for Enrollment Management launched the Rutgers Future Scholars Program as an initiative to help 7th graders from low-income families achieve academic success and be the first in their families to go to college. The program targets students from the school systems of Rutgers&#x27;s hometowns, New Brunswick/Piscataway, Newark, and Camden. Once admitted, the students receive mentoring and college prep courses each summer leading up to the year of their college applications. If admitted to the university, they are given a full tuition scholarship for four years of undergraduate study. The program has been very successful and currently admits as many as 200 new 7th graders each year with most of the original 200 now attending the university as undergraduates.

===Academic Support===

Rutgers University have a variety of resources to help students succeed academically. Rutgers offers academic counselling to help students plan a study schedule, plan a schedule for the semester, decide their major, and complete their major requirements in time. The Learning Centers at Rutgers provide Peer Tutoring and Study Groups where students can work with or receive help from others who are taking or have taken the same courses. Certain courses provide extra tutoring like the Computer Science program offer tutoring from RUCATS(Rutgers Computing Academic Tutoring for Students). Students can use resources such as the Penji app to find available academic support. Rutgers offers these academic support resources motioned above for free to its students. 
===Rankings===

In the 2025 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rankings of universities in the United States, the New Brunswick campus of Rutgers is tied for 41st among national universities overall and ranked tied for 15th among public universities. &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked the Camden campus 127th among national universities, and 18th in top performers for social mobility. The same ranking placed Rutgers-New Brunswick in the top 25 among all U.S. universities for the following graduate school programs: Library Science (7th), English (15th), Fine Arts (23rd), History (21st) with the subspecialties of Women&#x27;s History and African-American History both ranked 1st, Social Work (17th), and Mathematics (22nd).

&quot;U.S. News&quot; ranked Rutgers-Camden 58th for graduate nursing programs, and 83rd among graduate public policy programs, and 49th for top public universities. Rutgers University-New Brunswick has consistently ranked 2nd for Philosophy according the QS World University Rankings and the Philosophy Gourmet Report. QS ranks Rutgers 42nd nationally.

The Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) ranks Rutgers-New Brunswick 29th nationally and 50th globally as of 2020–2021.
QS Top Universities ranked Rutgers-New Brunswick 264 in the world in 2022.

&quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranking placed Rutgers-New Brunswick 130th in Best Global Universities, 15th in public universities in the US (2025), 47th in Agricultural Sciences, 45th in Arts and Humanities (tie), 61st in Mathematics, 66th in Cell Biology, 63rd in Economics and Business, 99th in Computer Science, 37th in Pharmacology and Toxicology, and 23rd in Food Science and Technology. The RBS Master of Quantitative Finance (M.Q.F.) program, and the Master of Mathematical Finance (M.S.M.F) program in the department of mathematics, are ranked 7th in the United States.
Under the New Jersey Medical and Health Sciences Education Restructuring Act of 2012, the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey was dissolved. Most of its schools, including Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Jersey Medical School, and New Jersey Dental School, were merged into the new Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, formed in 2013.

===Libraries===

The Rutgers University Libraries (RUL) system consists of twenty-six libraries, centers and reading rooms located on the university&#x27;s four campuses. Housing a collection that includes 4,383,848 volumes (print and electronic), 4,605,896 microforms, and an array of electronic indexes and abstracts, full-text electronic journals, and research guides, Rutgers University Libraries ranks among the nation&#x27;s top research libraries. The American Library Association ranks the Rutgers University Library system as the 44th-largest library in the United States in terms of volumes held.

The Archibald S. Alexander Library in New Brunswick, known to many students as &quot;Club Alex&quot;, is the oldest and the largest library of the university, and houses an extensive humanities and social science collection. It also supports the work of faculty and staff at four professional schools: the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy, the Graduate School of Education, the Graduate School of Social Work, and the School of Communication and Information. Alexander Library is also a Federal Depository Library, maintaining a large collection of government documents, which contains United States, New Jersey, foreign, and international government publications. The Paul Robeson Library in Camden, serves Rutgers affiliates as well as the Camden campuses of Rowan University and Camden County College with a broad collection of volumes, and also houses an archive including the papers of poet Nick Virgilio.

The Dana Library is the main research library for the Newark campus and is also home to the Institute of Jazz Studies, one of the world&#x27;s largest collections of jazz archives and research. The &quot;Library of Science and Medicine&quot; (LSM) on the Busch Campus in Piscataway houses the university&#x27;s collection in behavioral, biological, earth, and pharmaceutical sciences and engineering. LSM also serves as a designated depository library for government publications regarding science, and owns a U.S. patent collection and patent search facility. It was officially established as the Library of Science and Medicine in July 1964 although the beginning of the development of a library for science started in 1962. The current character of LSM is a university science library also serving a medical school.

On the New Brunswick-Piscataway campus, in addition to Alexander Library, many individual disciplines have their libraries, including art history, Chemistry, mathematics, music and physics. &quot;Special Collections and University Archives&quot; houses the Sinclair New Jersey Collection, manuscript collection, and rare book collection, as well as the university archives. Although located in the Alexander Library building, special collections and University Archives comprises a distinct unit unto itself. Also located within the Alexander Library is the &quot;East Asian Library&quot; which holds a sizable collection of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean monographs and periodicals. There are nine major libraries at the Rutgers- New Brunswick location which are the Alexander Library, Art Library, Carr Library, Chang Library, Douglass Library, Library of Science and Medicine, Math and Physics Library, School of Management and Labor Relations Library, and Special Collections &amp; University Archives Library. Both the Newark and Camden campuses have law libraries. 

===Museums and collections===

Rutgers oversees several museums and collections that are open to the public.
* Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, on the College Avenue Campus maintains a collection of over 60,000 works of art, focusing on Russian and Soviet art, French 19th-century art and American 19th- and 20th-century art with a concentration on early-20th-century and contemporary prints.
* Rutgers University Geology Museum in Geology Hall features exhibits on geology and anthropology, with an emphasis on the natural history of New Jersey. The largest exhibits include a dinosaur trackway from Towaco, New Jersey; a mastodon from Salem County; and a Ptolemaic era Egyptian mummy.
* Rutgers Gardens, which features of horticultural, display, and botanical gardens, as well as arboretums.
* &quot;Stedman Art Gallery&quot; on the Camden campus is a collection of local, national, and international artwork and exhibits as part of the Rutgers Camden Center for the Arts.
* &quot;Edison Papers&quot; is a collection of roughly 5 million documents related to Thomas Alva Edison. Nearly 175,000 of these documents are digitized and available to be viewed through their website.

Rutgers&#x27; facilities across the four campuses include a golf course, botanical gardens, working agricultural, horse, dairy, and sustainable farms, a creamery, an ecological preserve with multiple use trails, television and radio studios, theaters, museums, athletic facilities, helipads and a makerspace. The New Jersey Museum of Agriculture, established in 1984 in a facility in North Brunswick, closed in 2011.

==Research==
Rutgers is home to the Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science, also known as RUCCS. This research center hosts researchers in psychology, linguistics, computer science, philosophy, electrical engineering, and anthropology.

It was at Rutgers that Selman Waksman discovered several antibiotics, including actinomycin, clavacin, streptothricin, grisein, neomycin, fradicin, candicidin, candidin, and others. Waksman, along with graduate student Albert Schatz, discovered streptomycin—a versatile antibiotic that was to be the first applied to cure tuberculosis. For this discovery, Waksman received the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1952.

Rutgers developed water-soluble sustained release polymers, tetraploids, robotic hands, artificial bovine insemination, and the ceramic tiles for the heat shield on the Space Shuttle. In health-related field, Rutgers has the Environmental &amp; Occupational Health Science Institute (EOHSI).

Rutgers is also home to the RCSB Protein Data bank, &#x27;an information portal to Biological Macromolecular Structures&#x27; cohosted with the San Diego Supercomputer Center. This database is the authoritative research tool for bioinformaticists using protein primary, secondary and tertiary structures worldwide.&#x27;

Rutgers is home to the Rutgers Cooperative Research &amp; Extension office, which is run by the Agricultural and Experiment Station with the support of the local government. The institution provides research &amp; education to the local farming and agro-industrial community in 19 of the 21 counties of the state and educational outreach programs offered through the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Office of Continuing Professional Education.
Rutgers University Cell and DNA Repository (RUCDR) is the largest university-based repository in the world and has received awards worth more than $57.8 million from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). One will fund genetic studies of mental disorders and the other will support investigations into the causes of digestive, liver, and kidney diseases, and diabetes.

==Student life==
===Residential life===

Rutgers University offers a variety of housing options. On the New Brunswick-Piscataway campus, students are given the option of on-campus housing in both traditional dorms or apartments. Freshman students, however, are allowed only a dorm, while upperclassmen have a wider array of on-campus housing choices, like apartments, but must apply for on-campus housing through the Rutgers online lottery process. Most students seeking on-campus housing will be accommodated with a space and sophomores are guaranteed housing. Many Rutgers students opt to rent apartments or houses off-campus within the city of New Brunswick. Similar setups are to be found in Rutgers–Newark and Rutgers–Camden.

Rutgers University&#x27;s three campuses are in Newark, Camden, and New Brunswick.

In 2008, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Rutgers University–Newark the most diverse university campus in the United States. Because the area of Rutgers&#x27; New Brunswick-Piscataway campus—which is composed of several constituent colleges and professional schools—is sprawled across six municipalities, the individual campuses are connected by an inter-campus bus system. The Rutgers bus system is the second-largest bus service in New Jersey, transporting six million passengers on an annual basis.

===Security and emergency services===
Services provided by the university include Rutgers Police, Emergency Medical Services, an emergency management office, bus and shuttle service, inter- and intra-campus mail, and occupational and environmental health and safety.

===Student organizations and activities===
Rutgers University has a student government that controls funding to student groups. The student government is made up of campus councils and professional school councils. Those councils then send representatives to the student assembly as well as the university senate. An example of these campus councils is the University College Council, which represents adult, part-time, and military veteran students.

Rutgers hosts over 700 student organizations; among the first student groups was the first college newspaper in the United States. &quot;The Political Intelligencer and New Jersey Adviser&quot; began publication at Queen&#x27;s College in 1783, and ceased operation in 1785. Continuing this tradition is the university&#x27;s current college newspaper, &quot;The Daily Targum&quot;, established in 1869, which is the second-oldest college newspaper published in the United States, after &quot;The Dartmouth&quot; (1843). Both poet Joyce Kilmer and economist Milton Friedman served as editors. Also included are &quot;The Medium&quot;, a weekly satirical newspaper billed as Rutgers Entertainment Weekly, &quot;Rutgers Centurion&quot;, a conservative newspaper, the &quot;Rutgers University Glee Club&quot;, a male choral singing group established in 1872 (among the oldest in the country). Rutgers a cappella groups have routinely placed well in the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella, including in 2010 when The OrphanSporks placed second in the semifinals. Governed by the Rutgers University Student Assembly and funded by student fees, students can organize groups for practically any political ideology or issue, ethnic or religious affiliation, academic subject, activity or hobby.

Rutgers University is home to chapters of many Greek organizations, and a significant percentage of the undergraduate student body is active in Greek life. Several fraternities and sororities maintain houses for their chapters in the area of Union Street (known familiarly as &quot;Frat Row&quot;) in New Brunswick, within blocks of Rutgers&#x27; College Avenue Campus. Chapters of Zeta Psi and Delta Phi were organized at Rutgers as early as 1845. The Alpha Rho chapter of Chi Psi fraternity, founded at Rutgers College in 1879, was the first fraternity at Rutgers to own a fraternity house, purchased in 1887 and still in use by the fraternity today. There are over fifty fraternities and sororities on the New Brunswick-Piscataway campus, ranging from traditional to historically African-American, Hispanic, Multicultural, and Asian interest organizations. The New Brunswick campus of Rutgers University has a chapter of the only active co-ed pre-medical fraternity, Phi Delta Epsilon, . Most Greek organizations are governed by the &quot;Office of Fraternity and Sorority Affairs,&quot; but twelve organizations maintain chapters in New Brunswick without sanction by the university&#x27;s administration.

It is Rutgers&#x27;s tradition for students to participate in one of the largest student-run philanthropic events in New Jersey, the Embrace Kids Foundation for children with cancer and blood disorders. The annual Dance Marathon involves hundreds of dancers and volunteers. In 2015, the marathon collected $692,046.

Rutgers has five vocal ensembles: Voorhees Choir (the New Brunswick campus&#x27;s women&#x27;s ensemble), Kirkpatrick Choir (the university&#x27;s most selective coed ensemble), Glee Club (New Brunswick&#x27;s most esteemed tenor-bass ensemble), University Choir (a larger mixed choir in New Brunswick), and the Rutgers Concert Choir (Camden&#x27;s vocal ensemble of faculty and students).

In 2016, the Iota Psi chapter of Sigma Chi raised a national Greek record of $300,007 for the Children&#x27;s Miracle Network with the help of seven sororities: Alpha Gamma Delta, Delta Gamma, Gamma Phi Beta, Phi Sigma Sigma, Sigma Delta Tau, Sigma Kappa, and Zeta Tau Alpha.

Aside from Rutgers being recognized for its greek organizations, it is also well-known for its Study Abroad programs. The University welcomes around 9,000 international students from 125 countries while also offering 160 Study Abroad programs to 50 countries. 

===Traditions===

The Grease Trucks are a group of truck-based food vendors located at various locations on the New Brunswick campus. They serve traditional grill fare, and Middle-Eastern specialties, and are especially well known for serving &quot;Fat Sandwiches,&quot; a sub roll containing various ingredients such as cheesesteaks, burgers, pork rolls, chicken fingers, French fries, mozzarella sticks, eggs, bacon, gyro meat, and marinara sauce. The Rutgers Grease Trucks were located in a designated lot for nearly two decades until August 2013. Truck owners were forced to relocate due to the construction of an $84-million student apartment complex. Three trucks remain on the College Avenue Campus, while the remaining two were moved to the Cook/Douglass Campus.

The Dance Marathon is a student-run organization that consists of a year-long series of fundraisers and culminates with the annual Marathon on April 5–6 in the College Avenue Gym. At the Marathon over 400 dancers pledge to raise funds and remain standing for 32 hours without sleeping. The &#x27;Dancers&#x27;, along with over 500 volunteers and countless visitors, are entertained by live bands, comedians, prize giveaways, games, sports, a mechanical bull, computer and internet access, various theme hours, and much more. Rutgers has held this tradition since 1999 and to date has raised more than $1.3 million for the Embrace Kids Foundation. In the seventies, the Dance Marathon raised funds for the American Cancer Society. In the Eighties, it was the Rutgers Cancer Research Association. In the two decades starting in 1998, the event had raised $5.8 million for the Embrace Kids Foundation.

Rutgers Day is an annual festival established in 1906.

===Mottos, colors and mascots===
Rutgers University&#x27;s motto is a modification of Utrecht University&#x27;s motto gleaned from a literal Latin Bible translation of Malachi 4:2 and highlights the historic connection of these two universities.

Rutgers University&#x27;s only school color is scarlet. Students had sought to make orange the school color, citing Rutgers&#x27; Dutch heritage and about the Prince of Orange. The Rutgers student publication &quot;Targum&quot; (which would become the &quot;Daily Targum&quot;) proposed that scarlet be adopted in May 1869, claiming that it was a striking color and because the scarlet ribbon was easily obtained. During the first intercollegiate football game with Princeton on November 6, 1869, the players from Rutgers wore scarlet-colored turbans and handkerchiefs to distinguish them as a team from the Princeton players. The board of trustees officially made scarlet the school color in 1900.

In its early days, Rutgers athletes were known informally as &quot;The Scarlet&quot; after the school color, or as &quot;Queensmen&quot; after the institution&#x27;s first name, Queen&#x27;s College. In 1925, the mascot was changed to Chanticleer, a fighting rooster from the medieval fable &quot;Reynard the Fox&quot; (&quot;Le Roman de Renart&quot;) which was used by Geoffrey Chaucer in the &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;. At the time, the student humor magazine at Rutgers was called &quot;Chanticleer&quot;, and one of its early arts editors, Ozzie Nelson (later of &quot;The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet&quot; fame) was quarterback of the Rutgers team from 1924 to 1926. The Chanticleer mascot was unveiled at a football game against Lafayette College, in which Lafayette was also introducing a new mascot, a leopard. However, the choice of Chanticleer as a mascot was often the subject of ridicule because of its association with &quot;being chicken.&quot; In 1955, the mascot was changed to the Scarlet Knight after a campus-wide election, beating out other contenders such as &quot;Queensmen,&quot; the &quot;Scarlet,&quot; the &quot;Red Lions,&quot; the &quot;Redmen&quot; and the &quot;Flying Dutchmen.&quot; Earlier proposed nicknames included &quot;Pioneers&quot; and &quot;Cannoneers.&quot; When Harvey Harman, then coach of the football team was asked why he supported changing the Rutgers mascot, he was quoted as saying, &quot;Awnish You can call it the Chanticleer, you can call it a fighting cock, you can call it any damn thing you want, but everybody knows it&#x27;s a chicken.&quot; Harman later is said to have bought the first &quot;Scarlet Knight&quot; mascot costume for the 1955 season, which was to be his final season as football coach at Rutgers. Today, the Scarlet Knight costumed mascot appearing at Rutgers football and basketball games and other campus events is called &quot;Sir Henry&quot;.

In later years the Camden and Newark campuses adopted their mascots, the Scarlet Raptor (Camden) and the Scarlet Raider (Newark).

==Athletics==



The Rutgers–Camden athletic teams are called the Scarlet Raptors. The Rutgers–Newark athletic teams are called the Scarlet Raiders. The Scarlet Raiders and the Scarlet Raptors both compete within NCAA Division III.

Rutgers was among the first American institutions to engage in intercollegiate athletics, and participated in a small circle of schools that included Yale University, Columbia University, and long-time rival, Princeton University (then called the College of New Jersey). The four schools met at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in Manhattan on October 19, 1873, to establish a set of rules governing their intercollegiate competition, and particularly to codify the new game of football. Although invited, Harvard chose not to attend. In the early years of intercollegiate athletics, the schools that participated in these athletic events were located solely in the American Northeast and by the turn of the 20th century, colleges and universities across the United States began to participate.

Rutgers University is referred to as &quot;the birthplace of college football&quot; as the first intercollegiate football game was held on College Field between Rutgers and Princeton on November 6, 1869, in New Brunswick, New Jersey, on a plot of ground behind where the present-day College Avenue Gymnasium now stands. Rutgers won the game, with a score of 6 runs to Princeton&#x27;s 4. A Rutgers-Princeton rivalry still exists today. According to Parke H. Davis, the 1869 Rutgers football team shared the national title with Princeton. (This game is believed to have been closer to soccer than to modern American football.)

In 1864, rowing became the first organized sport at Rutgers. Six-mile races were held on the Raritan River among six-oared boats. In 1870, Rutgers held its first intercollegiate competition, against the Lawrence Scientific School of Harvard, the then top-ranked amateur crew of the time. Since its start in 1864, Rutgers has built a strong crew program consisting of heavyweight and lightweight men. Women&#x27;s crew was added to the program in 1974. Financial support of the men&#x27;s crew program was discontinued by the university in 2006, though the crew continues to compete (funded entirely by alumni and private support) at a high level in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges conference.

The first intercollegiate athletic event at Rutgers was a baseball game on May 2, 1866, against Princeton in which they suffered a 40–2 loss.

Beginning in 1866, Rutgers was unaffiliated with any formal athletic conference and thus classified as &quot;independent&quot; for eighty years. From 1946 to 1951, the university was a member of the Middle Three Conference, and from 1958 to 1961, was a member of the Middle Atlantic Conference. In 1978, the Rutgers Scarlet Knights became a member of the Atlantic 10 conference. In 1991, it joined the Big East Conference for football. All sports programs at Rutgers New Brunswick subsequently became affiliated with the Big East in 1995.

The first intercollegiate competition in Ultimate Frisbee was held between students from Rutgers and Princeton on November 6, 1972, to mark the one hundred third anniversary of the first intercollegiate football game. Rutgers won 29–27. The Rutgers Scarlet Knights men&#x27;s Basketball Team was among the &quot;Final Four&quot; and ended the 1976 season ranked fourth in the United States, after an 86–70 loss against the University of Michigan in the semifinals, and a 106–92 loss against UCLA in the consolation round of the 1976 NCAA Men&#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament.

The Rutgers Scarlet Knights are members of the Big Ten Conference, a collegiate athletic conference consisting of 14 colleges and universities from the Midwestern and East Coast regions of the United States. The Big Ten Conference is a member of the Bowl Championship Series. Rutgers currently fields 27 intercollegiate sports programs and is a Division I school as sanctioned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association. Rutgers fields thirty teams in NCAA Division I sanctioned sports, including football, baseball, basketball, crew, cross country, fencing, field hockey, golf, gymnastics, lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis, track and field, swimming and diving, wrestling, and volleyball.

The Scarlet Knights have won five Big East Conference tournament titles: men&#x27;s soccer (1997), men&#x27;s track &amp; field (2005), baseball (2000, 2007), and women&#x27;s basketball (2007). Several other teams have won regular season titles but failed to win the conference&#x27;s championship tournament.

Although the Rutgers Scarlet Knights&#x27; football team had losing seasons in 2016 and 2015 (won-lost records of 2–10 and 4–8, respectively) it achieved success previously, being invited to the Insight Bowl on December 27, 2005, in which they lost 45 to 40 against Arizona State University. This was Rutgers&#x27; first bowl appearance since the December 16, 1978, loss against Arizona State, 34–18, at the Garden State Bowl. The 2006 football season also saw Rutgers being ranked within the Top 25 teams in major college football polls. After the November 9, 2006, victory over the 3rd ranked, undefeated Louisville Cardinals, Rutgers jumped up to seventh in the AP Poll, eighth in the USA Today/Coaches poll, seventh in the Harris Interactive Poll, and sixth in the Bowl Championship Series rankings. These were Rutgers&#x27; highest rankings in the football polls since they were ranked fifteenth in 1961. Rutgers ended the season 11–2 after winning the inaugural Texas Bowl on December 28, 2006, defeating the Wildcats of Kansas State University by a score of 37–10 and finishing the season ranked twelfth in the final AP poll of sportswriters, the team&#x27;s highest season-ending ranking.

Under Head Coach C. Vivian Stringer, the women&#x27;s basketball program is among the elite programs in the country as they remain consistently ranked in the Top 25, consistently making the NCAA Women&#x27;s Championship Tournament, and sometimes winning the Big East regular season championship. In 2006–2007, the Scarlet Knights won their first-ever Big East Conference Tournament Championship. The program has been highly competitive since its inception, winning the 1982 AIAW National Championship, reaching the 2000 Final Four, and reaching the Final Four and national championship game in 2007.

The Scarlet Knights maintain athletic rivalries with other collegiate institutions. The university has historic rivalries with Princeton University, Columbia University (formerly &quot;King&#x27;s College&quot;), Lafayette College, Lehigh University, and New York University originating from the early days of college football. While they maintain this rivalry in other sports, neither of them has met in football since 1980. Rutgers has a basketball rivalry with Seton Hall University. Penn State and the University of Maryland are the two schools with which Rutgers was developing rivalries within the Big Ten.

In the fall of 2007, six Rutgers New Brunswick/Piscataway NCAA Division I sports were discontinued by the university, including men&#x27;s swimming and diving, men&#x27;s heavyweight and lightweight crew, men&#x27;s tennis, and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s fencing. Some continued as club teams, while some were disbanded completely. The university claims this change was due to budget cuts, while others claim it was a politically motivated move designed to protest state funding changes.

In November 2012, the Rutgers Scarlet Knights, along with Louisville, Connecticut, and Cincinnati left the Big East to form the American Athletic Conference. Syracuse and Pittsburgh have decided to enter the Atlantic Coast Conference, while West Virginia entered the Big 12 Conference, taking effect as of the 2012–2013 season. Rutgers decided to leave American for the Big Ten Conference, effective July 1, 2014. Rutgers surpassed Penn State as the Big Ten&#x27;s easternmost school.

On March 23, 2019, Nick Suriano and Anthony Ashnault won national titles for Rutgers Wrestling and provided Rutgers with their first 2 NCAA wrestling championships.

In 2021, the Rutgers men&#x27;s basketball team was selected to participate in the NCAA tournament. This marked the program&#x27;s first appearance in the tournament since 1991 and ending a 30-year-long streak that made the school the longest to have been excluded among major collegiate basketball programs.

In 2022, Rutgers men&#x27;s lacrosse team was selected to participate in the NCAA Division I tournament. They defeated Harvard and the University of Pennsylvania to reach their first-ever Final Four. Their season ended with a 17–10 loss to Cornell.

==Notable people==
===Alumni===


At Queen&#x27;s College&#x27;s first commencement in 1774, one graduate, Matthew Leydt, received his baccalaureate degree in a brief ceremony.

Rutgers alumni have been influential in many fields. Singer, athlete, attorney, and Civil Rights Movement activist Paul Robeson graduated in 1919 and is the namesake of the Paul Robeson Cultural Center on the Busch Campus, the Paul Robeson Library on the Camden Campus, and the Campus Center on the Newark Campus. Among the first students enrolled at Rutgers (when it was &quot;Queen&#x27;s College&quot;), Simeon De Witt (A.B. 1776) became the Surveyor-General for the Continental Army (1776–1783) during the American Revolution and classmate James Schureman (A.B. 1775), served in the Continental Congress and as a United States senator. Two alumni have been awarded Nobel prizes— Milton Friedman (A.B. 1932) in economics, and Selman A. Waksman (B.Sc. 1915, M.Sc.1916) in Medicine. Poet Robert Pinsky (B.A. 1962) was appointed the nation&#x27;s poet laureate and novelist Junot Díaz (B.A. 1992) awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 2008.

Seven alumni have served as New Jersey governor; two as president of Rutgers; Garret A. Hobart (A.B. 1863) as Vice President of the United States; Louis Freeh (B.A. 1971, J.D. 1974) as director of the FBI; Frederick T. Frelinghuysen (A.B. 1836) served a U.S. Senator and as U.S. Secretary of State. Alumnus Joseph P. Bradley (A.B. 1836) served for two decades as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States and cast the tie-breaking vote on the bipartisan commission that decided the contested American presidential election in 1876. Diplomat Maria Fernanda Espinosa served as President of the United Nations General Assembly. Senators Elizabeth Warren (JD 1976) and Bob Menendez (JD 1979) both attended Rutgers Law School. Some alumni became activists such as Jack Babuscio (MHist.).

In business, alumni include: Bernard Marcus (B.S. 1951), founder of hardware retail company Home Depot; Bill Rasmussen (MBA 1960), founder of ESPN; Rana Kapoor (founder of Yes Bank); Dev Ittycheria (B.S 1990) CEO of MongoDB Inc.; Greg Brown, CEO of Motorola Solutions; and Duncan MacMillan (B.S. 1966), co-founder of financial data and media company Bloomberg L.P. In science and technology, alumni include: Peter C. Schultz (B.S. 1967), co-inventor of fiber optics; molecular geneticist Angela Christiano (Ph.D. 1991); geneticist Stanley N. Cohen (B.Sc. 1956) who pioneered in the field of gene splicing; physician Howard Krein; and Louis Gluck (B.S. 1948) the &quot;father of neonatology&quot;.

Alumni prominent in entertainment include actor James Gandolfini (B.A. 1983) (&quot;The Sopranos&quot;); chef Mario Batali (B.A. 1982); David Stern (B.A. 1963), former commissioner of the National Basketball Association; Henry Selick, film director (Disney&#x27;s &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot;); actor Michael Sorvino; Holly Black; actor Sebastian Stan (&quot;Captain America: The Winter Soldier&quot;); cartoon character Mr Magoo; actress Jessica Darrow (&quot;Encanto&quot;); voice actor John DiMaggio (&quot;Futurama&quot;, &quot;Adventure Time&quot;); guitarist Frank Iero (My Chemical Romance), actor Roy Scheider (&quot;Jaws&quot;); and actress Calista Flockhart (&quot;Ally McBeal&quot;).

===Faculty===
Ruth Bader Ginsburg served as a professor at Rutgers Law School for 9 years from 1963-1972 and later went on to serve as an associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. During his 20-year tenure at Rutgers, David Levering Lewis, a former history professor, was twice awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography (1994 and 2001) for both volumes of his biography of W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963) and was also the winner of the Bancroft Prize and the Francis Parkman Prize. Poet Gregory Pardlo won the 2015 Pulitzer Prize for Poetry, he is both an alumnus and faculty member at the Camden campus. Michael R. Douglas, a prominent string theorist and the director of the New High Energy Theory Center and winner of the Sackler Prize in theoretical physics in 2000. Family Research Council director Jennifer Bauwens taught in the Rutgers School of Social Work. Avery Brooks, a Rutgers graduate, taught at Mason Gross School of the Arts. Former professor Ruth Chang is an expert in decision-making and a fellow at Oxford. Literature scholar Ankhi Mukherjee now at University of Oxford won the Rose Mary Crawshay prize. Former English professor at Rutgers-Newark Jayne Anne Phillips won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 2024. Jerry Fodor, Zenon Pylyshyn, Stephen Stich and Frances Egan were awarded the Jean Nicod Prize in philosophy and cognitive science. Endre Szemerédi was awarded the Abel Prize in 2012. Mario Szegedy was awarded the Gödel Prize twice, in 2001 and 2005.

Many other members of the faculty have received the highest awards in their fields, including Guggenheim and MacArthur &quot;Genius Award&quot; fellowships, Pulitzer Prize winners, National Medal of Science and National Medal of Technology recipients, a National Endowment for the Arts &quot;Jazz Master,&quot; amongst others. , 37 science, engineering, and medical faculty are members of the four &quot;National Academies&quot;—the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, the Institute of Medicine, and the National Research Council.

==See also==
* 2011 Rutgers tuition protests
* The 2012 Project
* List of American state universities
* List of Rutgers University people
* List of Rutgers University presidents
* List of colleges and universities in New Jersey

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

==Bibliography==

* H.M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T.N. Bhat, H. Weissig, I.N. Shindyalov, P.E. Bourne: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Research, 28, pp. 235–242 (2000).
* Demarest, William Henry Steele. &quot;History of Rutgers College: 1776–1924.&quot; (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers College, 1924).
* &quot;History of Rutgers College: or an account of the union of Rutgers College, and the Theological Seminary of the General Synod of the Reformed Dutch Church. Prepared and published at the request of several trustees of the College, by a trustee.&quot; (New York: Anderson &amp; Smith, 1833).
* Lukac, George J. (ed.), &quot;Aloud to Alma Mater.&quot; (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1966), 70–73.
* McCormick, Richard P. &quot;Rutgers: a Bicentennial History&quot;. (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1966). .
* Schmidt, George P. &quot;Princeton, and Rutgers: The Two Colonial Colleges of New Jersey&quot;. (Princeton, New Jersey: Van Nostrand, 1964).

==External links==
* 
* Official Home of the Scarlet Knights
* Official Home of the Scarlet Raiders
* Official Home of the Scarlet Raptors
* 1937–. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="0" end="18" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="35" end="78" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="85" end="91" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="92" end="102" title="land-grant" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="103" end="122" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="155" end="165" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="216" end="236" title="Rutgers University" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="265" end="286" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="381" end="401" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188663" start="420" end="437" title="colonial colleges" label="colonial colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="469" end="488" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="533" end="548" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094720" start="569" end="582" title="Henry Rutgers" label="Henry Rutgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="722" end="729" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="730" end="750" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="774" end="787" title="Mixed-sex education" label="coeducational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="880" end="904" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="state&amp;#x27;s legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="1044" end="1069" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382826" start="1071" end="1103" title="Rutgers University–New Brunswick" label="Rutgers University–New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038055" start="1143" end="1159" title="Douglass College" label="Douglass College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432448" start="1260" end="1315" title="Rutgers School of Environmental and Biological Sciences" label="Rutgers School of Environmental and Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001311" start="1390" end="1395" title="Busch Campus of Rutgers University" label="Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659633" start="1400" end="1410" title="Livingston Campus (Rutgers University)" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428659" start="1423" end="1434" title="Piscataway, New Jersey" label="Piscataway."/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="1482" end="1507" title="Rutgers University–Newark" label="Rutgers University–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="1509" end="1534" title="Rutgers University–Camden" label="Rutgers University–Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980474" start="1540" end="1578" title="Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences" label="Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="1740" end="1752" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1768" end="1778" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="1780" end="1789" title="sea-grant university" label="sea-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="1795" end="1806" title="space-grant university" label="space-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758367" start="1842" end="1865" title="higher education in New Jersey" label="university in the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="1899" end="1906" title="Faculty (division)" label="faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="2074" end="2118" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="2142" end="2178" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005852" start="2187" end="2220" title="Universities Research Association" label="Universities Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2312" end="2332" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="2390" end="2399" title="minister (Christianity)" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="2407" end="2428" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="2480" end="2497" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="2565" end="2574" title="Clergy" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782168" start="2630" end="2661" title="Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen" label="Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119206" start="2678" end="2702" title="Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh" label="Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020008" start="2866" end="2882" title="William Franklin" label="William Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="2907" end="2924" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="3067" end="3082" title="Queen Charlotte" label="Queen Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="3187" end="3205" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382802" start="3284" end="3310" title="Rutgers Preparatory School" label="Rutgers Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q138458" start="3406" end="3416" title="Hackensack, New Jersey" label="Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3472" end="3480" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="3626" end="3664" title="liberal arts" label="liberal, the divinity, and useful arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790870" start="3948" end="3961" title="Matthew Leydt" label="Matthew Leydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="4047" end="4053" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="4594" end="4600" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="4813" end="4822" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4899" end="4912" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084807" start="5035" end="5045" title="Old Queens" label="Old Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247826" start="5075" end="5091" title="John McComb, Jr." label="John McComb, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6066004" start="5128" end="5139" title="Ira Condict" label="Ira Condict"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428327" start="5200" end="5234" title="New Brunswick Theological Seminary" label="New Brunswick Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5268" end="5276" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382802" start="5352" end="5387" title="Rutgers Preparatory School" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="5442" end="5468" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Reformed Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="5802" end="5813" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5909" end="5935" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094720" start="5941" end="5954" title="Henry Rutgers" label="Henry Rutgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="6054" end="6070" title="Christian ethics" label="Christian ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="6318" end="6336" title="land-grant college" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="6369" end="6388" title="Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act" label="Morrill Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="6480" end="6491" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="6493" end="6504" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="6510" end="6519" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432439" start="6666" end="6688" title="School of Engineering (Rutgers University)" label="College of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432448" start="6704" end="6726" title="School of Environmental and Biological Sciences (Rutgers University)" label="College of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038055" start="6755" end="6783" title="Douglass College (Rutgers University)" label="New Jersey College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432388" start="7086" end="7104" title="School of Arts and Sciences (Rutgers University)" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261030" start="7167" end="7185" title="Livingston College" label="Livingston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="7384" end="7406" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="7880" end="7905" title="Rutgers University–Newark" label="Rutgers University–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="7910" end="7935" title="Rutgers University–Camden" label="Rutgers University–Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551717" start="8774" end="8818" title="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey" label="New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9298" end="9310" title="#1982–present" label="again became"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="9419" end="9438" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292613" start="9561" end="9580" title="Edward J. Bloustein" label="Edward J. Bloustein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432388" start="10378" end="10405" title="School of Arts and Sciences (Rutgers University)" label="School of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622279" start="10830" end="10859" title="2011 Rutgers tuition protests" label="2011 Rutgers tuition protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="11325" end="11339" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799872" start="11400" end="11416" title="Rowan University" label="Rowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327361" start="11608" end="11628" title="Richard L. McCormick" label="Richard L. McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428327" start="11826" end="11860" title="New Brunswick Theological Seminary" label="New Brunswick Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980474" start="12114" end="12152" title="Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences" label="Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009262" start="12179" end="12204" title="New Jersey Medical School" label="New Jersey Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351231" start="12209" end="12243" title="Robert Wood Johnson Medical School" label="Robert Wood Johnson Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091293" start="12323" end="12354" title="On the Banks of the Old Raritan" label="On the Banks of the Old Raritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="12783" end="12795" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q354181" start="13119" end="13135" title="Steven Van Zandt" label="Steven Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="13359" end="13364" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="13400" end="13416" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005680" start="13507" end="13524" title="Jonathan Holloway (historian)" label="Jonathan Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q117489475" start="13672" end="13684" title="2023 Rutgers University strike" label="first strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="14033" end="14046" title="Motion of no confidence" label="no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119206" start="14448" end="14472" title="Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh" label="Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="14663" end="14681" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="14690" end="14695" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642736" start="14699" end="14705" title="Reformed Church in the United States" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148547" start="14719" end="14731" title="Presbyterianism in the United States" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012171" start="14780" end="14802" title="William Henry Steele Demarest" label="William H. S. Demarest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184088" start="14823" end="14846" title="Philip Milledoler Brett" label="Philip Milledoler Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="14898" end="14908" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005680" start="15563" end="15580" title="Jonathan Holloway (historian)" label="Jonathan Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="15819" end="15841" title="Governor of New Jersey" label="Governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="16975" end="16992" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="17017" end="17053" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841600" start="17056" end="17105" title="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153069" start="17108" end="17133" title="Big Ten Academic Alliance" label="Big Ten Academic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005852" start="17136" end="17169" title="Universities Research Association" label="Universities Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810015" start="17172" end="17221" title="Association of Public and Land-grant Universities" label="Association of Public and Land-grant Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="17224" end="17242" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="17363" end="17376" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428659" start="17390" end="17400" title="Piscataway, New Jersey" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="17464" end="17470" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="17496" end="17502" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="17810" end="17816" title="Rutgers–Newark" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="17821" end="17827" title="Rutgers–Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q496862" start="18074" end="18102" title="Middlesex County, New Jersey" label="Middlesex County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084807" start="18372" end="18382" title="Old Queens" label="Old Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931303" start="18470" end="18483" title="Queens Campus, Rutgers University" label="Queens Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941712" start="18488" end="18501" title="Voorhees Mall" label="Voorhees Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001311" start="18968" end="18980" title="Busch Campus" label="Busch Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686804" start="19309" end="19333" title="Jersey Mike&amp;#x27;s Arena" label="Jersey Mike&amp;#x27;s Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382783" start="19641" end="19664" title="Rutgers Business School – Newark and New Brunswick" label="Rutgers Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382782" start="19779" end="19799" title="Rutgers Campus Buses" label="Rutgers Campus Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432388" start="19976" end="20003" title="School of Arts and Sciences (Rutgers University)" label="School of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432405" start="20009" end="20048" title="School of Communication and Information (Rutgers University)" label="School of Communication and Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343619" start="20054" end="20110" title="Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy" label="Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432439" start="20116" end="20137" title="School of Engineering (Rutgers University)" label="School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432448" start="20143" end="20190" title="School of Environmental and Biological Sciences (Rutgers University)" label="School of Environmental and Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393513" start="20196" end="20227" title="Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy" label="Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432499" start="20348" end="20388" title="School of Management and Labor Relations" label="School of Management and Labor Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783581" start="20390" end="20420" title="Mason Gross School of the Arts" label="Mason Gross School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382783" start="20450" end="20473" title="Rutgers Business School" label="Rutgers Business School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20987" end="21030" title="Rutgers University School of Public Affairs and Administration" label="School of Public Affairs and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382783" start="21032" end="21055" title="Rutgers Business School" label="Rutgers Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="21064" end="21070" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882407" start="21087" end="21105" title="Rutgers Law School" label="Rutgers Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882407" start="21621" end="21639" title="Rutgers Law School" label="Rutgers Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551717" start="22215" end="22265" title="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey" label="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378080" start="22904" end="22921" title="School of Nursing" label="School of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089064" start="23350" end="23359" title="Blackwood, New Jersey" label="Blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083856" start="23361" end="23370" title="Stratford, New Jersey" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q262609" start="23375" end="23400" title="Scotch Plains, New Jersey" label="Scotch Plains, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816324" start="24417" end="24430" title="Atlantic Cape Community College" label="Atlantic Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974383" start="24432" end="24441" title="Brookdale Community College" label="Brookdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818271" start="24443" end="24449" title="Mercer County Community College" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177637" start="24451" end="24457" title="County College of Morris" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025749" start="24459" end="24465" title="Camden County College" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294576" start="24471" end="24485" title="Raritan Valley Community College" label="Raritan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="24785" end="24815" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841600" start="24823" end="24872" title="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="24917" end="24953" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382826" start="25029" end="25050" title="Rutgers–New Brunswick" label="Rutgers–New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="25054" end="25064" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="25140" end="25154" title="Rutgers–Newark" label="Rutgers–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="25159" end="25173" title="Rutgers–Camden" label="Rutgers–Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="25331" end="25359" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896798" start="25764" end="25778" title="University student retention" label="retention rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="25894" end="25897" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="26014" end="26017" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="26304" end="26327" title="National Merit Scholars" label="National Merit Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627832" start="27187" end="27200" title="Student financial aid (United States)" label="financial aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="30044" end="30072" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="30548" end="30563" title="Library Science" label="Library Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="30571" end="30578" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="30587" end="30596" title="Fine Arts" label="Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="30605" end="30612" title="History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279400" start="30647" end="30667" title="Women&amp;#x27;s History" label="Women&amp;#x27;s History"/>
<link wikidata="Q162881" start="30672" end="30696" title="African-American History" label="African-American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="30714" end="30725" title="Social Work" label="Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="30738" end="30749" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="30990" end="31000" title="Philosophy" label="Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="31015" end="31043" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408762" start="31052" end="31077" title="Philosophical Gourmet Report" label="Philosophy Gourmet Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551717" start="31996" end="32046" title="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey" label="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351231" start="32093" end="32127" title="Robert Wood Johnson Medical School" label="Robert Wood Johnson Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009262" start="32129" end="32154" title="New Jersey Medical School" label="New Jersey Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009170" start="32160" end="32184" title="New Jersey Dental School" label="New Jersey Dental School"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="32727" end="32755" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648924" start="32880" end="32910" title="Archibald S. Alexander Library" label="Archibald S. Alexander Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="32914" end="32927" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="33059" end="33069" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="33074" end="33088" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440185" start="33387" end="33413" title="Federal Depository Library Program" label="Federal Depository Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="33593" end="33599" title="Rutgers–Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799872" start="33661" end="33677" title="Rowan University" label="Rowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025749" start="33682" end="33703" title="Camden County College" label="Camden County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028084" start="33796" end="33809" title="Nick Virgilio" label="Nick Virgilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040474" start="33904" end="33929" title="Institute of Jazz Studies" label="Institute of Jazz Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428659" start="34083" end="34093" title="Piscataway, New Jersey" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919817" start="34137" end="34147" title="behavioral science" label="behavioral"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="34149" end="34159" title="Biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="34161" end="34166" title="Earth science" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="34172" end="34194" title="pharmaceutical science" label="pharmaceutical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="34200" end="34211" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431094" start="35058" end="35077" title="special collections" label="special collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458883" start="35815" end="35848" title="Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers University" label="Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="35955" end="35961" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="35995" end="36003" title="United States of America" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382814" start="36101" end="36134" title="Rutgers University Geology Museum" label="Rutgers University Geology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="36172" end="36179" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="36184" end="36196" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="36284" end="36292" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114983" start="36293" end="36301" title="fossil trackway" label="trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253484" start="36307" end="36325" title="Towaco, New Jersey" label="Towaco, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="36329" end="36337" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q502587" start="36343" end="36355" title="Salem County, New Jersey" label="Salem County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="36363" end="36372" title="History of Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="36377" end="36382" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="36386" end="36391" title="mummy" label="mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382790" start="36395" end="36410" title="Rutgers Gardens" label="Rutgers Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="36458" end="36475" title="botanical gardens" label="botanical gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="36488" end="36497" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382790" start="36959" end="36976" title="Rutgers Gardens" label="botanical gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627765" start="37018" end="37035" title="Student Sustainable Farm at Rutgers" label="sustainable farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382787" start="37052" end="37071" title="Rutgers Ecological Preserve" label="ecological preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032372" start="37183" end="37193" title="makerspace" label="makerspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969059" start="37199" end="37231" title="New Jersey Museum of Agriculture" label="New Jersey Museum of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088679" start="37270" end="37285" title="North Brunswick, New Jersey" label="North Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="37370" end="37387" title="Cognitive Science" label="Cognitive Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="37452" end="37462" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="37464" end="37475" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="37477" end="37493" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="37495" end="37505" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="37507" end="37529" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="37535" end="37547" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q232308" start="37573" end="37587" title="Selman Waksman" label="Selman Waksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="37607" end="37617" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186127" start="37630" end="37641" title="actinomycin" label="actinomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414526" start="37643" end="37651" title="clavacin" label="clavacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27128697" start="37653" end="37667" title="streptothricin" label="streptothricin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423098" start="37678" end="37686" title="neomycin" label="neomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26292057" start="37688" end="37696" title="Streptomyces purpureus" label="fradicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61653285" start="37698" end="37708" title="candicidin" label="candicidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q429985" start="37769" end="37782" title="Albert Schatz (scientist)" label="Albert Schatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="37795" end="37807" title="streptomycin" label="streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="37872" end="37884" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="37927" end="37951" title="Nobel Prize for Medicine" label="Nobel Prize for Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="38022" end="38033" title="Polyploidy" label="tetraploids"/>
<link wikidata="Q40687" start="38035" end="38048" title="robotic hands" label="robotic hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="38050" end="38080" title="artificial insemination" label="artificial bovine insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285509" start="38112" end="38123" title="Space Shuttle thermal protection system" label="heat shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="38131" end="38144" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q766195" start="38288" end="38305" title="Protein Data bank" label="Protein Data bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947008" start="38399" end="38429" title="San Diego Supercomputer Center" label="San Diego Supercomputer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974668" start="38944" end="39030" title="New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Office of Continuing Professional Education" label="New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Office of Continuing Professional Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="39202" end="39231" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="39508" end="39521" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="39612" end="39616" title="dorm" label="dorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="40184" end="40190" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="40192" end="40198" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="40204" end="40217" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="40235" end="40263" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="40277" end="40302" title="Rutgers University–Newark" label="Rutgers University–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382782" start="40613" end="40631" title="Rutgers Buses" label="Rutgers bus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382817" start="40820" end="40834" title="Rutgers University Police Department" label="Rutgers Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382782" start="40896" end="40919" title="Rutgers Buses" label="bus and shuttle service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685451" start="41481" end="41501" title="student organization" label="student organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="41549" end="41566" title="college newspaper" label="college newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="41574" end="41587" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728722" start="41817" end="41833" title="The Daily Targum" label="The Daily Targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729068" start="41951" end="41964" title="The Dartmouth" label="The Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q762223" start="41989" end="42001" title="Joyce Kilmer" label="Joyce Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="42016" end="42031" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750890" start="42075" end="42085" title="The Medium (Rutgers)" label="The Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721941" start="42168" end="42185" title="Rutgers Centurion" label="Rutgers Centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382815" start="42229" end="42257" title="Rutgers University Glee Club" label="Rutgers University Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="42272" end="42278" title="choral" label="choral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049149" start="42408" end="42459" title="International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella" label="International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238265" start="42805" end="42829" title="List of Rutgers University Greek organizations" label="many Greek organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="42927" end="42954" title="fraternities and sororities" label="fraternities and sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="43064" end="43077" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069723" start="43145" end="43153" title="Zeta Psi" label="Zeta Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021914" start="43158" end="43167" title="Delta Phi" label="Delta Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963210" start="43237" end="43244" title="Chi Psi" label="Chi Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="43546" end="43562" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="43564" end="43572" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="43574" end="43587" title="Multiculturalism" label="Multicultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="43593" end="43598" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181520" start="43733" end="43750" title="Phi Delta Epsilon" label="Phi Delta Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382815" start="44468" end="44477" title="Rutgers University Glee Club" label="Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q768929" start="44714" end="44723" title="Sigma Chi" label="Sigma Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735037" start="44842" end="44859" title="Alpha Gamma Delta" label="Alpha Gamma Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254642" start="44861" end="44872" title="Delta Gamma" label="Delta Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095019" start="44874" end="44888" title="Gamma Phi Beta" label="Gamma Phi Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181567" start="44890" end="44905" title="Phi Sigma Sigma" label="Phi Sigma Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512306" start="44907" end="44922" title="Sigma Delta Tau" label="Sigma Delta Tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512330" start="44924" end="44935" title="Sigma Kappa" label="Sigma Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069727" start="44941" end="44955" title="Zeta Tau Alpha" label="Zeta Tau Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598565" start="45242" end="45255" title="Grease Trucks" label="Grease Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287501" start="45996" end="46010" title="Dance Marathon" label="Dance Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382786" start="46892" end="46903" title="Rutgers Day" label="Rutgers Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q221653" start="47034" end="47052" title="Utrecht University" label="Utrecht University"/>
<link wikidata="Q51675" start="47116" end="47127" title="Book of Malachi" label="Malachi 4:2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268159" start="47242" end="47249" title="Scarlet (color)" label="scarlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39338" start="47279" end="47285" title="orange (colour)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="47325" end="47330" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="47354" end="47370" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q926483" start="47620" end="47655" title="1869 college football season" label="first intercollegiate football game"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="47661" end="47670" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="47738" end="47744" title="turban" label="turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q192411" start="47750" end="47762" title="handkerchief" label="handkerchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246652" start="47872" end="47884" title="school color" label="school color"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="48108" end="48114" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="48171" end="48179" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="48180" end="48185" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675513" start="48192" end="48207" title="Reynard the Fox" label="Reynard the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="48265" end="48281" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="48295" end="48311" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q794871" start="48441" end="48453" title="Ozzie Nelson" label="Ozzie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q952841" start="48470" end="48505" title="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet" label="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592074" start="48636" end="48653" title="Lafayette College" label="Lafayette College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="48711" end="48718" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="48845" end="48852" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677255" start="49206" end="49219" title="Harvey Harman" label="Harvey Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="49398" end="49411" title="fighting cock" label="fighting cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="49976" end="49990" title="Rutgers–Camden" label="Rutgers–Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="50021" end="50036" title="Rutgers–Camden Scarlet Raptors" label="Scarlet Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="50042" end="50056" title="Rutgers–Newark" label="Rutgers–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="50087" end="50102" title="Rutgers–Newark Scarlet Raiders" label="Scarlet Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50108" end="50115" title="scarlet (color)#School colors" label="Scarlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="50168" end="50185" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="50338" end="50353" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="50355" end="50374" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="50397" end="50417" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="50509" end="50518" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="50656" end="50664" title="College football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="50684" end="50691" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="51035" end="51051" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51071" end="51109" title="1869 college football season#First football game ever played" label="intercollegiate football game was held"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="51181" end="51206" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146328" start="51257" end="51281" title="College Avenue Gymnasium" label="College Avenue Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138233" start="51423" end="51437" title="Parke H. Davis" label="Parke H. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329995" start="52254" end="52292" title="Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges" label="Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841208" start="52716" end="52742" title="Middle Atlantic Conferences" label="Middle Atlantic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q32472" start="52804" end="52815" title="Atlantic 10" label="Atlantic 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q783062" start="52851" end="52870" title="Big East Conference (1979–2013)" label="Big East Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="53030" end="53046" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="Ultimate Frisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="53090" end="53099" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="53412" end="53434" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="53480" end="53484" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994957" start="53517" end="53570" title="1976 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament" label="1976 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="53620" end="53638" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="53725" end="53735" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q895447" start="53823" end="53847" title="Bowl Championship Series" label="Bowl Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="53918" end="53928" title="Division I (NCAA)" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="53957" end="53997" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="54075" end="54083" title="College football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="54085" end="54093" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="54095" end="54105" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="54107" end="54111" title="Sport rowing" label="crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="54113" end="54126" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="54128" end="54135" title="fencing (sport)" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="54137" end="54149" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="54151" end="54155" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="54157" end="54167" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="54169" end="54177" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="54179" end="54185" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="54187" end="54195" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="54197" end="54203" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="54205" end="54220" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="54222" end="54230" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="54235" end="54241" title="Diving (sport)" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="54243" end="54252" title="Collegiate wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="54258" end="54268" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="54355" end="54361" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="54381" end="54398" title="track &amp;amp; field" label="track &amp;amp; field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="54407" end="54415" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887217" start="54434" end="54457" title="women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151565" start="54778" end="54790" title="Insight Bowl" label="Insight Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="54849" end="54873" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522315" start="54991" end="55008" title="Garden State Bowl" label="Garden State Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="55190" end="55210" title="University of Louisville" label="Louisville Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653492" start="55248" end="55255" title="AP Poll" label="AP Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137620" start="55271" end="55293" title="USA Today Coaches Poll" label="USA Today/Coaches poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664931" start="55310" end="55333" title="Harris Interactive College Football Poll" label="Harris Interactive Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q895447" start="55352" end="55376" title="Bowl Championship Series" label="Bowl Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519336" start="55551" end="55561" title="Texas Bowl" label="Texas Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568142" start="55598" end="55606" title="Kansas State Wildcats" label="Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="55610" end="55633" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930488" start="55798" end="55816" title="C. Vivian Stringer" label="C. Vivian Stringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="56510" end="56530" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="56532" end="56551" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592074" start="56596" end="56613" title="Lafayette College" label="Lafayette College"/>
<link wikidata="Q622137" start="56615" end="56632" title="Lehigh University" label="Lehigh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="56638" end="56657" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q585828" start="56847" end="56868" title="Seton Hall University" label="Seton Hall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="56870" end="56880" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="56889" end="56911" title="University of Maryland" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="57615" end="57643" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="57857" end="57875" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="57919" end="57929" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q90828170" start="57992" end="58004" title="Nick Suriano" label="Nick Suriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q65168027" start="58009" end="58025" title="Anthony Ashnault" label="Anthony Ashnault"/>
<link wikidata="Q113012909" start="58526" end="58552" title="2022 NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Lacrosse Championship" label="NCAA Division I tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676345" start="58568" end="58575" title="Harvard Crimson men&amp;#x27;s lacrosse" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163214" start="58584" end="58610" title="Penn Quakers men&amp;#x27;s lacrosse" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171504" start="58689" end="58696" title="Cornell Big Red men&amp;#x27;s lacrosse" label="Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790870" start="58806" end="58819" title="Matthew Leydt" label="Matthew Leydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="58961" end="58982" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="58992" end="59004" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q346218" start="59284" end="59298" title="Simeon De Witt" label="Simeon De Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="59387" end="59406" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q930576" start="59421" end="59436" title="James Schureman" label="James Schureman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="59464" end="59484" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="59560" end="59575" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232308" start="59606" end="59623" title="Selman A. Waksman" label="Selman A. Waksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q588807" start="59666" end="59679" title="Robert Pinsky" label="Robert Pinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q981258" start="59724" end="59737" title="Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress" label="poet laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q402664" start="59751" end="59761" title="Junot Díaz" label="Junot Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="59786" end="59812" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q886931" start="59851" end="59870" title="List of Governors of New Jersey" label="New Jersey governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634822" start="59879" end="59899" title="List of Rutgers University presidents" label="president of Rutgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310841" start="59901" end="59917" title="Garret A. Hobart" label="Garret A. Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="59933" end="59968" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110029" start="59970" end="59981" title="Louis Freeh" label="Louis Freeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="60024" end="60027" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q709453" start="60029" end="60055" title="Frederick T. Frelinghuysen" label="Frederick T. Frelinghuysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="60097" end="60120" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587475" start="60130" end="60147" title="Joseph P. Bradley" label="Joseph P. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="60214" end="60248" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="60336" end="60374" title="1876 U.S. presidential election" label="American presidential election in 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q460904" start="60385" end="60408" title="Maria Fernanda Espinosa" label="Maria Fernanda Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161813" start="60419" end="60467" title="President of the United Nations General Assembly" label="President of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="60478" end="60494" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q888132" start="60509" end="60521" title="Bob Menendez" label="Bob Menendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882407" start="60546" end="60564" title="Rutgers Law School" label="Rutgers Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="60585" end="60594" title="Activism" label="activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q84767149" start="60603" end="60616" title="Jack Babuscio" label="Jack Babuscio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898293" start="60657" end="60671" title="Bernard Marcus" label="Bernard Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="60720" end="60730" title="Home Depot" label="Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903327" start="60732" end="60746" title="Bill Rasmussen" label="Bill Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="60770" end="60774" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290636" start="60776" end="60787" title="Rana Kapoor" label="Rana Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040394" start="60800" end="60808" title="Yes Bank" label="Yes Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351457" start="60811" end="60825" title="Dev Ittycheria" label="Dev Ittycheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546965" start="60844" end="60856" title="MongoDB Inc." label="MongoDB Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5605358" start="60858" end="60868" title="Greg Brown (businessman)" label="Greg Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q634815" start="60877" end="60895" title="Motorola Solutions" label="Motorola Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314471" start="60901" end="60917" title="Duncan MacMillan (Bloomberg)" label="Duncan MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="60978" end="60992" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg L.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q7173141" start="61036" end="61052" title="Peter C. Schultz" label="Peter C. Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="61081" end="61093" title="fiber optics" label="fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q96475730" start="61116" end="61133" title="Angela Christiano" label="Angela Christiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q741299" start="61159" end="61175" title="Stanley N. Cohen" label="Stanley N. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="61219" end="61232" title="gene splicing" label="gene splicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q100331973" start="61244" end="61256" title="Howard Krein" label="Howard Krein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687261" start="61262" end="61273" title="Louis Gluck" label="Louis Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q898674" start="61306" end="61317" title="neonatology" label="neonatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="61374" end="61390" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="61410" end="61422" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640705" start="61436" end="61448" title="Mario Batali" label="Mario Batali"/>
<link wikidata="Q347958" start="61462" end="61473" title="David Stern" label="David Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="61514" end="61545" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q514859" start="61547" end="61559" title="Henry Selick" label="Henry Selick"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="61596" end="61626" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856266" start="61641" end="61656" title="Michael Sorvino" label="Michael Sorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q266173" start="61658" end="61669" title="Holly Black" label="Holly Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q455898" start="61677" end="61691" title="Sebastian Stan" label="Sebastian Stan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61699" end="61734" title="Captain America: The Winter Soldier" label="Captain America: The Winter Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939314" start="61761" end="61769" title="Mr Magoo" label="Mr Magoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109718598" start="61779" end="61793" title="Jessica Darrow" label="Jessica Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q103372692" start="61801" end="61808" title="Encanto" label="Encanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q313266" start="61829" end="61842" title="John DiMaggio" label="John DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="61850" end="61858" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q53093" start="61872" end="61886" title="Adventure Time" label="Adventure Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q723430" start="61905" end="61915" title="Frank Iero" label="Frank Iero"/>
<link wikidata="Q483285" start="61917" end="61936" title="My Chemical Romance" label="My Chemical Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q216569" start="61945" end="61957" title="Roy Scheider" label="Roy Scheider"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="61959" end="61975" title="Jaws (film)" label="&amp;quot;Jaws&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26424" start="61990" end="62007" title="Calista Flockhart" label="Calista Flockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q244803" start="62015" end="62026" title="Ally McBeal" label="Ally McBeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="62050" end="62069" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882407" start="62095" end="62113" title="Rutgers Law School" label="Rutgers Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780882" start="62184" end="62233" title="Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236528" start="62273" end="62293" title="David Levering Lewis" label="David Levering Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285117" start="62345" end="62390" title="Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography" label="Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="62431" end="62440" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="62444" end="62460" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q724144" start="62504" end="62518" title="Bancroft Prize" label="Bancroft Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482142" start="62527" end="62548" title="Francis Parkman Prize" label="Francis Parkman Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607102" start="62555" end="62569" title="Gregory Pardlo" label="Gregory Pardlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755564" start="62673" end="62691" title="Michael R. Douglas" label="Michael R. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="62705" end="62720" title="String theory" label="string theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396837" start="62793" end="62806" title="Sackler Prize" label="Sackler Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q841737" start="62839" end="62862" title="Family Research Council" label="Family Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157626" start="62903" end="62932" title="Rutgers School of Social Work" label="Rutgers School of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q366012" start="62934" end="62946" title="Avery Brooks" label="Avery Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783581" start="62978" end="63008" title="Mason Gross School of the Arts" label="Mason Gross School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382918" start="63027" end="63037" title="Ruth Chang" label="Ruth Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033743" start="63113" end="63128" title="Ankhi Mukherjee" label="Ankhi Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="63136" end="63156" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367851" start="63165" end="63189" title="Rose Mary Crawshay prize" label="Rose Mary Crawshay prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353602" start="63234" end="63253" title="Jayne Anne Phillips" label="Jayne Anne Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="63262" end="63288" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q319186" start="63298" end="63309" title="Jerry Fodor" label="Jerry Fodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355757" start="63311" end="63325" title="Zenon Pylyshyn" label="Zenon Pylyshyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345102" start="63327" end="63340" title="Stephen Stich" label="Stephen Stich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729071" start="63345" end="63357" title="Frances Egan" label="Frances Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263735" start="63375" end="63391" title="Jean Nicod Prize" label="Jean Nicod Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="63395" end="63405" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="63410" end="63427" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q439709" start="63429" end="63444" title="Endre Szemerédi" label="Endre Szemerédi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="63461" end="63471" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q92840" start="63481" end="63494" title="Mario Szegedy" label="Mario Szegedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417143" start="63511" end="63522" title="Gödel Prize" label="Gödel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622279" start="64127" end="64156" title="2011 Rutgers tuition protests" label="2011 Rutgers tuition protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711820" start="64159" end="64175" title="The 2012 Project" label="The 2012 Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64178" end="64213" title="List of American state universities#New Jersey" label="List of American state universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596104" start="64216" end="64249" title="List of Rutgers University people" label="List of Rutgers University people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634822" start="64252" end="64289" title="List of Rutgers University presidents" label="List of Rutgers University presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q385741" start="64292" end="64339" title="List of colleges and universities in New Jersey" label="List of colleges and universities in New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048631" start="65102" end="65126" title="Rutgers University Press" label="Rutgers University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80140" wikidata="Q107957" url="?curid=80140" title="Alexander Haig">
<text>Alexander Meigs Haig Jr. (; 2 December 192420 February 2010) was United States Secretary of State under president Ronald Reagan and White House chief of staff under presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. Prior to and in between these cabinet-level positions, he was a general in the U.S. Army, serving first as the vice chief of staff of the Army and then as Supreme Allied Commander Europe. In 1973, Haig became the youngest four-star general in the Army&#x27;s history.

Haig was born and raised in Pennsylvania. He graduated from the U.S. Military Academy and served in the Korean War, during which he served as an aide to general Alonzo Patrick Fox and general Edward Almond. Afterward, he served as an aide to defense secretary Robert McNamara. During the Vietnam War, Haig commanded a battalion and later a brigade of the 1st Infantry Division. For his service, Haig received the Distinguished Service Cross, the Silver Star with oak leaf cluster, and the Purple Heart.

In 1969, Haig became an assistant to national security advisor Henry Kissinger. He became vice chief of staff of the Army, the Army&#x27;s second-highest-ranking position, in 1972. After the 1973 resignation of H. R. Haldeman, Haig became President Nixon&#x27;s chief of staff. Serving in the wake of the Watergate scandal, he became especially influential in the final months of Nixon&#x27;s tenure, playing a role in persuading Nixon to resign in 1974. Haig continued to serve as chief of staff for the first month of President Ford&#x27;s tenure. From 1974 to 1979, Haig served as Supreme Allied Commander Europe, commanding all NATO forces in Europe. He retired from the army in 1979 and pursued a career in business.

After Reagan won the 1980 U.S. presidential election, he nominated Haig to be his secretary of state. After the Reagan assassination attempt, Haig said &quot;I am in control here, in the White House&quot;, despite not being next in the line of succession. During the Falklands War, Haig sought to broker peace between the United Kingdom and Argentina. He resigned from Reagan&#x27;s cabinet in July 1982. He unsuccessfully sought the presidential nomination in the 1988 Republican primaries. He also served as the head of a consulting firm and hosted the television program &quot;World Business Review&quot;.

==Early life and education==
Haig was born in Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania, the middle of three children of Alexander Meigs Haig, a Republican lawyer of Scottish descent, and his wife, Regina Anne (née Murphy). When Haig was 9, his father, aged 41, died of cancer. His Irish American mother raised her children in the Catholic faith. Haig initially attended Saint Joseph&#x27;s Preparatory School in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on a scholarship; when he was withdrawn due to poor academic performance, he transferred to Lower Merion High School in Ardmore, Pennsylvania, where he graduated in 1942.

Initially unable to secure his desired appointment to the United States Military Academy, though one of his teachers opined that &quot;Al is definitely not West Point material&quot;, Haig studied at the University of Notre Dame, where he earned a &quot;string of A&#x27;s&quot; in an &quot;intellectual awakening&quot; for two years before securing a congressional appointment to the U.S. Military Academy in 1944 at the behest of his uncle, who served as the Philadelphia municipal government&#x27;s director of public works.

Haig was enrolled in an accelerated wartime curriculum at West Point that deemphasized the humanities and social sciences, and he graduated in the bottom third of his class (ranked 214 of 310) in 1947. Although a West Point superintendent characterized Haig as &quot;the last man in his class anyone expected to become the first general&quot;, other classmates acknowledged his &quot;strong convictions and even stronger ambitions&quot;. Haig later earned an MBA from the Columbia Business School in New York City in 1955. As a major, he attended the Naval War College in 1960 and then earned a M.A. in international relations from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. in 1961. His thesis at Georgetown University examined the role of military officers in making national policy.

==Early military career==
===Korean War===
As a young officer, Haig served as an aide to Lieutenant General Alonzo Patrick Fox, a deputy chief of staff to General Douglas MacArthur. In 1950 Haig married Fox&#x27;s daughter, Patricia. In the early days of the Korean War, Haig was responsible for maintaining General MacArthur&#x27;s situation map and briefing MacArthur each evening on the day&#x27;s battlefield events. Haig later served (1950–51) with the X Corps, as aide to MacArthur&#x27;s chief of staff, General Edward Almond, who awarded Haig two Silver Stars and a Bronze Star with Valor device. Haig participated in four Korean War campaigns, including the Battle of Inchon, the Battle of Chosin Reservoir and the evacuation of Hŭngnam, as Almond&#x27;s aide.

===Pentagon assignments===
Haig served as a staff officer in the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations at the Pentagon (1962–64), and then was appointed military assistant to Secretary of the Army Stephen Ailes in 1964. He then was appointed military assistant to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, continuing in that service until the end of 1965. In 1966, Haig graduated from the United States Army War College.

===Vietnam War===

In 1966, Haig took command of a battalion of the 1st Infantry Division during the Vietnam War. On 22 May 1967, General William Westmoreland rewarded Haig with the Distinguished Service Cross, the U.S. Army&#x27;s second-highest medal for valor, in recognition of his actions during the Battle of Ap Gu in March 1967. During the battle, Haig, then a member of the 1st Battalion, 26th Infantry Regiment, became pinned down by a Viet Cong force that outnumbered U.S. forces by three to one. In an attempt to survey the battlefield, Haig boarded a helicopter and flew to the point of contact. His helicopter was subsequently shot down, leading to two days of bloody hand-to-hand combat. An excerpt from Haig&#x27;s Distinguished Service Cross citation states:

Haig was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Purple Heart during his tour in Vietnam and was eventually promoted to colonel as commander of 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division in Vietnam.

===Return to West Point===
Following his one-year tour of Vietnam during the Vietnam War, Haig returned to the United States to become regimental commander of the Third Regiment of the Corps of Cadets at West Point under the newly appointed commandant, Brigadier General Bernard W. Rogers. Both had previously served together in the 1st Infantry Division, Rogers as assistant division commander and Haig as brigade commander.

==Security adviser and vice chief of staff (1969–1973)==
In 1969, he was appointed military assistant to the assistant to the president for national security affairs, Henry Kissinger. A year later, he replaced Richard V. Allen as deputy assistant to the president for national security affairs. During this period, he was promoted to brigadier general (September 1969) and major general (March 1972).

In the spring of 1972, the North Vietnamese armed forces (PAVN) launched a multi-prong attack, known as the Easter Offensive, on every region of South Vietnam. For the first time, the PAVN deployed heavy weaponry such as mobile surface-to-air missile batteries, tanks, and armored vehicles. In the early weeks of the offensive, the PAVN won startling advances, and captured crucial bases, roads, and cities. Nixon and Kissinger——while delicately picking their way through the diplomatic thickets of détente with Moscow and open relations with Peking (Beijing)——decided to respond to North Vietnam’s sweeping assault by mining its principal harbor, and massively bombing targets in every quarter of North Vietnam. Nixon, in his reflexive suspicion, and Kissinger, in his boundless ambition, opted to bypass the Departments of State and Defense, as well as the Joint Chiefs of Staff(JCS), in any advisory or decision-making capacity relating to what would become known as Operation Linebacker.

Haig effectively substituted for the JCS during this time. He developed the core strategy coordinating the mining with the bombing of transportation targets. He was dispatched, to the Pentagon as well as Saigon, to critique field commanders and military procedure, and provide an independent information channel to the White House. He was a member of a national security triumvirate, along with Nixon and Kissinger, that both scapegoated and ignored the military command running the daily operations in Vietnam.

In this position, Haig helped South Vietnamese president Nguyen Van Thieu negotiate the final cease-fire talks in 1972. Haig continued in the role until 4 January 1973, when he became vice chief of staff of the Army. Nixon planned to appoint Haig as chief of staff over Creighton Abrams, whom he personally disliked, but secretary of defense Melvin Laird resisted as Haig lacked the relevant upper-level command experience. He was confirmed by the U.S. Senate in October 1972, thus skipping the rank of lieutenant general. By appointing him to this billet, Nixon &quot;passed over 240 generals&quot; who were senior to Haig.

==White House Chief of Staff (1973–1974)==
===Nixon administration===

In May 1973, after only four months as VCSA, Haig returned to the Nixon administration at the height of the Watergate affair as White House Chief of Staff. During the Saturday Night Massacre, Haig attempted to make acting-Attorney General William Ruckelshaus to fire special prosecutor Archibald Cox. Haig&#x27;s coercion failed, and Ruckelshaus resigned. Retaining his Army commission, he remained in the position until 21 September 1974, ultimately overseeing the transition to the presidency of Gerald Ford following Nixon&#x27;s resignation on 9 August 1974.

Haig has been largely credited with keeping the government running while President Nixon was preoccupied with Watergate and was essentially seen as the &quot;acting president&quot; during Nixon&#x27;s last few months in office. During July and early August 1974, Haig played an instrumental role in persuading Nixon to resign. Haig presented several pardon options to Ford a few days before Nixon resigned. In this regard, in his 1999 book &quot;Shadow&quot;, author Bob Woodward describes Haig&#x27;s role as the point man between Nixon and Ford during the final days of Nixon&#x27;s presidency. According to Woodward, Haig played a major behind-the-scenes role in the delicate negotiations of the transfer of power from Nixon to Ford. Indeed, about one month after taking office, Ford did pardon Nixon, resulting in much controversy.

However, Haig denied the allegation that he played a key role in arbitrating Nixon&#x27;s resignation by offering Ford&#x27;s pardon to Nixon. One of the most crucial moments occurred a day before Haig&#x27;s departure to Europe to begin his tenure as NATO Supreme Allied Commander. Haig was telephoned by J. Fred Buzhardt, who once served as special White House counsel for Watergate matters. In the call, Buzhardt discussed with Haig President Ford&#x27;s upcoming speech to the nation about pardoning Nixon, informing Haig that the speech contained something indicating Haig&#x27;s role in Nixon&#x27;s resignation and Ford&#x27;s pardon of Nixon. According to Haig&#x27;s autobiography (&quot;Inner Circles: How America Changed the World&quot;), Haig was furious and immediately drove straight to the White House to determine the veracity of Buzhardt&#x27;s claims. This was due to his concern that Ford&#x27;s speech would expose Haig&#x27;s role in negotiating Nixon&#x27;s resignation supposedly in exchange for a pardon issued by the new president.

On 7 August 1974, two days before Nixon&#x27;s resignation, Haig met with Nixon in the Oval Office to discuss the transition. Following their conversation, Nixon told Haig &quot;You fellows, in your business, have a way of handling problems like this. Give them a pistol and leave the room. I don&#x27;t have a pistol, Al.&quot;

===Ford administration===

Following Nixon&#x27;s resignation, Haig remained briefly as White House Chief of Staff under Ford. Haig aided in the transition by advising the new president mostly on policy matters on which he had been working under the Nixon presidency and introducing Ford to the White House staff and their daily activities. Haig recommended that Ford retain several of Nixon&#x27;s White House staff for 30 days to provide an orderly transition. Haig and Kissinger also advised Ford on Nixon&#x27;s détente policy with the Soviet Union following the SALT I treaty in 1972.

Haig found it difficult to get along with the new administration and wanted to return to the Army for his last command. It had also been rumored that Ford wanted to be his own chief of staff. At first Ford decided to replace Haig with Robert T. Hartmann, Ford&#x27;s chief of staff during his tenure as vice president. Ford soon replaced Hartmann with United States Permanent Ambassador to NATO Donald Rumsfeld. Author and Haig biographer Roger Morris, a former colleague of Haig&#x27;s on the National Security Council early in Nixon&#x27;s first term, wrote that when Ford pardoned Nixon, he in effect pardoned Haig as well.

Haig resigned from his position as White House Chief of Staff and returned to active duty in the United States Army in September 1974.

==NATO Supreme Allied Commander (1974–1979)==

In December 1974, Haig was appointed as the next Supreme Allied Commander Europe by President Ford, replacing General Andrew Goodpaster and returning to active duty in the United States Army. Haig also became the front-runner to be the 27th U.S. Army Chief of Staff, following the death of General Creighton Abrams from complications of surgery to remove lung cancer on 4 September 1974. However it was General Frederick C. Weyand who ultimately filled Abrams&#x27;s position as Chief of Staff. From 1974 to 1979 Haig served as the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, the commander of NATO forces in Europe, as well as commander-in-chief of United States European Command. During his tenure as SACEUR, Haig focused on transforming SACEUR in order to face the future global challenge following the end of the Vietnam War and the rise of Soviet influence within Eastern Europe.

Haig focused on strengthening the relationship between the United States and NATO member nations and their allies. As a result, several fleets of United States Air Force aircraft, such as the F-111 Aardvark from the Strategic Air Command, were relocated to US Air Force bases located in Europe. Haig also stressed the importance of increasing the training of US troops deployed in Europe following his tour of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean Sea, on which Haig saw poorly-disciplined and ill-trained troops. As a result, Haig conducted routine inspections during NATO troops&#x27; training and often went to the training site and participated in the training itself. Haig also recommended the revitalization of equipment in the US installations in Europe and US troops deployed in Europe, in order to strengthen deterrence from possible attack.

Haig took the same route to SHAPE every day—a pattern of behavior that did not go unnoticed by terrorist organizations. On 25 June 1979, Haig was the target of an assassination attempt in Mons, Belgium. A land mine blew up under the bridge on which Haig&#x27;s car was traveling, narrowly missing his car and wounding three of his bodyguards in a following car. Authorities later attributed responsibility for the attack to the Red Army Faction (RAF). In 1993 a German court sentenced Rolf Clemens Wagner, a former RAF member, to life imprisonment for the assassination attempt. During Haig&#x27;s last month as Supreme Allied Commander Europe, he oversaw the talks and negotiation between the United States and NATO member nations of a new policy following the signing of SALT II treaty on 18 June 1979, by President Jimmy Carter and Soviet President Leonid Brezhnev. However Haig also drew concern regarding the treaty, which he believed benefited the Soviet position by giving them a way to build up their military arsenal.

Haig retired from his position as Supreme Allied Commander Europe in July 1979 and was succeeded by General Bernard W. Rogers, who previously served as Army Chief of Staff. Haig&#x27;s retirement ceremony took place at NATO Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe on 1 July 1979, and was attended by Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, NATO Secretary General Joseph Luns and U.S. Ambassador to NATO William Tapley Bennett Jr.

==Civilian positions==
In 1979, Haig joined the Philadelphia-based Foreign Policy Research Institute as director of its Western Security Program, and he later served on the organization&#x27;s board of trustees. Later that year, he was named president and director of United Technologies Corporation under chief executive officer Harry J. Gray, where he remained until 1981.

==Secretary of State (1981–1982)==
Haig was the second of three career military officers to become secretary of state (George C. Marshall and Colin Powell were the others). His speeches in this role in particular led to the coining of the neologism &quot;Haigspeak,&quot; described in &quot;a dictionary of neologisms&quot; as &quot;Language characterized by pompous obscurity resulting from redundancy, the semantically strained use of words, and verbosity,&quot; leading Ambassador Nicko Henderson to offer a prize for the best rendering of the Gettysburg Address in Haigspeak.

===Initial challenges===
On 11 December 1980, president-elect Reagan was prepared to publicly announce nearly all of his candidates for the most important cabinet-level posts. Singularly absent from the list of top nominees was his choice for Secretary of State, presumed by many at the time to be Alexander Haig. Haig&#x27;s prospects for Senate confirmation were clouded when Senate Democrats questioned his role in the Watergate scandal. In Haig&#x27;s defense, North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms claimed to have phoned former president Nixon personally to inquire whether any material on Nixon&#x27;s unreleased White House tapes could embarrass Haig. According to Helms, Nixon replied, &quot;Not a thing.&quot; Haig was eventually confirmed after hearings he described as an &quot;ordeal,&quot; during which he received no encouragement from Reagan or his staff.

Several days earlier, on 2 December 1980, as Haig faced these initial challenges to the next step in his political career, four U.S. Catholic missionary women in El Salvador, two of whom were Maryknoll sisters, were beaten, raped and murdered by five Salvadoran national guardsmen ordered to follow them. Their bodies were exhumed from a remote shallow grave two days later in the presence of then-U.S. ambassador to El Salvador Robert E. White. Despite this diplomatically awkward atrocity, the Carter administration soon approved $5.9 million in lethal military assistance to El Salvador&#x27;s oppressive right-wing government. The incoming Reagan administration expanded that aid to $25 million less than six weeks later.

In justifying the arms shipments, the new administration claimed that the Salvadoran government of José Napoleón Duarte had taken &quot;positive steps&quot; to investigate the murder of four American nuns, but this was disputed by U.S. Ambassador Robert E. White, who said that he could find no evidence the junta was &quot;conducting a serious investigation.&quot; White was dismissed from the Foreign Service by Haig because of his complaints. White later asserted that the Reagan administration was determined to ignore and even conceal the complicity of the Salvadoran government and army in the murders.
Throughout the 1980 U.S. presidential campaign, Reagan and his foreign policy advisers faulted the Carter administration&#x27;s perceived over-emphasis on the human rights abuses committed by authoritarian governments allied to the U.S., labeling it a &quot;double standard&quot; when compared with Carter&#x27;s treatment of communist-bloc governments. Haig, who described himself as the &quot;vicar&quot; of U.S. foreign policy, believed the human rights violations of a U.S. ally such as El Salvador should be given less attention than the ally&#x27;s successes against enemies of the U.S., and thus found himself diminishing the murders of the nuns before the House Foreign Affairs Committee in March 1981:

The outcry that immediately followed Haig&#x27;s insinuation prompted him to emphatically withdraw his speculative suggestions the very next day before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Similar public relations miscalculations, by Haig and others, continued to plague the Reagan administration&#x27;s attempts to build popular support at home for its Central American policies.

===Reagan assassination attempt===
In 1981, following the 30 March assassination attempt on Reagan, Haig asserted before reporters, &quot;I am in control here&quot; as a result of Reagan&#x27;s hospitalization, indicating that, while Reagan had not &quot;transfer[red] the helm,&quot; Haig was in fact directing White House crisis management until Vice President George Bush arrived in Washington to assume that role.

The U.S. Constitution, including both the presidential line of succession and the 25th Amendment, dictates what happens when a president is incapacitated. The Speaker of the House (at the time, Tip O&#x27;Neill, Democrat) and the president pro tempore of the Senate (at the time, Strom Thurmond, Republican), precede the secretary of state in the line of succession. Haig later clarified,

His reputation never recovered after this press conference, and in virtually all of the obituaries published after his death, his quote is referenced in the opening paragraphs.

===Falklands War===
In April 1982, Haig conducted shuttle diplomacy between the governments of Argentina in Buenos Aires and the United Kingdom in London after Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands. Negotiations collapsed and Haig returned to Washington on 19 April. The British naval fleet then entered the war zone. In December 2012 documents released under the United Kingdom&#x27;s 30 Year Rule disclosed that Haig planned to reveal British classified military information to Argentina in advance of the recapture of South Georgia Island. The information, which contained the plans for Operation Paraquet, was intended to show the Argentine military junta in Buenos Aires that the United States was a neutral player and could be trusted to act impartially during negotiations to end the conflict. However, in 2012 it was revealed via documents released from the Reagan Presidential Library that Haig attempted to persuade Reagan to side with Argentina in the war.

===1982 Lebanon War===

Haig&#x27;s report to Reagan on 30 January 1982, shows that Haig feared the Israelis might start a war against Lebanon. Critics accused Haig of &quot;greenlighting&quot; the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in June 1982. Haig denied this and said he urged restraint.

===Resignation===
Haig caused some alarm with his suggestion that a &quot;nuclear warning shot&quot; in Europe might be effective in deterring the Soviet Union. His tenure as secretary of state was often characterized by his clashes with the defense secretary, Caspar Weinberger. Haig, who repeatedly had difficulty with various members of the Reagan administration during his year-and-a-half in office, decided to resign his post on 25 June 1982. President Reagan accepted his resignation on 5 July. Haig was succeeded by George P. Shultz, who was confirmed on July 16.

==1988 Republican presidential primaries==

Haig ran unsuccessfully for the 1988 Republican Party presidential nomination. Although he enjoyed relatively high name recognition, Haig never broke out of single digits in national public opinion polls. He was a fierce critic of then–Vice President George H. W. Bush, often doubting Bush&#x27;s leadership abilities, questioning his role in the Iran–Contra affair, and using the word &quot;wimp&quot; in relation to Bush in an October 1987 debate in Texas. Despite extensive personal campaigning and paid advertising in New Hampshire, Haig remained stuck in last place in the polls. After finishing with less than 1 percent of the vote in the Iowa caucuses and trailing badly in the New Hampshire primary polls, Haig withdrew his candidacy and endorsed Senator Bob Dole. Dole, steadily gaining on Bush after beating him handily a week earlier in the Iowa caucus, ended up losing to Bush in the New Hampshire primary by 10 percentage points. With his momentum regained, Bush easily won the nomination.

==Later life, health, and death==

In 1980 Haig had a double heart bypass operation.

After leaving the Reagan White House, Haig took a seat on the MGM board of directors in an effort to cultivate a film career. He supervised the development of John Milius&#x27; &quot;Red Dawn&quot; (1984) and made significant changes to it. While heading a consulting firm in the 1980s and 1990s, he served as a director for various struggling businesses, including computer manufacturer Commodore International. He also served as a founding corporate director of America Online.

Haig was the host for several years of the television program &quot;World Business Review&quot;. At the time of his death, he was the host of &quot;21st Century Business&quot;, with each program a weekly business education forum that included business solutions, expert interview, commentary, and field reports. Haig was co-chairman of the American Committee for Peace in the Caucasus, along with Zbigniew Brzezinski and Stephen J. Solarz. He was also member of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP) board of advisers.

On 5 January 2006, Haig participated in a meeting at the White House of former secretaries of defense and state to discuss U.S. foreign policy with Bush administration officials. On 12 May 2006, Haig participated in a second White House meeting with 10 former secretaries of state and defense. The meeting included briefings by Donald Rumsfeld and Condoleezza Rice and was followed by a discussion with President George W. Bush. Haig&#x27;s memoirs—&quot;Inner Circles: How America Changed The World—&quot;were published in 1992.

On 19 February 2010, a hospital spokesman revealed that the 85-year-old Haig had been hospitalized at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore since January 28 and remained in critical condition. On February 20, Haig died at the age of 85, from complications from a staphylococcal infection that he had prior to admission. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, his brother, Frank Haig, said the Army was coordinating a mass at Fort Myer in Washington, D.C., and an interment at Arlington National Cemetery, but both had to be delayed by about two weeks owing to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. A Mass of Christian Burial was held at the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C., on 2 March 2010. Eulogies were given by Henry Kissinger and Sherwood D. Goldberg.

President Barack Obama said in a statement that &quot;General Haig exemplified our finest warrior–diplomat tradition of those who dedicate their lives to public service.&quot; Secretary of State Hillary Clinton described Haig as a man who &quot;served his country in many capacities for many years, earning honor on the battlefield, the confidence of presidents and prime ministers, and the thanks of a grateful nation.&quot;

==Family==
Alexander Haig was married to Patricia (née Fox), with whom he had three children: Alexander Patrick Haig, Barbara Haig, and Brian Haig. Haig&#x27;s younger brother, Frank Haig, was a Jesuit priest and professor emeritus of physics at Loyola University in Baltimore, Maryland.

==Publications==
Articles
* &quot;Introduction&quot;. &quot;World Affairs&quot;, Vol. 144, No. 4, &quot;Statements by Ambassador Max Kampelman before the Madrid Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe&quot;, Spring 1982. (pp. 299–301)
* &quot;Stalemate: The Public Reaction to Poland&quot;. &quot;World Affairs&quot;, Vol. 144, No. 4, &quot;Statements by Ambassador Max Kampelman before the Madrid Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe&quot;, Spring 1982. (pp. 467–511)
* &quot;U.S. Foreign Policy: A Discussion with Former Secretaries of State Dean Rusk, William P. Rogers, Cyrus R. Vance, and Alexander M. Haig, Jr.&quot;. &quot;International Studies Notes&quot;, Vol. 11, No. 1, &quot;Special Edition: The Secretaries of State&quot;, Fall 1984. (pp. 10–20)
* &quot;Reply&quot;. &quot;Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs&quot;, Vol. 27, No. 2, Summer 1985. (pp. 23–24)
* &quot;The Challenges to American Leadership&quot;. &quot;Harvard International Review&quot;, Vol. 11, No. 3, &quot;Tenth Anniversary Issue – American Foreign Policy: Toward the 1990s&quot;, 1989. (pp. 24–29)
* &quot;Nation Building: A Flawed Approach&quot;. &quot;The Brown Journal of World Affairs&quot;, Vol. 2, No. 1, Winter 1994. (pp. 7–10)

Books
* &quot;Caveat: Realism, Reagan and Foreign Affairs&quot;. New York, NY: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1984. . 367 pages.
* &quot;Inner Circles: How America Changed the World: A Memoir&quot;. New York, NY: Warner Books, 1992. . 650 pages.

Contributed works
* &quot;Foreword&quot;. &quot;Soviet Leaders from Lenin to Gorbachev&quot; by Thomas Streissguth. Minneapolis, MN: Oliver Press, 1992. (pp. 7–8)

==Awards and decorations==




===Other honors===
In 1976, Haig received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In 2009, Haig was recognized for their generous gift in support of academic programs at West Point by being inducted into the Eisenhower Society for Lifetime Giving.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Colodny, Len and Robert Gettlin. &quot;Silent Coup: The Removal of a President&quot;. New York City: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1991.
* Haig, Alexander. &quot;Caveat: Realism, Reagan and Foreign Affairs&quot;. New York City: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1984.
* Haig, Alexander and Charles McCarry. &quot;Inner Circles: How America Changed the World&quot;. Grand Central Publishing, 2 January 1994.
* Hersh, Seymour. &quot;The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House&quot;. New York City: Summit Books, 1983. 
* Morris, Robert. &quot;Haig: The General&#x27;s Progress&quot;. . 490 pages.

==External links==
* The Day Reagan was Shot article on Haig
* The Falklands: Failure of a Mission critique of Haig&#x27;s mediation efforts
* Portrait of Alexander Haig by Margaret Holland Sargent
* 
* ANC Explorer



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107957" start="0" end="24" title="Alexander Haig" label="Alexander Meigs Haig Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="65" end="97" title="United States secretary of state" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="114" end="127" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="132" end="158" title="White House chief of staff" label="White House chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="176" end="189" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="194" end="205" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="286" end="295" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="362" end="393" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="540" end="561" title="U.S. Military Academy" label="U.S. Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="580" end="590" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734575" start="637" end="655" title="Alonzo Patrick Fox" label="Alonzo Patrick Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q495224" start="668" end="681" title="Edward Almond" label="Edward Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="736" end="751" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="764" end="775" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="831" end="852" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="889" end="916" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="922" end="933" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q571544" start="939" end="955" title="oak leaf cluster" label="oak leaf cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="965" end="977" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="1043" end="1058" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355859" start="1070" end="1101" title="Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="vice chief of staff of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="1191" end="1205" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="1285" end="1302" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="1564" end="1595" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1612" end="1616" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="1724" end="1755" title="1980 U.S. presidential election" label="1980 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="1815" end="1843" title="Reagan assassination attempt" label="Reagan assassination attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="1939" end="1957" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="1970" end="1983" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314684" start="2168" end="2193" title="1988 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1988 Republican primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035462" start="2283" end="2304" title="World Business Review" label="World Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q804572" start="2359" end="2384" title="Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania" label="Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="2579" end="2593" title="Irish American" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2628" end="2636" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401525" start="2668" end="2706" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Preparatory School" label="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2710" end="2722" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693608" start="2830" end="2854" title="Lower Merion High School" label="Lower Merion High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132213" start="2858" end="2879" title="Ardmore, Pennsylvania" label="Ardmore, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="2968" end="2998" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="3113" end="3137" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3261" end="3274" title="United States Congress" label="congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="3897" end="3900" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q907481" start="3910" end="3934" title="Columbia Business School" label="Columbia Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3938" end="3951" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="3989" end="4006" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="4033" end="4037" title="Master of Arts" label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="4041" end="4064" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="4070" end="4091" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4095" end="4111" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4734575" start="4332" end="4350" title="Alonzo Patrick Fox" label="Alonzo Patrick Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="4387" end="4404" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="4483" end="4493" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480883" start="4682" end="4689" title="X Corps (United States)" label="X Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q495224" start="4743" end="4756" title="Edward Almond" label="Edward Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="4798" end="4809" title="Bronze Star" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540324" start="4815" end="4827" title="Valor device" label="Valor device"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="4855" end="4865" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="4891" end="4907" title="Battle of Inchon" label="Battle of Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q277337" start="4913" end="4939" title="Battle of Chosin Reservoir" label="Battle of Chosin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12626180" start="4948" end="4969" title="Hungnam evacuation" label="evacuation of Hŭngnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="5118" end="5126" title="The Pentagon" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344502" start="5205" end="5218" title="Stephen Ailes" label="Stephen Ailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="5293" end="5308" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="5393" end="5423" title="United States Army War College" label="United States Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="5477" end="5486" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="5494" end="5515" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5527" end="5538" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q298793" start="5564" end="5584" title="William Westmoreland" label="William Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="5608" end="5635" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5641" end="5650" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870317" start="5731" end="5746" title="Battle of Ap Gu" label="Battle of Ap Gu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5808" end="5845" title="26th Infantry Regiment (United States)#Vietnam War" label="1st Battalion, 26th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="5871" end="5880" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="6228" end="6254" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="6263" end="6275" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="6371" end="6392" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="6464" end="6471" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6483" end="6494" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54552" start="6591" end="6606" title="Cadet Corps" label="Corps of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q822756" start="6677" end="6694" title="Bernard W. Rogers" label="Bernard W. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="7000" end="7015" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q517683" start="7043" end="7059" title="Richard V. Allen" label="Richard V. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261055" start="7063" end="7126" title="Deputy National Security Advisor (United States)" label="deputy assistant to the president for national security affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="7262" end="7291" title="People’s Army of Vietnam" label="North Vietnamese armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395085" start="7343" end="7359" title="Easter Offensive" label="Easter Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7734" end="7741" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon#Soviet Union" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7747" end="7753" title="Soviet Union" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7758" end="7772" title="Foreign policy of the Richard Nixon administration#China" label="open relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7778" end="7794" title="China" label="Peking (Beijing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q72818" start="7865" end="7881" title="Haiphong" label="principal harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="8060" end="8065" title="United States Department of State" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8070" end="8077" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="8094" end="8115" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q489959" start="8205" end="8225" title="Operation Linebacker" label="Operation Linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83204" start="8599" end="8610" title="triumvirate" label="triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q485921" start="8682" end="8738" title="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam" label="military command running the daily operations in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="8771" end="8784" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="8798" end="8814" title="Nguyen Van Thieu" label="Nguyen Van Thieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="8835" end="8851" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="cease-fire talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355859" start="8925" end="8956" title="Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="vice chief of staff of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q280290" start="9011" end="9027" title="Creighton Abrams" label="Creighton Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="9062" end="9082" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="secretary of defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q499056" start="9083" end="9095" title="Melvin Laird" label="Melvin Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="9504" end="9524" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="9546" end="9562" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="9566" end="9592" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q444159" start="9605" end="9628" title="Saturday Night Massacre" label="Saturday Night Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q464554" start="9677" end="9696" title="William Ruckelshaus" label="William Ruckelshaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q633113" start="9724" end="9737" title="Archibald Cox" label="Archibald Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824551" start="9922" end="9947" title="presidency of Gerald Ford" label="presidency of Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932404" start="9958" end="9982" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s resignation speech" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460442" start="10448" end="10454" title="Shadow (Woodward book)" label="Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="10469" end="10481" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631125" start="11145" end="11161" title="J. Fred Buzhardt" label="J. Fred Buzhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28972670" start="13053" end="13071" title="Robert T. Hartmann" label="Robert T. Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="13213" end="13228" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994311" start="13257" end="13269" title="Roger Morris (American writer)" label="Roger Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="13312" end="13337" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="13678" end="13709" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q505291" start="13747" end="13764" title="Andrew Goodpaster" label="Andrew Goodpaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="13870" end="13894" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="U.S. Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q280290" start="13927" end="13943" title="Creighton Abrams" label="Creighton Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q368536" start="14040" end="14059" title="Frederick C. Weyand" label="Frederick C. Weyand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="14161" end="14192" title="Supreme Allied Commander Europe" label="Supreme Allied Commander Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="14245" end="14263" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q510610" start="14267" end="14297" title="United States European Command" label="United States European Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="14434" end="14445" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="14695" end="14709" title="General Dynamics F-111 Aardvark" label="F-111 Aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="14719" end="14740" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381805" start="14917" end="14928" title="United States Sixth Fleet" label="Sixth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="14936" end="14953" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432908" start="15382" end="15387" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe" label="SHAPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q83407" start="15542" end="15555" title="Mons, Belgium" label="Mons, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="15559" end="15568" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="15782" end="15798" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q86278" start="15839" end="15858" title="Rolf Clemens Wagner" label="Rolf Clemens Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="16127" end="16141" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="SALT II treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="16172" end="16184" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="16206" end="16221" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q822756" start="16490" end="16507" title="Bernard W. Rogers" label="Bernard W. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="16534" end="16553" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432908" start="16601" end="16647" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe" label="NATO Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="16684" end="16704" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="16705" end="16717" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q167662" start="16719" end="16741" title="Secretary General of NATO" label="NATO Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q553882" start="16742" end="16753" title="Joseph Luns" label="Joseph Luns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580722" start="16782" end="16808" title="William Tapley Bennett Jr." label="William Tapley Bennett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="16858" end="16870" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468312" start="16877" end="16910" title="Foreign Policy Research Institute" label="Foreign Policy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045758" start="17078" end="17097" title="United Technologies" label="United Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669237" start="17140" end="17153" title="Harry J. Gray" label="Harry J. Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="17305" end="17323" title="George C. Marshall" label="George C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="17328" end="17340" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q558063" start="17670" end="17685" title="Nicko Henderson" label="Nicko Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214524" start="17733" end="17751" title="Gettysburg Address" label="Gettysburg Address"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18107" end="18126" title="Advice and consent#United States" label="Senate confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="18247" end="18266" title="Jesse Helms" label="Senator Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="18359" end="18400" title="Nixon White House tapes" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s unreleased White House tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="18798" end="18809" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q941717" start="18828" end="18845" title="Maryknoll Sisters of St. Dominic" label="Maryknoll sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014923" start="18847" end="18878" title="1980 murders of U.S. missionaries in El Salvador" label="were beaten, raped and murdered"/>
<link wikidata="Q846747" start="18887" end="18916" title="National Guard (El Salvador)" label="Salvadoran national guardsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q522221" start="18974" end="18980" title="Chalatenango Department" label="remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726234" start="19065" end="19080" title="Robert White (ambassador)" label="Robert E. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="19132" end="19153" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q360283" start="19462" end="19482" title="José Napoleón Duarte" label="José Napoleón Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19987" end="20018" title="1980 US presidential election#Campaign" label="1980 U.S. presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20071" end="20123" title="Carter administration#Human rights" label="Carter administration&amp;#x27;s perceived over-emphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273942" start="20224" end="20251" title="Dictatorships and Double Standards" label="&amp;quot;double standard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="20298" end="20312" title="Eastern Bloc" label="communist-bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="20367" end="20372" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="20636" end="20667" title="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="House Foreign Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="20840" end="20874" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21041" end="21066" title="Foreign policy of the Ronald Reagan administration#Latin America" label="Central American policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="21136" end="21167" title="Reagan assassination attempt" label="assassination attempt on Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="21432" end="21443" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="21492" end="21509" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="21530" end="21561" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="presidential line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="21570" end="21584" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="25th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="21647" end="21667" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094491" start="21682" end="21698" title="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="21718" end="21753" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="president pro tempore of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="21768" end="21782" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395459" start="22106" end="22123" title="shuttle diplomacy" label="shuttle diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="22151" end="22160" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992361" start="22216" end="22254" title="1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands" label="Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="22328" end="22347" title="Royal Navy" label="British naval fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785234" start="22443" end="22455" title="Thirty-year rule" label="30 Year Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137202" start="22578" end="22598" title="South Georgia Island" label="South Georgia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269922" start="22647" end="22665" title="Operation Paraquet" label="Operation Paraquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q645986" start="22692" end="22716" title="National Reorganization Process" label="Argentine military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432360" start="22923" end="22950" title="Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum" label="Reagan Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="23224" end="23251" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="Israeli invasion of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23460" end="23472" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q434142" start="23574" end="23591" title="Caspar Weinberger" label="Caspar Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="23836" end="23852" title="George P. Shultz" label="George P. Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314684" start="23961" end="24006" title="Republican Party presidential primaries, 1988" label="1988 Republican Party presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="24180" end="24197" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="24276" end="24294" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="24381" end="24386" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="24451" end="24464" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="24574" end="24587" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="24614" end="24635" title="New Hampshire presidential primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="24692" end="24700" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="24781" end="24792" title="Iowa caucus" label="Iowa caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="24994" end="25016" title="coronary artery bypass surgery" label="heart bypass operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="25081" end="25084" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q83859" start="25178" end="25189" title="John Milius" label="John Milius"/>
<link wikidata="Q506400" start="25202" end="25210" title="Red Dawn" label="Red Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="25407" end="25430" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore International"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="25483" end="25497" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035462" start="25568" end="25589" title="World Business Review" label="World Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="25897" end="25916" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096807" start="25921" end="25938" title="Stephen J. Solarz" label="Stephen J. Solarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778471" start="25966" end="26007" title="Washington Institute for Near East Policy" label="Washington Institute for Near East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="26093" end="26104" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="26364" end="26379" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="26384" end="26400" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="26449" end="26463" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472068" start="26669" end="26691" title="Johns Hopkins Hospital" label="Johns Hopkins Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="26695" end="26704" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="26807" end="26820" title="complication (medicine)" label="complications"/>
<link wikidata="Q34879" start="26828" end="26852" title="staphylococcal infection" label="staphylococcal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26904" end="26922" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748478" start="26996" end="27005" title="Fort Myer" label="Fort Myer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="27047" end="27074" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="27135" end="27154" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="wars in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="27159" end="27163" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q82387" start="27208" end="27268" title="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception" label="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="27330" end="27345" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="27383" end="27395" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="27568" end="27583" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q785550" start="27936" end="27946" title="Brian Haig" label="Brian Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487060" start="27977" end="27987" title="Frank Haig" label="Frank Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="27995" end="28001" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="28013" end="28031" title="professor emeritus" label="professor emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="28035" end="28042" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399470" start="28046" end="28063" title="Loyola University Maryland" label="Loyola University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569946" start="28149" end="28162" title="World Affairs" label="World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569946" start="28395" end="28408" title="World Affairs" label="World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676450" start="29054" end="29082" title="Harvard International Review" label="Harvard International Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976183" start="29261" end="29295" title="Brown Journal of World Affairs" label="The Brown Journal of World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="29422" end="29450" title="Macmillan Publishing Company" label="Macmillan Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="29555" end="29567" title="Warner Books" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="29856" end="29887" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="30194" end="30217" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="30316" end="30344" title="Macmillan Publishing Company" label="Macmillan Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="30449" end="30473" title="Grand Central Publishing" label="Grand Central Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q435792" start="30493" end="30507" title="Seymour Hersh" label="Hersh, Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="30592" end="30604" title="Summit Books" label="Summit Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759525" start="30865" end="30889" title="Margaret Holland Sargent" label="Margaret Holland Sargent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80142" wikidata="Q2066421" url="?curid=80142" title="Pedro Alcázar">
<text>Guillermo Gonzalez, better known as Pedro &quot;El Rockero&quot; Alcázar (16 September 1975 in Zapayal, Panama – 24 June 2002) was a Panamanian boxer who won the WBO Super flyweight championship, and then sustained fatal injuries in the ring.

==Professional career==
Alcázar turned professional in 1995 &amp; compiled a record of 22–0–1 (1 NC) before beating Adonis Rivas, to win the WBO super-flyweight title. He lost his title to Fernando Montiel in Las Vegas, Nevada on 22 June 2002, in what would turn out to be his final bout.

==Professional boxing record==

==Death==
Immediately following the bout with Montiel, Alcazar was declared healthy by ringside doctors, with no visible signs of any trauma. He went sightseeing the day after the fight and was in his hotel room getting ready to fly back to Panama when he collapsed. He was taken to hospital, where he died.

This was the first time in boxing history that a boxer is known to have collapsed so long after the end of a fight. The boxing authorities have discussed compulsory medical testing for boxers up to 48 hours after a fight finishes, longer than heretofore. There was already concern following the Michael Watson case, which in the United Kingdom established the principle that the authorities have a wide responsibility for the health and safety of boxers (and also spectators). Alcazar&#x27;s death highlighted the manner in which it can take an extended time before potentially life-threatening symptoms present themselves.

He was a protégé of the legendary Hall of Famer Roberto Durán, who was a pallbearer at his funeral.

==See also==
*List of world super-flyweight boxing champions
*List of deaths due to injuries sustained in boxing

==References==
==External links==




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2066421" start="0" end="18" title="Pedro Alcázar" label="Guillermo Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066421" start="36" end="72" title="Pedro Alcázar" label="Pedro &amp;quot;El Rockero&amp;quot; Alcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="104" end="110" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="133" end="139" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="144" end="149" title="Boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="162" end="165" title="World Boxing Organisation" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699026" start="166" end="181" title="Super flyweight" label="Super flyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552437" start="433" end="449" title="Fernando Montiel" label="Fernando Montiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="453" end="462" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="464" end="470" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="700" end="706" title="Physical trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674689" start="1170" end="1184" title="Michael Watson" label="Michael Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="1301" end="1318" title="Occupational safety and health" label="health and safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q471571" start="1548" end="1561" title="Roberto Durán" label="Roberto Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127679" start="1573" end="1583" title="pallbearer" label="pallbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="1591" end="1598" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075879" start="1615" end="1661" title="List of world super-flyweight boxing champions" label="List of world super-flyweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315174" start="1663" end="1713" title="List of deaths due to injuries sustained in boxing" label="List of deaths due to injuries sustained in boxing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80143" wikidata="Q66777993" url="?curid=80143" title="Lists of mathematicians">
<text>This is a List of Lists of mathematicians and covers notable mathematicians by nationality, ethnicity, religion, profession and other characteristics. Alphabetical lists are also available (see table to the right).

==Lists by nationality, ethnicity or religion==

* List of American mathematicians
**List of African-American mathematicians
* List of Bengali mathematicians
* List of Brazilian mathematicians
* List of Chinese mathematicians
* List of German mathematicians
* List of Greek mathematicians
** Timeline of ancient Greek mathematicians
* List of Hungarian mathematicians
* List of Indian mathematicians
* List of Italian mathematicians
* List of Iranian mathematicians
* List of Jewish American mathematicians
* List of Jewish mathematicians
* List of Norwegian mathematicians
* List of Muslim mathematicians
* List of Polish mathematicians
* List of Russian mathematicians
* List of Slovenian mathematicians
* List of Ukrainian mathematicians
* List of Turkish mathematicians
* List of Welsh mathematicians
==Lists by profession==

* List of actuaries
* List of game theorists
* List of geometers
* List of logicians
* List of mathematical probabilists
* List of statisticians
* List of quantitative analysts

==Other lists of mathematicians==

* List of amateur mathematicians
* List of mathematicians born in the 19th century
* List of centenarians (scientists and mathematicians)
* List of films about mathematicians
* List of women in mathematics

==See also==

* The Mathematics Genealogy Project – Database for the academic genealogy of mathematicians
* List of mathematical artists

==External links==
* The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive – Extensive list of detailed biographies
* The Oberwolfach Photo Collection – Photographs of mathematicians from all over the world
* Photos of mathematicians – Collection of photos of mathematicians (and computer scientists) made by Andrej Bauer.
* Famous Mathematicians
* Calendar of mathematicians&#x27; birthdays and death anniversaries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66777993" start="10" end="41" title="Lists of mathematicians" label="List of Lists of mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="61" end="74" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q27660656" start="267" end="298" title="List of American mathematicians" label="List of American mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560683" start="301" end="340" title="List of African-American mathematicians" label="List of African-American mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563738" start="343" end="373" title="List of Bengali mathematicians" label="List of Bengali mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715857" start="376" end="408" title="List of Brazilian mathematicians" label="List of Brazilian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567106" start="411" end="441" title="List of Chinese mathematicians" label="List of Chinese mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q52458459" start="444" end="473" title="List of German mathematicians" label="List of German mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192222" start="476" end="504" title="List of Greek mathematicians" label="List of Greek mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433435" start="508" end="548" title="Timeline of ancient Greek mathematicians" label="Timeline of ancient Greek mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162431" start="551" end="583" title="List of Hungarian mathematicians" label="List of Hungarian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264019" start="586" end="615" title="List of Indian mathematicians" label="List of Indian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150922" start="618" end="648" title="List of Italian mathematicians" label="List of Italian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086679" start="651" end="681" title="List of Iranian mathematicians" label="List of Iranian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575310" start="684" end="722" title="List of Jewish American mathematicians" label="List of Jewish American mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575348" start="725" end="754" title="List of Jewish mathematicians" label="List of Jewish mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q113787266" start="757" end="789" title="List of Norwegian mathematicians" label="List of Norwegian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="792" end="821" title="List of Muslim mathematicians" label="List of Muslim mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594410" start="824" end="853" title="List of Polish mathematicians" label="List of Polish mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q621883" start="856" end="886" title="List of Russian mathematicians" label="List of Russian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802385" start="889" end="921" title="List of Slovenian mathematicians" label="List of Slovenian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601350" start="924" end="956" title="List of Ukrainian mathematicians" label="List of Ukrainian mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308534" start="959" end="989" title="List of Turkish mathematicians" label="List of Turkish mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603924" start="992" end="1020" title="List of Welsh mathematicians" label="List of Welsh mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605016" start="1048" end="1065" title="List of actuaries" label="List of actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621456" start="1068" end="1090" title="List of game theorists" label="List of game theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235798" start="1093" end="1110" title="List of geometers" label="List of geometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222142" start="1113" end="1130" title="List of logicians" label="List of logicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627331" start="1133" end="1166" title="List of mathematical probabilists" label="List of mathematical probabilists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083928" start="1169" end="1190" title="List of statisticians" label="List of statisticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635746" start="1193" end="1222" title="List of quantitative analysts" label="List of quantitative analysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605648" start="1261" end="1291" title="List of amateur mathematicians" label="List of amateur mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901337" start="1294" end="1341" title="List of mathematicians born in the 19th century" label="List of mathematicians born in the 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609306" start="1344" end="1396" title="List of centenarians (scientists and mathematicians)" label="List of centenarians (scientists and mathematicians)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619927" start="1399" end="1433" title="List of films about mathematicians" label="List of films about mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244218" start="1436" end="1464" title="List of women in mathematics" label="List of women in mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q829984" start="1486" end="1515" title="Mathematics Genealogy Project" label="Mathematics Genealogy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716090" start="1574" end="1602" title="List of mathematical artists" label="List of mathematical artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80144" wikidata="Q816854" url="?curid=80144" title="List of chemists">
<text>This is a list of chemists. It should include those who have been important to the development or practice of chemistry. Their research or application has made significant contributions in the area of basic or applied chemistry.

==A==

*Richard Abegg (1869–1910), German chemist
*Frederick Abel (1827–1902), English chemist
*Friedrich Accum (1769–1838), German chemist, advances in the field of gas lighting
*Homer Burton Adkins (1892–1949), American chemist, known for work in hydrogenation of organic compounds
*Peter Agre (born 1949), American chemist and doctor, 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Georgius Agricola (1494–1555), German scholar known as &quot;the father of mineralogy&quot;
*Natalie Ahn, American chemist
*Arthur Aikin (1773–1855), English chemist and mineralogist
*Adrien Albert (1907–1989), Australian medicinal chemist
*John Albery (1936–2013), English physical chemist
*Kurt Alder (1902–1958), German chemist, 1950 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jerome Alexander (1876–1959), American expert on the chemistry of colloids
*Ivan Alimarin (1903-1989), Soviet chemist, one of the leaders of analytical chemistry in 20&#x27;s century
*Elmer Lucille Allen (born 1931), American chemist and ceramic artist
*Heather C. Allen (born 1960), American chemist
*Adah Almutairi (born 1976), American chemist
*Sidney Altman (1939–2022), Canadian-American biologist, 1989 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Faiza Al-Kharafi (born 1946), Kuwaiti chemist, academic and the first woman to head a major university in the Middle East
*Lisa Alvarez-Cohen, American chemist
*Gloria Long Anderson (born 1938), American chemist
*Christian B. Anfinsen (1916–1995), American chemist, 1972 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Angelo Angeli (1864–1931), Italian chemist
*Octavio Augusto Ceva Antunes, Brazilian chemist
*Anthony Joseph Arduengo, III (born 1952), American chemist
*Johan August Arfwedson (1792–1841), Swedish chemist
*Anton Eduard van Arkel (1893–1976), Dutch chemist
*Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927), Swedish chemist, one of the founders of physical chemistry
*Valerie Ashby (born 1965/1966), American chemist
*Barbara Askins (born 1939), American chemist
*Larned B. Asprey (1919–2005), American nuclear chemist
*Alán Aspuru-Guzik (born 1976), computational chemist 
*Francis William Aston (1877–1945), British chemist and physicist, 1922 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Karin Aurivillius (1920–1982), Swedish chemist and crystallographer
*Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856), Italian chemist and physicist, discovered Avogadro&#x27;s law

==B==

*Stephen Moulton Babcock (1843–1931), American agricultural chemist worked on the &quot;single-grain experiment&quot;
*Myrtle Bachelder (1908–1997), American chemist noted for work on the Manhattan Project atomic bomb
*Werner Emmanuel Bachmann (1901–1951), American chemist, known for work in steroids and RDX
*Simone Badal-McCreath, Jamaican chemist
*Leo Baekeland (1863–1944), Belgian-American chemist
*Adolf von Baeyer (1835–1917), German chemist, 1905 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, synthesis of indigo
*Piero Baglioni (born 1952), Italian chemist
*Hendrik Willem Bakhuis Roozeboom (1854–1907), Dutch chemist
*Alice Ball (1892–1916), African American chemist known for inventing an effective injectable treatment for leprosy
*Emily Balskus (born 1980), American chemist and microbiologist
*Zhenan Bao (born 1970), Chinese chemist known for developing technologies with organic field-effect transistors and organic semiconductors
*Phil S. Baran (born 1977), American chemist known for synthesis, novel reactions and reagents
*Coral Barbas, Spanish chemist
*Allen J. Bard (born 1933), 2008, American chemist, Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Vincenzo Barone (born 1952), Italian chemist
*Neil Bartlett (1932–2008), English/Canadian/American chemist
*Sir Derek Barton (1918–1998), 1969 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Fred Basolo (1920–2007), American inorganic chemist
*Esther Batchelder (1897–1987), American chemist, educator and specialist in nutrition
*Sir Alan Battersby (1925–2018), English organic chemist known for work on biosynthetic pathways
*Antoine Baumé (1728–1804), French chemist
*Karl Bayer (1847–1904), Austrian chemist
*Johann Joachim Becher (1635–1682), German who developed the phlogiston theory of combustion
*Kathryn Beers, American polymer chemist
*Friedrich Konrad Beilstein (1838–1906), German-Russian chemist, created Beilstein database
*Joseph Achille Le Bel (1847–1930), French chemist, early work in stereochemistry
*Angela Belcher, American chemist, materials scientist, and biological engineer
*Irina Beletskaya (born 1933), Russian organometallic chemist
*R. P. Bell (1907–1996), English physical chemist
*Francesco Bellini (born 1947), research scientist, doctor in organic chemistry
*Andrey Belozersky (1905–1972), Soviet biologist and biochemist, doctor in biological sciences
*Ruth R. Benerito (1916–2013), American chemist known for inventions relating to textiles
*Paul Berg (1926–2023), American biochemist,1980 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Friedrich Bergius (1884–1949), German chemist,1931 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Helen M. Berman (born 1943), American chemist
*Marcellin Berthelot (1827–1907), French chemist, important work in thermochemistry
*Claude Louis Berthollet (1748–1822), French chemist
*Carolyn R. Bertozzi (born 1966) American chemist, Stanford
*Guy Bertrand (born 1952) French chemist, UCSD
*Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), Swedish chemist, coined the term &quot;polymer&quot; in 1833
*Johannes Martin Bijvoet (1892–1980), Dutch chemist and crystallographer
*Leonora Bilger (1893–1975), American chemist who studied nitrogenous compounds
*Hazel Bishop (1906–1998), American chemist and cosmetics inventor
*Katherine Bitting (1869–1937), Canadian and American food chemist for the United States Department of Agriculture and the National Canners Association
*Joseph Black (1728–1799), Scottish chemist
*Katharine Burr Blodgett (1898–1979), American surface chemist and physicist and inventor of nonreflective glass
*Suzanne Blum (born 1978), American chemist
*Katharine Blunt (1876–1954), American chemist and nutritionist focusing on home economics, food chemistry and nutrition
* Herman Boerhaave (1668–1738) Dutch chemist, botanist, Christian humanist &amp; physician, first to isolate urea from urine
*Kristie Boering (born 1963), American chemist and Earth and planetary scientist
*Olga Bogdanova (1896–1982), Soviet chemist
*Dale L. Boger (born 1953), American organic and medicinal chemist
*Paul Emile Lecoq de Boisbaudran (1838–1912), French chemist
*Jan Boldingh (1915–2003), Dutch chemist
*Alexander Borodin (1833–1887), Russian chemist and composer
*Hans-Joachim Born (1909–1987), German radiochemist
*Carl Bosch (1872–1940), German chemist
*Octave Leopold Boudouard (1872–1923), French chemist, discovered the Boudouard reaction
*Jean-Baptiste Boussingault (1802–1887), French chemist, agricultural chemistry
*E. J. Bowen (1898–1980), English physical chemist
*Humphry Bowen (1929–2001), English analytical chemist
*Paul D. Boyer (1918–2018), American biochemist, 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Robert Boyer (1909–1989), American Chemist, employee of Henry Ford focus on soybean use
*Robert Boyle (1627–1691), Irish-English pioneer of modern chemistry
*Henri Braconnot (1780–1855), French chemist and pharmacist
*Henning Brand (c. 1630–c.1692 or c. 1710), German chemist, discovered phosphorus
*Mary Bidwell Breed (1870–1949), American chemist focusing on aromatic acids, first woman dean of Indiana University
*Ronald Breslow (1931–2017), American organic chemist
*Alan Brisdon, British chemist
*Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted (1879–1947), Danish chemist
*Herbert C. Brown (1912–2004), American chemist, 1979 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jeannette Brown (born 1934), American organic medicinal chemist, historian, and author
*Jeanette Grasselli Brown (born 1928), American analytical chemist and spectroscopist
*Rachel Fuller Brown (1898–1980), American chemist who co-developed the first useful antifungal antibiotic
*Eduard Buchner (1860–1917), German chemist and zymologist,1907 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Stephen L. Buchwald (born 1955), American Chemist, Organic Chemistry, co-discoverer of Palladium-catalyzed C-N bond formation Buchwald–Hartwig amination
*Mary Van Rensselaer Buell (1893–1969), American chemist who did early research in nutrition and physiological chemistry
*Kathryn Bullock (born 1945), American chemist who co-developed valve-regulated lead-acid batteries
*Robert Wilhelm Bunsen (1811–1899), German inventor, chemist, discovered the elements caesium and rubidium with Gustav Kirchhoff and invented the Bunsen burner
*Jeanne Burbank (1915–2002), American chemist who developed lead-acid and silver-zinc batteries for submarines at the United States Naval Research Laboratory
*Winifred Burks-Houck (1950–2004), American organic chemist
*Stephanie Burns (born 1955), American organosilicon chemist and past honorary president of Society of Chemical Industry
*William Merriam Burton (1865–1954), American chemist, developed the first thermal cracking process for crude oil
*Adolf Butenandt (1903–1995), German biochemist,1939 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Alison Butler, American bioinorganic chemist and metallobiochemist
*Aleksandr Butlerov (1828–1886), Russian chemist, discovered the formose reaction

==C==

*Mary Letitia Caldwell (1890–1972), American chemist who developed a method for purifying crystalline porcine pancreatic amylase
*Melvin Calvin (1911–1997), American chemist, winner of 1961 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Allison A. Campbell (born 1963), American chemist studying biomineralization, biomimetics and biomaterials
*Constantin Cândea (1887–1971), Romanian chemist
*Stanislao Cannizzaro (1826–1910), Italian chemist, postulated the Cannizzaro reaction
*Georg Ludwig Carius (1829–1875), German chemist
*Heinrich Caro (1834–1910), German chemist
*Wallace Carothers (1896–1937), American chemist, known for the discovery of nylon
*Emma P. Carr (1880–1972), American spectroscopist
*Marjorie Constance Caserio (1929–2021), American chemist, winner of the American Chemical Society&#x27;s Garvan Medal
*Marta Catellani, Italian chemist, discovered the Catellani reaction
*Henry Cavendish (1731–1810), British scientist
*Elena Ceaușescu (1916–1989), Romanian chemist and politician 
*Thomas Cech (born 1947), American biochemist, 1989 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*María Cegarra Salcedo (1899–1993), Spanish chemist, teacher, poet, councillor 
*Martin Chalfie (born 1947), American scientist, 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Michelle Chang (born 1977), American chemist, Professor of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley
*Yves Chauvin (1930–2015), French chemist, 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Michel Eugėne Chevreul (1786–1889), French chemist, designed an early form of soap, lived to be 102
*Christine S. Chow, American chemist
*Aaron Ciechanover (born 1947), Israeli biologist, 2004 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Giacomo Luigi Ciamician (1857–1922) Italian chemist, father of the solar panel
*G. Marius Clore FRS (born 1955), American chemist, known for foundational work in three-dimensional protein and nucleic acid structure determination by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
*Edward L. Cochran (born 1929), American chemist, known for pioneering studies on the nature of free radicals
*Ernst Cohen (1869–1944), Dutch chemist (murdered in Auschwitz)
*Mildred Cohn (1913–2009), American chemist who studied chemical reactions within animal cells
*David Collison, British chemist
*Vicki Colvin (born 1965), Director of the Centre for Biomedical Engineering at Brown University
*James Bryant Conant (1893–1978), American organic chemist, Priestley Medal 1944
*Elias James Corey (born 1928), American organic chemist, winner of the 1990 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Robert Corey (1897–1971), American biochemist
*Carl Ferdinand Cori (1896–1984), Czech biochemist, Nobel Prize in medicine 1947
*Gerty Cori (1896–1957), American biochemist, Nobel Prize in medicine 1947
*Charles D. Coryell (1912–1971), American chemist, co-discovered the element promethium
*John Cornforth (1917–2013), Australian-British chemist, Australian winner of the 1975 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Brigid Cotter (1921–1978), Irish chemist and barrister
*Frank Albert Cotton (1930–2007), 2000 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Charles Coulson (1910–1974), British theoretical chemist
*Archibald Scott Couper (1831–1892), English chemist, further developed Tetravalence
*James Crafts (1839–1917), American chemist, developer of Friedel–Crafts reaction
*Donald J. Cram (1919–2001), American chemist, winner of the 1987 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*William Crookes (1832–1919), British chemist, discovered the element thallium
*Alexander Crum Brown (1838–1922), Scottish organic chemist
*Paul J. Crutzen (1933–2021), Dutch chemist, winner of the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Ana Maria Cuervo (born 1966), Spanish-American physician, researcher, and cell biologist
*Marie Curie (1867–1934), Polish radiation physicist, discovered the elements radium and polonium, 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics, 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Pierre Curie (1859–1906), 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics
*Robert Curl (1933–2022), American chemist, winner of 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Theodor Curtius (1857–1928), German chemist
*Emil Czyrniański (1824–1888), Polish chemist

==D==

*Jeff Dahn (born 1957), American materials chemist noted for significant contributions to lithium-ion batteries
*John Dalton (1766–1844), British chemist and physicist and pioneer of the atomic theory
*Marie Maynard Daly (1921–2003), American biochemist and the first African American woman in the United States to earn a PhD in chemistry
*Carl Peter Henrik Dam (1895–1976), Danish biochemist, winner of the 1943 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Vincenzo, Count Dandolo (1758–1819), Italian nobleman and chemist
*Samuel J. Danishefsky (born 1936), American organic chemist, natural product Total synthesis, 1995/6 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Humphry Davy (1778–1829), British chemist, discovered several alkaline earth metals
*Raymond Davis, Jr. (1914–2006), American physical chemist
*Serena DeBeer (born 1973, American chemist and director of the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion
*Peter Debye (1884–1966), Dutch chemist, winner of the 1936 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Johann Deisenhofer (born 1943), German biochemist, 1988 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Margarita del Val (born 1959), Spanish chemist, immunologist, and virologist
*Nathalie Demassieux (1884–1961), French mineral chemist and academic
*Gautam Radhakrishna Desiraju (born 1952), Indian chemist considered father of crystal engineering
*James Dewar (1842–1923), British chemist and physicist
*François Diederich (1952–2020), Luxembourg chemist
*Otto Diels (1876–1954), German chemist, winner of the 1950 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Robert Dirks (1978–2015), American computational chemist
*Martha Doan (1872–1960), American chemist who studied thallium compounds
*William von Eggers Doering (1917–2011), American chemist
*Edward Doisy (1893–1986), American biochemist, winner of the 1943 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Davorin Dolar (1921–2005), Slovenian physical chemist from University of Ljubljana
*Vy Maria Dong (born 1976), American chemist who studies enantioselective catalysis and natural product synthesis
*David Adriaan van Dorp (1915–1995), Dutch chemist
*Israel Dostrovsky (1918–2010), Russian (Ukraine)-born Israeli physical chemist, fifth president of the Weizmann Institute of Science
*Herbert Henry Dow (1866–1930), American industrial chemist, known for bromine extraction
*Cornelius Drebbel (1572–1633), Dutch inventor, alchemist and chemist
*Vratislav Ducháček (1941–2018), Czech chemist
*Carl Duisberg (1861–1935), German chemist, early administrative industrial chemist
*Jean Baptiste Dumas (1800–1884), French chemist, work on atomic weights
*Helen Dyer (1895–1998), American biochemist and early cancer researcher

==E==

*Sandra Eaton, American chemist notable for work on electron paramagnetic resonance
*Eilaf Egap, American chemist
*Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915), German chemist, winner of the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Arthur Eichengrün (1867–1949), German chemist
*Manfred Eigen (1927–2019), German chemist, winner of the 1967 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Mostafa El-Sayed (born 1933), Egyptian-American physical chemist
*Fausto Elhuyar (1755–1833), Spanish chemist, discoverer of tungsten
*Lorne Elias, Canadian chemist, inventor of the explosives vapour detector EVD-1
*Gertrude B. Elion (1918–1999), American biochemist and recipient of the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Conrad Elvehjem (1901–1962), American biochemist, discovered niacin
*Harry Julius Emeléus (1903–1993), British inorganic chemist
*Gladys Anderson Emerson (1903–1984), American chemist and early nutritionist, and the first person to isolate Vitamin E
*Emil Erlenmeyer (1825–1909), German chemist
*Richard R. Ernst (1933–2021), Swiss physical chemist, 1991 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Gerhard Ertl (born 1936), German physical chemist, 2007 Nobel prize in chemistry
*Margaret C. Etter (1943–1992), American chemist and developer of solid state chemistry for crystalline organic compounds
*Hans von Euler-Chelpin (1873–1964), Swedish chemist, winner of the 1929 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Henry Eyring (1901–1981), Mexican-American theoretical chemist

==F==

*Kazimierz Fajans (1887–1975), Polish-American physical chemist
*Michael Faraday (1791–1867), British chemist and physicist, discovered Benzene
*Hermann von Fehling (1812–1885), German chemist
*John Bennett Fenn (1917–2010), 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Enrico Fermi (1901–1954), Nuclear chemist and elementary particle physicist, Nobel Prize in Physics 1938
*Mary Peters Fieser (1909–1997), American chemist and author of chemistry books
*Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts, Canadian-American atmospheric chemist
*Hermann Emil Fischer (1852–1919), 1902 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, (actual name Hermann Emil Fischer, see below) not to be confused with:
*Franz Joseph Emil Fischer (1877–1947), German chemist, co-discovered the Fischer–Tropsch process
*Emily V. Fischer (born 1979/1980), American chemist notable for work on the WE-CAN project and on peroxyacetyl nitrate
*Ernst Gottfried Fischer (1754–1831), German chemist
*Ernst Otto Fischer (1918–2007), German chemist, 1973 Nobel Prize in Chemistry winner
*Hans Fischer (1881–1945), German organic chemist, 1930 Nobel Prize in Chemistry winner
*Nellie Ivy Fisher (1907–1995), London-born industrial chemist 
*Wilhelm Rudolph Fittig (1835–1910), German chemist, co-discovered Wurtz–Fittig reaction
*Edith M. Flanigen (born 1929), American chemist known for synthesizing emeralds and zeolites
*Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy (1775–1809), co-discovered the element Iridium and developed modern chemical notation
*Nicolas Flamel (c. 1330–1418), French alchemist
*Paul Flory (1910–1985), 1974 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Maria Forsyth, Australian researcher, new plastic materials for batteries
*Margaret D. Foster (1895–1970), Manhattan Project chemist and the first female chemist to work for the United States Geological Survey
*Joanna Fowler (born 1942), American neural chemist
*Michelle Francl, American computational chemist
*Edward Frankland (1825–1899), English chemist, originated the concept of valence
*Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958), British chemist and crystallographer
*Katherine Franz (born 1972), American chemist noted for work in metal ion coordination in biological systems
*Herman Frasch (1851–1914), German mining engineer and inventor, pioneered the Frasch process
*Bertram Fraser-Reid (1934–2020), Jamaican synthetic organic chemist who developed the armed-disarmed principle in glycosylation chemistry. He constructed the largest ever synthetic hetero-oligosaccharide without the use of automated methods.
*Helen Murray Free (1923–2021), American chemist who developed self-testing systems for diabetes
*Carl Remigius Fresenius (1818–1897), German chemist
*Ida Freund (1863–1914), first woman university chemistry lecturer in the UK
*Charles Friedel (1832–1899), French chemist, developer of Friedel–Crafts reaction
*Alexander Naumovich Frumkin (1895–1976), electrochemist and chemist
*Kenichi Fukui (1918–1998), 1981 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Elizabeth Fulhame (18th–19th centuries), British chemist, pioneer in the study of catalysis
*Vera Furness (1921–2002), English chemist and industrial manager

==G==

*Johan Gadolin (1760–1852), Finnish chemist
*Merrill Garnett (born 1930), American biochemist
*Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850), French chemist and physicist, discovered the Gay-Lussac law
*Charles Frédéric Gerhardt (1816–1856), French chemist, synthesized acetylsalicylic acid
*Jnan Chandra Ghosh (1894–1959), Indian chemist, development of anomaly of strong electrolytes and the dissociation - ionization theory.
*William Giauque (1895–1982), 1949 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903), American engineer, chemist and physicist
*Walter Gilbert (born 1932), 1980 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Cornelia Gillyard (born 1941), codirector of the National Science Foundation&#x27;s Research in Chemistry for Minority Scholars Program
*Henry Gilman (1893–1986), American chemist, discovered the Gilman reagent
*Judith Giordan, American chemist and professor; 2014 American Chemical Society Henry Whalen Award
*Johann Rudolf Glauber (1604–1670), Dutch-German alchemist and chemist
*Lawrence E. Glendenin (1918–2008), American chemist, co-discovered the element promethium
*Leopold Gmelin (1788–1853), German chemist, discovered potassium ferricyanide
*Theodore Nicolas Gobley (1811–1874), French chemist, pioneer in brain tissues analysis, discoverer of lecithin
*Adolph Goetting (1851–1929), German chemist, worked for California Perfume Company
*Sulamith Goldhaber (1923–1965), Austrian-American chemist, high-energy physicist, and molecular spectroscopist
*Victor Goldschmidt (1888–1947), father of modern geochemistry
*Moses Gomberg (1866–1947), Russian-American chemist, known for pioneering work in radical chemistry
*Mary L. Good (1931–2019), American inorganic chemist
*David van Goorle also called Gorlaeus (1591–1612), Dutch chemist, one of the first modern atomists
*Loney Gordon (1915–1999), American chemist who assisted in creating the pertussis vaccine
*Carl Gräbe (1841–1927), German chemist, discovered the dye alizarin
*Thomas Graham (1805–1869), Scottish chemist, dialysis and diffusion
*Harry B. Gray (born 1935), 2004 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Martha Greenblatt (born 1941), American solid state inorganic chemist, 2003 American Chemical Society&#x27;s Garvan-Olin Medal
*Bettye Washington Greene (1935–1995), American researcher on latex and polymers
*Sandra C. Greer (born 1945), American chemist notable for work on thermodynamics of fluids, polymer solutions and phase transitions
*François Auguste Victor Grignard (1871–1935), 1912 Nobel Prize in Chemistry corecipient
*Robert H. Grubbs (1942–2021), 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Vilmosné Gryllus (1924–2024), Hungarian chemist in the sugar industry

==H==

*Fritz Haber (1868–1934), German chemist, 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, father of the Haber process
*Dorothy Hahn (1876–1950), early American organic chemist and ultraviolet spectroscopist
*Otto Hahn (1879–1968), German chemist, discoverer of nuclear fission, 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, father of nuclear chemistry
*Sossina M. Haile (born 1966), American chemist notable for developing the first solid acid fuel cells
*Naomi Halas, American biochemist focusing on nanoshells and nanophotonics
*John Burdon Sanderson Haldane (1892–1962), British and Indian biochemist, geneticist and evolutionary biologist
*John Scott Haldane (1860–1936), British biochemist
*Charles Martin Hall (1863–1914), American chemist, famous for Hall-Héroult process
*Frances Mary Hamer (1894–1980), British chemist who specialized in photographic sensitization compounds
*George S. Hammond (1921–2005), American chemist, famous for Hammond&#x27;s postulate
*Arthur Harden (1865–1940), English biochemist and winner of the shared Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1929
*Elizabeth Hardy (1915–2008), American chemist and discoverer of the Cope rearrangement
*Anna J. Harrison (1912–1998), first female President of the American Chemical Society
*Odd Hassel (1897–1981), Norwegian chemist 1969 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Charles Hatchett (1765–1847), English chemist who discovered niobium
*Herbert A. Hauptman (1917–2011), 1985 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Robert Havemann (1910–1982), German chemist
*Walter Hawkins (1911–1992), African American chemist, widely regarded as a pioneer of polymer chemistry. Co-invented a polymer with antioxidants that prevented deterioration even in extreme temperatures. 
*Walter Haworth (1883–1950), 1937 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Sam Hay, New Zealand chemist
*Alma Levant Hayden (1927–1967), American spectrophotometer at the National Institutes of Health
*Jabir Ibn Hayyan (722–804), Persian-Arab chemist and alchemist
*Clayton Heathcock (born 1936), American chemist
*Philipp R. Heck, cosmochemist
*Alan J. Heeger (1936–2023), 2000 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Jan Baptist van Helmont (1579–1644), The founder of pneumatic chemistry
*Dudley R. Herschbach (born 1932), American chemist, 1986 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Avram Hershko (born 1937), 2004 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Charles Herty (1867–1938), American chemist
*Gerhard Herzberg (1904–1999), German-Canadian chemist, 1971 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Germain Henri Hess (1802–1850), Swiss-born Russian chemist, namesake of Hess&#x27;s law
*George de Hevesy (1885–1966), Hungarian born chemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in chemistry 1943
*Jaroslav Heyrovský (1890–1967), Czech chemist, 1959 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Evelyn Hickmans (1883–1972), British biochemist, pioneer in treatment of phenylketonuria
*Joel Hildebrand (18811983), American educator and chemist specializing in liquids and nonelectrolyte solutions
*Mary Elliott Hill (1907–1969), American chemist who developed analytic methodology for ultraviolet light
*Cyril Norman Hinshelwood (1897–1967), English physical chemist and winner of the shared Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1956
*Gladys Lounsbury Hobby (1910–1993), American microbiologist known for development and early understanding of antibiotics
*Dorothy Hodgkin (1910–1994), 1964 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Jacobus Henricus van &#x27;t Hoff (1852–1911), Dutch physical chemist, 1901 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Albert Hofmann (1906–2008), Swiss chemist, synthesized Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
*August Wilhelm Hofmann (1818–1892), German chemist, first to isolate sorbic acid
*Darleane C. Hoffman (born 1926), American nuclear chemist
*Friedrich Hoffmann (1660–1742), physician and chemist
*Roald Hoffmann (born 1937), Polish-born American chemist, 1981 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Mei Hong (born 1970), Chinese-American biophysical chemist
*Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1861–1947), British biochemist, known for discovery of vitamins, Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1929
*Marjorie G. Horning (1917–2020), American biochemist and pioneer of chromatography
*Linda Hsieh-Wilson, American chemist, California Institute of Technology
*Heinrich Hubert Maria Josef Houben (1875–1940), German organic chemist
*Coenraad Johannes van Houten (1801–1887), Dutch chemist and chocolate maker, invented cocoa powder
*Amir H. Hoveyda, U.S.-based chemist working in asymmetric catalysis
*Benjamin Hsiao (born 1958), Asian American chemist at Stony Brook University, Fellow of the American Physical Society, Fellow of the American Chemical Society, Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
*Marcia Huber, American chemical engineer and 2005 Department of Commerce Bronze Medal winner
*Robert Huber (born 1937), 1988 Nobel Prize in chemistry
*Catherine T. Hunt (born 1955), American chemist, served as president of the American Chemical Society and was a Dow Chemical Company director

==I==

*Sir Christopher Kelk Ingold (1893–1970), English chemist
*Vladimir Ipatieff (1867–1952), Russian-American chemist, known for organic synthesis

==J==

*Nancy B. Jackson (1956–2022), American chemist
*Marilyn E. Jacox (1929–2013), American chemist and National Institute of Standards and Technology fellow
*Hope Jahren (born 1969), American chemist and isotope analyst
*Paul Janssen (1926–2003), Belgian founder of Janssen Pharmaceutica
*Allene Jeanes (1906–1995), American chemist who developed Dextran to replace plasma in the Korean War
*Frédéric Joliot-Curie (1900–1958), French chemist and physicist, 1935 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Irène Joliot-Curie (1897–1956), French chemist and physicist, 1935 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Madeleine M. Joullié (born 1927), French-American-Brazilian organic chemist and first woman to have an American tenure track position in organic chemistry
*Percy Lavon Julian (1899–1975), African American organic chemist who was a pioneer in the chemical synthesis of medicinal drugs from plants. He was the first to synthesize the natural product physostigmine.

==K==

*Henri B. Kagan (born 1930), 2001 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Isabella Karle (1921–2017), American chemist instrumental for extracting plutonium chloride from a mixture containing plutonium oxide
*Jerome Karle (1918–2013), 1985 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Paul Karrer (1889–1971), 1937 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Karl Wilhelm Gottlob Kastner (1783–1857)
*Alan R. Katritzky (1928–2014), Pioneer in heterocyclic chemistry
*Joyce Jacobson Kaufman (1929–2016), American chemist and inventor of conformational topology
*Melinda H. Keefe, American chemist and research and development director at the Dow Chemical Company
*August Kekulé (1829–1896), German organic chemist
*Sinah Estelle Kelley (1916–1982), American chemist who helped pioneer mass production of penicillin
*John Kendrew (1917–1997), 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Ann Kiessling (born 1942), American chemist and reproductive biologist
*Petrus Jacobus Kipp (1808–1864), Dutch chemist, inventor of Kipp-generator
*Johan Kjeldahl (1849–1900), Danish chemist, head chemist at Carlsberg Brewery, methods still in use
*Martin Heinrich Klaproth (1743–1817), German chemist, discovered the element uranium
*Trevor Kletz (1922–2013), British promoter of industrial safety
*Aaron Klug (1926–2018), winner of the 1982 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Emil Knoevenagel (1865–1921)
*Jeremy Randall Knowles (1935–2008), British chemist
*William Standish Knowles (1917–2012), 2001 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Walter Kohn (1923–2016), 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Adolph Wilhelm Hermann Kolbe (1818–1884), German chemist known for Kolbe nitrile synthesis
*Izaak Kolthoff (1894–1993), Dutch-American chemist, the &quot;Father of Analytical Chemistry&quot;
*Roger D. Kornberg (born 1947), 2006 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Teresa Kowalska (1946–2023), Polish chemist, co-founder of &quot;Acta Chromatographia&quot;
*Hans A. Krebs (1900–1981), German biochemist, work on metabolic cycles
*Harold Kroto (1939–2016), English chemist, 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Richard Kuhn (1900–1967), 1938 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Eugenia Kumacheva, polymer chemist
*Theodore Kuwana, (1931–2022), American chemist, founder of the field of spectroelectrochemistry

==L==

*Irving Langmuir (1881–1957), chemist, physicist, 1932 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Auguste Laurent (1807–1853), French chemist, discovered anthracene
*Paul Lauterbur (1929–2007), American chemist
*Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794), French pioneer chemist
*Nicolas Leblanc (1742–1806), French chemist and surgeon
*Henri Louis Le Chatelier (1850–1936), French chemist
*Yuan T. Lee (born 1936), Taiwanese chemist, winner of 1986 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Valery Legasov (1936–1988), Soviet inorganic chemist known for his position as head of the Chernobyl Commission for the Chernobyl Disaster
*Jean-Marie Lehn (born 1939), French chemist, shared 1987 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Marko Leko (1853–1932), Serbian chemist
*Luis Federico Leloir (1906–1987), Argentine biochemist and winner of the 1970 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Raymond Lemieux (1920–2000), Canadian organic chemist, Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Gilbert Newton Lewis (1875–1946), American chemist and first Dean of the Berkeley College of Chemistry
*Andreas Libavius (1555–1616), German doctor and chemist
*Carl Theodore Liebermann (1842–1914), German chemist, known for synthesis of alizarin
*Willard Libby (1908–1980), American chemist, winner of 1960 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Justus von Liebig (1803–1873), German inventor and pioneer in agricultural and biological chemistry
*Karl Paul Link (1901–1978), American biochemist, discovered the anticoagulant warfarin
*John Wilfrid Linnett (1913–1975), British chemist at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
*William Lipscomb (1919–2011), American chemist, 1976 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister (1827–1912), English surgeon
*Arthur H. Livermore (1915–2009), science educator and chemist
*Mikhail Lomonosov (1711–1765), Russian scientist, anticipated the kinetic-molecular theory by 100 years
*H. Christopher Longuet-Higgins (1923–2004), British chemist
*Janis Louie, (born 1971) American chemist
*Martin Lowry (1874–1936), British chemist
*Sima Lozanić (1847–1935), Serbian chemist
*Alfred Lucas (1867–1945), Egypt-based English chemist and archaeologist
*Ignacy Łukasiewicz (1802–1882), Polish pharmacist

==M==

*Alan MacDiarmid (1927–2007), American-New Zealand chemist, 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Carolina Henriette Mac Gillavry (1904–1993), Dutch chemist and crystallographer
*Roderick MacKinnon (born 1956), 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Pierre Macquer (1718–1784), influential French chemist
*Rudolph A. Marcus (born 1923), 1992 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jacob A. Marinsky (1918–2005), American chemist, co-discovered the element promethium
*Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac (1817–1894), Swiss chemist, discovered ytterbium and co-discovered gadolinium
*Vladimir Vasilevich Markovnikov (1838–1904)
*Tobin J. Marks (born 1944), American inorganic chemist and materials scientist
*Alan G. Marshall (born 1944), American chemist, co-inventor of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometry
*Archer John Porter Martin (1910–2002), 1952 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Martinus van Marum (1750–1837), Dutch chemist
*Elmer McCollum (1879–1967), American biochemist, known for work of diet on health
*Edwin McMillan (1907–1991), 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Lise Meitner (1878–1968), German physicist
*Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834–1907), Russian chemist, creator of the Periodic table of elements
*John Mercer (1791–1866), chemist and industrialist
*Robert Bruce Merrifield (1921–2006), solid-phase chemist, 1984 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Julius Lothar Meyer (1830–1895), German chemist, important work on The periodic table of elements; not to be confused with:
*Viktor Meyer (1848–1897)
* Dan Meyerstein (born 1938), Israeli chemist and president of Ariel University
*August Michaelis (1847–1916), German chemist
*Leonor Michaelis (1875–1949), German biochemist and physical chemist
*Hartmut Michel (born 1948), 1988 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Huang Minlon (1889–1979), Chinese chemist
*Stanley Miller (1930–2007), American chemist, best known for the Miller–Urey experiment
*Eugène Millon (1812–1867), French chemist
*David P. Mills, British chemist
*Luis E. Miramontes (1925–2004), co-inventor of the combined oral contraceptive pill
*Peter D. Mitchell (1920–1992), 1978 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*William A. Mitchell (1911–2004), key inventor behind Pop Rocks, Tang, and Cool Whip
*Eilhardt Mitscherlich (1794–1863), German chemist, remembered for the law of isomorphism.
*Alexander Mitscherlich (1836–1918), German chemist
*Karl Friedrich Mohr (1806–1879), German chemist famous for first musings on the Conservation of energy
*Henri Moissan (1852–1907), French chemist and the winner of the 1906 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Mario J. Molina (1943–2020), 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jacques Monod (1910–1976), biochemist, winner of Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1965
*Jeffrey S. Moore (born 1961), American materials chemist
*Peter Moore (born 1939), American biochemist, Sterling Professor of Chemistry at Yale University
*Stanford Moore (1913–1982), 1972 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Hamilton Morris (born 1987), American chemist, creator and director of the television series &quot;Hamilton&#x27;s Pharmacopeia&quot;
*Henry Gwyn Jeffreys Moseley (1887–1915), English physicist, discovered Moseley&#x27;s law
*Gerardus Johannes Mulder (1802–1880), Dutch organic chemist
*Paul Müller (1899–1965), Swiss chemist, discovered DDT, won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1939
*Robert S. Mulliken (1896–1986), American physicist, chemist, 1966 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jnanendra Nath Mukherjee(1893-1983), Indian origin colloidal chemist
*Kary Mullis (1944–2019), 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Earl Muetterties (1927–1984), American chemist
*Catherine J. Murphy (born 1964), American chemist and materials scientist

==N==

*Robert Nalbandyan (1937–2002), Armenian protein chemist
*Sergey Nametkin, Soviet and Russian organic chemist
*Louise Natrajan, British chemist
*Giulio Natta (1903–1979), Italian chemist, 1963 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Costin Nenițescu (1902–1970), Romanian chemist
*Antonio Neri (1576–1614), Florentine chemist and glassmaker
*Walther Nernst (1864–1941), German chemist, 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*John Alexander Reina Newlands (1837–1898), English analytical chemist
*William Nicholson (1753–1815), English chemist
*Kyriacos Costa Nicolaou (born 1946), Cypriot-American chemist
*Julius Nieuwland (1878–1936), American chemist, work on synthetic rubber leading to neoprene
*Mathias Nilsson, Swedish chemist
*Alfred Nobel (1833–1896), Swedish chemist
*Philiswa Nomngongo, South-African professor of Analytical Chemistry and the SARChI in nanotechnology for water
*Ronald George Wreyford Norrish (1897–1978), 1967 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*John Howard Northrop (1891–1987), 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Ryōji Noyori (born 1938), 2001 Wolf Prize in Chemistry, 2001 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Ralph Nuzzo (born 1954), American chemist and materials scientist

==O==

*George Andrew Olah (1927–2017), 1994 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Simon Olivier (1879–1961), Dutch chemist
*Marilyn Olmstead (1943–2020), chemist, expert in small molecule crystallography
*Fred Olsen (1891–1986), inventor of the ball propellant manufacturing process
*Lars Onsager (1903–1976), physical chemist, 1968 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Tony Orchard (1941–2005), British inorganic chemist, photoelectron spectroscopist
*Joan Oró (1923–2004), Catalan biochemist, one of his most important contributions was the prebiotic synthesis of the nucleobase adenine from hydrogen cyanide
*Hans Christian Ørsted (1777–1851), first to isolate aluminium
*Wilhelm Ostwald (1853–1932), 1909 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Larry E. Overman (born 1943), American organic chemist
*Geoffrey Ozin (born 1943), materials chemist

==P==

*Paracelsus (1493–1541), alchemist
*Rudolph Pariser (1923–2021), theoretical and organic chemist
*Robert G. Parr (1921–2017), theoretical chemist
*Louis Pasteur (1822–1895), French biochemist, father of pasteurization
*Linus Pauling (1901–1994), Nobel Prizes in chemistry and peace
*Charles J. Pedersen (1904–1989), 1987 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Eugène-Melchior Péligot (1811–1890), French chemist who isolated the uranium metal
*William Henry Perkin (1838–1907), British organic chemist and inventor of mauveine (dye)
*William Henry Perkin, Jr. (1860–1929), British organic chemist, son of Sir William Henry Perkin
*Max Perutz (1914–2002), 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Eva Philbin (1914–2005), Irish chemist
*David Andrew Phoenix (born 1966), British biochemist
*Georgy Pigulevsky (1888–1964), Russian chemist and biochemist
*Roy J. Plunkett (1910–1994), discoverer of Teflon
*John Charles Polanyi (born 1929), Canadian chemist, Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1986
*John A. Pople (1925–2004), theoretical chemist, 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Vera Vevstafievna Popova (1867–1896), one of the first female Russian chemists
*George Porter (1920–2002), 1967 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Fritz Pregl (1869–1930), Slovene-German chemist, Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1923
*Vladimir Prelog (1906–1998), 1975 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Joseph Priestley (1733–1804), no formal training as a scientist, discovered the element oxygen
*Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003), 1977 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Joseph Louis Proust (1754–1826), discovered the Law of definite proportions
*Evgenii Przhevalsky (1879-1953), Russian and Soviet chemist, father of analytical chemistry in USSR

==R==

*Ronald T. Raines (born 1958), American chemist
*Venkatraman Ramakrishnan (born 1952), 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*William Ramsay (1852–1916), Scottish chemist, 1904 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*C. N. R. Rao (born 1934), Indian chemist
*François-Marie Raoult (1830–1901), French chemist, known for Raoult&#x27;s law
*Henry Rapoport (1918–2002), American chemist, UC Berkeley
*William Sage Rapson (1912–1999), South African chemist and co-author of Gold Usage
*Nil Ratan Dhar (1892–1986), Pioneering Indian soil chemist
*Ken Raymond (born 1942), American inorganic and bioinorganic chemist, UC Berkeley
*Prafulla Chandra Ray (1861–1944), Indian chemist
*Julius Rebek (born 1944), Hungarian American chemist
*Charles Lee Reese (1862–1940), American chemist and Chemical Director of DuPont
*Henri Victor Regnault (1810–1878), French chemist and physicist
*Tadeus Reichstein (1897–1996), chemist, 1950 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
*Rhazes (Razi) (865–925), Persian physician, philosopher and alchemist
*Stuart A. Rice (1932–2024), physical chemist
*Ellen Swallow Richards (1842–1911), industrial and environmental chemist
*Theodore William Richards (1868–1928), 1914 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Wim Richter (1946–2019), South Africa
*Jeremias Benjamin Richter (1762–1807), German chemist, first used the term stoichiometry
*Nikolaus Riehl (1901–1990), German chemist
*Andrés Manuel del Río (1764–1849), Spanish-Mexican geochemist, discovered vanadium
*Robert Robinson (1886–1975), British chemist,1947 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Pierre Jean Robiquet (1780–1840), French chemist, discovered caffeine, alizarin, cantharidin
*Hillar Rootare (1928–2008), Estonian-American physical chemist
*Irwin Rose (1926–2015), 2004 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Guillaume-François Rouelle (1703–1770), French chemist
*Hilaire-Marin Rouelle (1718–1779), French chemist
*Frank Sherwood Rowland (1927–2012), 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Daniel Rutherford (1749–1819), Scottish chemist
*Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), New Zealand born chemist and nuclear physicist. Discovered the proton. Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1908
*Leopold Ruzicka (Lavoslav Ružička) (1887–1976), 1939 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

==S==

*Paul Sabatier (1854–1941), French chemist, 1912 Nobel Prize in Chemistry corecipient

*Frederick Sanger (1918–2013), 1958 and 1980 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742–1786), Swedish 18th century chemist, discovered numerous elements
*Christian Friedrich Schönbein (1799–1868), German-Swiss chemist, invented the fuel cell, and discovered gun cotton and ozone
*Stuart L. Schreiber (born 1956), American chemist, a pioneer in a field of chemical biology
*Richard R. Schrock (born 1945), 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Peter Schultz (born 1956), American chemist
*Glenn T. Seaborg (1912–1999), 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Nils Gabriel Sefström (1787–1845), chemist
*Francesco Selmi (1817–1881), Italian chemist
*Nikolay Nikolayevich Semyonov (1896–1986), physicist and chemist, 1956 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*T. R. Seshadri (1900–1975), Indian chemist, pioneer in plant chemistry
*K. Barry Sharpless (born 1941), 2001 Wolf Prize in Chemistry, 2001 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Dan Shechtman (born 1941), 2011 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, discovered quasicrystals
*Patsy O. Sherman (1930–2008), 12 US patents
*John Sherwood (died 2020), British physical chemist
*Nevil Vincent Sidgwick (1873–1952), English theoretical chemist, known for work in valency
*Osamu Shimomura (1928–2018), 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Hideki Shirakawa (born 1936), 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Alexander Shulgin (1925–2014), pioneer researcher in Psychopharmacology and Entheogens
*Salimuzzaman Siddiqui (1897–1994), Pakistani chemist, pioneer in natural products chemistry
*Oktay Sinanoglu (1935–2015), Turkish chemist
*Joseph H. Simons (1897–1983), U.S. chemist, discoverer of fluorocarbons, used in gaseous diffusion of Uranium for Manhattan project
*Jens Christian Skou (1918–2018), 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Richard Smalley (1943–2005), 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Michael Smith (1932–2000), 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Ascanio Sobrero (1812–1888), Italian chemist, discoverer of nitroglycerin
*Frederick Soddy (1877–1956), British chemist, 1921 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Susan Solomon (born 1956), American atmospheric chemist
*Ernest Solvay (1838–1922), Belgian chemist and industrialist
*S.P.L. Sørensen (1868–1939), Danish chemist
*Gabor A. Somorjai (born 1935), 1998 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Georg Ernst Stahl (1659–1734), Important work on fermentation
*Wendell Meredith Stanley (1904–1971), 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Jean Servais Stas (1813–1891), Belgian analytical chemist
*Branko Stanovnik (born 1938), chemist
*Hermann Staudinger (1881–1965), polymer chemist, 1953 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Harry Steenbock (1886–1967), American biochemist, work on ultraviolet irradiation
*William Howard Stein (1911–1980), 1972 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Thomas A. Steitz (1940–2018), 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Douglas Stephan, Frustrated Lewis Pairs
*Alfred Stock (1876–1946), German inorganic chemist, known for work in mercury poisoning
*Brian Stoltz (born 1970), award-winning American organic chemist.
*Fraser Stoddart (1942–2024), Scottish chemist, a pioneer in the field of the mechanical bond
*Molly Shoichet, award-winning Canadian biomedical engineer known for her work in tissue engineering. She is the only person to be a fellow of the three National Academies in Canada
*F. Gordon A. Stone (1925–2011), British inorganic chemist
*S. Donald Stookey (1915–2014), American glass and ceramic chemist
*Gilbert Stork (1921–2017), 1995/6 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz (1829–1896), German organic chemist, principal founder of chemical structure
*Yellapragada Subbarow (1895-1948), Indian biochemist known for discovery of ATP and synthesis of many new ground breaking compounds
*James B. Sumner (1887–1955), 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Kenneth S. Suslick (born 1952), professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, known for optoelectronic nose
*Edwin Sutermeister (1876–1958), American chemist, known for its work on papermaking
*Theodor Svedberg (1884–1971), 1926 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Joseph Swan (1828–1914), English physicist, chemist and inventor
*Frédéric Swarts (1866–1940), Belgian chemist, prepared the first chlorofluorocarbon compound
*Richard Laurence Millington Synge (1914–1994), 1952 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

==T==

*Koichi Tanaka (born 1959), Japanese electrical engineer, 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Henry Taube (1915–2005), American chemist, (1983 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Louis Jacques Thénard (1777–1857), French chemist, discovered hydrogen peroxide and Thenard&#x27;s Blue
*Sir Harold Warris Thompson (1908–1983), English physical chemist
*J. J. Thomson (1856–1940), British physicist, Known in chemistry for discovery of isotopes
*T. Don Tilley (born 1954), organometallic chemist
*Arne Tiselius (1902–1971), Swedish biochemist, 1948 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Max Tishler (1906–1989), American chemist, 1970 Priestley Medal
*Alexander R. Todd, Baron Todd (1907–1997), British biochemist, 1957 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647), Italian physicist and chemist, invented the barometer, pupil of Galileo
*Roger Y. Tsien (1952–2016), American biochemist , 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Mikhail Tsvet (1872–1919), Russian botanist, known for adsorption chromatography
*Kristy Turner, British chemist

==U==

*Georges Urbain (1872–1938), French chemist, discovered the element lutetium
*Harold Clayton Urey (1893–1981), American physical chemist, discovered the element deuterium, 1934 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

==V==

*Lauri Vaska (1925–2015), Estonian/American chemist
*Louis Nicolas Vauquelin (1763–1829), French pharmacist and chemist, discovered the elements beryllium and chromium
*Vincent du Vigneaud (1901–1978), 1955 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Artturi Ilmari Virtanen (1895–1973), chemist, Nobel Prize laureate
*Max Volmer, Germany (1885–1965)
*Alessandro Volta (1745–1827), Italian electrochemist, invented the voltaic cell
*Alexander Vinogradov (1895-1975), Soviet geochemist

==W==

*Johannes Diderik van der Waals (1837–1923), Dutch physicist 
*Sir James Walker (1863–1935), Scottish physical chemist
*John E. Walker (born 1941), British chemist, 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Otto Wallach (1847–1931), German chemist, 1910 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*John Warner (born 1962), American chemist, 2014 Perkin Medal, one of the &quot;founders&quot; of green chemistry
*Alfred Werner (1866–1919), Swiss chemist, 1913 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Thomas Summers West (1927–2010), British analytical chemist
*Peter Jaffrey Wheatley (1921–1997), English chemist
*Chaim Weizmann (1874–1952), Russian chemist, developed the ABE-process
*George M. Whitesides (born 1939), American chemist
*John Rex Whinfield (1901–1966), British chemist, discovered polyester fibres
*Otto Wichterle (1913–1998), Czech chemist, known for inventing modern contact lenses
*Heinrich Otto Wieland (1877–1957), German chemist 1927 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Julius Wilbrand (1839–1906), German chemist, inventor of TNT
*Harvey W. Wiley (1844–1930), American chemist, pure food and drug advocate
*Sir Geoffrey Wilkinson (1921–1996), English chemist, 1973 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Alexander William Williamson (1824–1904), English chemist, famous for Williamson ether synthesis
*Thomas Willson (1860–1915), Canadian chemist, discovered an economically efficient process for creating calcium carbide
*Richard Willstätter (1872–1942), German chemist, 1915 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus (1876–1959), German chemist, 1928 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Günter Wirths (1911–2005), German chemist
*Georg Wittig (1897–1987), German chemist, 1979 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Friedrich Wöhler (1800–1882), German chemist, best known for his synthesis of urea
*William Hyde Wollaston (1766–1828), English chemist, discovered the elements palladium and rhodium
*Robert B. Woodward (1917–1979), American chemist, 1965 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Charles de Worms (1903–1979), English chemist and lepidopterist
*Charles-Adolphe Wurtz (1817–1884), Alsatian French chemist, discovered the Wurtz reaction
*Kurt Wüthrich (born 1938), 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

==X==

*Xiaoliang Sunney Xie (born 1962), Chinese-American biochemist, pioneer in the field of Single Molecule Microscopy and CARS (Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy) microscopy
*Xie Yi (born 1967), Chinese chemist, member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry.

==Y==

*Ada Yonath (born 1939), Israeli chemist, 2006/7 Wolf Prize in Chemistry, 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Sabir Yunusov (1909–1995), Soviet chemist (alkaloids)

==Z==

*Richard Zare (born 1939), American chemist, 2005 Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*Nikolay Zefirov (1935-2017), Russian and Soviet Organic and Medicinal Chemist
*Nikolay Zelinsky (1861–1953), Russian and Soviet Organic chemist, inventor of the first effective gas mask (1915)
*Ahmed H. Zewail (1946–2016), Egyptian chemist, 1999 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on femtochemistry
*Karl Ziegler (1898–1973), German chemist, 1963 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
*Richard Adolf Zsigmondy (1865–1929), 1925 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

==Chemists famous in other areas==
*Marion Barry (1936–2014), Masters in Organic Chemistry, American politician
*Alexander Borodin (1833–1887), Russian chemist and composer
*Jerry Buss (1934–2013), PhD in Physical Chemistry, owner of the NBA LA Lakers and other sports franchises
*Catherine Coleman (born 1960), American chemist and retired NASA astronaut who went on two Space Shuttle missions
*Emmanuel Dongala (born 1941), Congolese chemist and novelist
*Elizabeth J. Feinler (born 1931), American information scientist and past director of the Network Information Systems Center at the Stanford Research Institute
*Marye Anne Fox (1947–2021), American chemist and university chancellor
*Dolph Lundgren (born 1957), Masters in Chemistry, Swedish actor
*Primo Levi (1919–1987), resistance fighter, chemist and novelist
*Mikhail Lomonosov (1711–1765), Russian chemist, historian, philologist, and poet
*Angela Merkel (born 1954), doctorate in quantum chemistry, Chancellor of Germany (2005–2021)
*Gaspard Monge (1746–1818), invented descriptive geometry
*Francis Muguet (1955–2009), advocate of open information access
*Edward W. Morley (1838–1923), performed the Michelson–Morley experiment
*Knute Rockne (1888–1931), head football coach of Notre Dame
*Elio Di Rupo (born 1951), Prime Minister of Belgium
*Israel Shahak (1933–2001)
*Margaret Thatcher (1925–2013), Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1979–1990), research chemist at BX Plastics

==See also==
* List of biochemists
* List of computational chemists
* List of Russian chemists

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q816854" start="10" end="26" title="List of chemists" label="list of chemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="110" end="119" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76771" start="238" end="251" title="Richard Abegg" label="Richard Abegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q528631" start="281" end="295" title="Frederick Abel" label="Frederick Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72378" start="326" end="341" title="Friedrich Accum" label="Friedrich Accum"/>
<link wikidata="Q856548" start="396" end="408" title="gas lighting" label="gas lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q499423" start="410" end="429" title="Homer Burton Adkins" label="Homer Burton Adkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="479" end="492" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="496" end="513" title="organic compounds" label="organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q102250" start="515" end="525" title="Peter Agre" label="Peter Agre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="573" end="597" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="599" end="616" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georgius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q56077" start="692" end="703" title="Natalie Ahn" label="Natalie Ahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q708372" start="723" end="735" title="Arthur Aikin" label="Arthur Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685639" start="783" end="796" title="Adrien Albert" label="Adrien Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218465" start="840" end="851" title="John Albery" label="John Albery"/>
<link wikidata="Q76595" start="891" end="901" title="Kurt Alder" label="Kurt Alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="936" end="960" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807992" start="962" end="978" title="Jerome Alexander (chemist)" label="Jerome Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="1028" end="1035" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804648" start="1038" end="1051" title="Ivan Alimarin" label="Ivan Alimarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="1103" end="1123" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22915088" start="1146" end="1165" title="Elmer Lucille Allen" label="Elmer Lucille Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003101" start="1216" end="1232" title="Heather C. Allen" label="Heather C. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16125107" start="1264" end="1278" title="Adah Almutairi" label="Adah Almutairi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102266" start="1310" end="1323" title="Sidney Altman" label="Sidney Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="1371" end="1395" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11921636" start="1397" end="1413" title="Faiza Al-Kharafi" label="Faiza Al-Kharafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q63919297" start="1520" end="1538" title="Lisa Alvarez-Cohen" label="Lisa Alvarez-Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948749" start="1558" end="1578" title="Gloria Long Anderson" label="Gloria Long Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102278" start="1610" end="1631" title="Christian B. Anfinsen" label="Christian B. Anfinsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="1668" end="1692" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327324" start="1694" end="1707" title="Angelo Angeli" label="Angelo Angeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680936" start="1738" end="1766" title="Octavio Augusto Ceva Antunes" label="Octavio Augusto Ceva Antunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772849" start="1787" end="1815" title="Anthony Joseph Arduengo, III" label="Anthony Joseph Arduengo, III"/>
<link wikidata="Q313568" start="1847" end="1869" title="Johan August Arfwedson" label="Johan August Arfwedson"/>
<link wikidata="Q902921" start="1900" end="1922" title="Anton Eduard van Arkel" label="Anton Eduard van Arkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="1951" end="1967" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="2021" end="2039" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23888367" start="2041" end="2054" title="Valerie Ashby" label="Valerie Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17301270" start="2091" end="2105" title="Barbara Askins" label="Barbara Askins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489717" start="2137" end="2153" title="Larned B. Asprey" label="Larned B. Asprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q62109773" start="2193" end="2210" title="Alán Aspuru-Guzik" label="Alán Aspuru-Guzik"/>
<link wikidata="Q102291" start="2248" end="2269" title="Francis William Aston" label="Francis William Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="2319" end="2343" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18699544" start="2345" end="2362" title="Karin Aurivillius" label="Karin Aurivillius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43476" start="2414" end="2429" title="Amedeo Avogadro" label="Amedeo Avogadro"/>
<link wikidata="Q170431" start="2485" end="2504" title="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law" label="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q906497" start="2514" end="2537" title="Stephen Moulton Babcock" label="Stephen Moulton Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523728" start="2601" end="2624" title="single-grain experiment" label="single-grain experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433" start="2632" end="2648" title="Myrtle Bachelder" label="Myrtle Bachelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131859" start="2732" end="2756" title="Werner Emmanuel Bachmann" label="Werner Emmanuel Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="2806" end="2814" title="steroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="2819" end="2822" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q42336750" start="2824" end="2845" title="Simone Badal-McCreath" label="Simone Badal-McCreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q243442" start="2865" end="2878" title="Leo Baekeland" label="Leo Baekeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078" start="2918" end="2934" title="Adolf von Baeyer" label="Adolf von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="2969" end="2993" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="3008" end="3014" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191906" start="3016" end="3030" title="Piero Baglioni" label="Piero Baglioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q908559" start="3061" end="3093" title="Hendrik Willem Bakhuis Roozeboom" label="Hendrik Willem Bakhuis Roozeboom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059113" start="3122" end="3132" title="Alice Ball" label="Alice Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q57449135" start="3238" end="3251" title="Emily Balskus" label="Emily Balskus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15848277" start="3302" end="3312" title="Zhenan Bao" label="Zhenan Bao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066726" start="3381" end="3413" title="organic field-effect transistors" label="organic field-effect transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933714" start="3418" end="3440" title="organic semiconductors" label="organic semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840376" start="3442" end="3455" title="Phil S. Baran" label="Phil S. Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745544" start="3537" end="3549" title="Coral Barbas" label="Coral Barbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q899517" start="3568" end="3581" title="Allen J. Bard" label="Allen J. Bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="3619" end="3642" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013098" start="3644" end="3659" title="Vincenzo Barone" label="Vincenzo Barone"/>
<link wikidata="Q737340" start="3690" end="3703" title="Neil Bartlett (chemist)" label="Neil Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q102419" start="3752" end="3768" title="Sir Derek Barton" label="Sir Derek Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="3787" end="3811" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q557519" start="3813" end="3824" title="Fred Basolo" label="Fred Basolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284409" start="3866" end="3883" title="Esther Batchelder" label="Esther Batchelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q907583" start="3953" end="3971" title="Alan R. Battersby" label="Sir Alan Battersby"/>
<link wikidata="Q503022" start="4050" end="4063" title="Antoine Baumé" label="Antoine Baumé"/>
<link wikidata="Q113798" start="4093" end="4103" title="Karl Bayer" label="Karl Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60808" start="4135" end="4156" title="Johann Joachim Becher" label="Johann Joachim Becher"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="4195" end="4212" title="phlogiston theory" label="phlogiston theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q71002496" start="4228" end="4241" title="Kathryn Beers" label="Kathryn Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q61313" start="4269" end="4295" title="Friedrich Konrad Beilstein" label="Friedrich Konrad Beilstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q116024" start="4341" end="4359" title="Beilstein database" label="Beilstein database"/>
<link wikidata="Q519172" start="4361" end="4382" title="Joseph Achille Le Bel" label="Joseph Achille Le Bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186011" start="4426" end="4441" title="stereochemistry" label="stereochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762378" start="4443" end="4457" title="Angela Belcher" label="Angela Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437" start="4523" end="4539" title="Irina Beletskaya" label="Irina Beletskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365796" start="4585" end="4595" title="Ronnie Bell (chemist)" label="R. P. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080907" start="4635" end="4652" title="Francesco Bellini (businessman)" label="Francesco Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082454" start="4715" end="4732" title="Andrey Belozersky" label="Andrey Belozersky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440" start="4810" end="4826" title="Ruth R. Benerito" label="Ruth R. Benerito"/>
<link wikidata="Q102379" start="4900" end="4909" title="Paul Berg" label="Paul Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="4948" end="4972" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76614" start="4974" end="4991" title="Friedrich Bergius" label="Friedrich Bergius"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="5012" end="5019" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="5025" end="5049" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441" start="5051" end="5066" title="Helen M. Berman" label="Helen M. Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18425" start="5098" end="5117" title="Marcellin Berthelot" label="Marcellin Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183410" start="5165" end="5180" title="thermochemistry" label="thermochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q312587" start="5182" end="5205" title="Claude Louis Berthollet" label="Claude Louis Berthollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442" start="5235" end="5254" title="Carolyn R. Bertozzi" label="Carolyn R. Bertozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622094" start="5295" end="5307" title="Guy Bertrand (chemist)" label="Guy Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="5342" end="5362" title="Jöns Jakob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jakob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="5415" end="5422" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q368476" start="5438" end="5461" title="Johannes Martin Bijvoet" label="Johannes Martin Bijvoet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203265" start="5511" end="5525" title="Leonora Bilger" label="Leonora Bilger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444" start="5591" end="5603" title="Hazel Bishop" label="Hazel Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194024" start="5658" end="5675" title="Katherine Bitting" label="Katherine Bitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272512" start="5810" end="5822" title="Joseph Black" label="Joseph Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q21482" start="5854" end="5877" title="Katharine Burr Blodgett" label="Katharine Burr Blodgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q57532379" start="5967" end="5979" title="Suzanne Blum" label="Suzanne Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998478" start="6011" end="6026" title="Katharine Blunt" label="Katharine Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="6133" end="6149" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q58135066" start="6257" end="6272" title="Kristie Boering" label="Kristie Boering"/>
<link wikidata="Q26243976" start="6338" end="6352" title="Olga Bogdanova (chemist)" label="Olga Bogdanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210511" start="6382" end="6395" title="Dale L. Boger" label="Dale L. Boger"/>
<link wikidata="Q366827" start="6449" end="6480" title="Paul Emile Lecoq de Boisbaudran" label="Paul Emile Lecoq de Boisbaudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510604" start="6510" end="6522" title="Jan Boldingh" label="Jan Boldingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q164004" start="6551" end="6568" title="Alexander Borodin" label="Alexander Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q775044" start="6612" end="6629" title="Hans-Joachim Born" label="Hans-Joachim Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q76606" start="6664" end="6674" title="Carl Bosch" label="Carl Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903607" start="6704" end="6728" title="Octave Leopold Boudouard" label="Octave Leopold Boudouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q894998" start="6773" end="6791" title="Boudouard reaction" label="Boudouard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q503318" start="6793" end="6819" title="Jean-Baptiste Boussingault" label="Jean-Baptiste Boussingault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321933" start="6873" end="6884" title="E. J. Bowen" label="E. J. Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941748" start="6924" end="6937" title="Humphry Bowen" label="Humphry Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102395" start="6979" end="6992" title="Paul D. Boyer" label="Paul D. Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="7032" end="7056" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342281" start="7058" end="7070" title="Robert Boyer (chemist)" label="Robert Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="7114" end="7124" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="7134" end="7141" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="7147" end="7159" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q908581" start="7216" end="7231" title="Henri Braconnot" label="Henri Braconnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q77306" start="7276" end="7289" title="Henning Brand" label="Henning Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="7346" end="7356" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997816" start="7358" end="7376" title="Mary Bidwell Breed" label="Mary Bidwell Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q907664" start="7475" end="7489" title="Ronald Breslow" label="Ronald Breslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q96337141" start="7529" end="7541" title="Alan Brisdon" label="Alan Brisdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180142" start="7560" end="7586" title="Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted" label="Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q102406" start="7616" end="7632" title="Herbert C. Brown" label="Herbert C. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="7669" end="7693" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21473964" start="7695" end="7710" title="Jeannette Brown" label="Jeannette Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693011" start="7783" end="7807" title="Jeanette Grasselli Brown" label="Jeanette Grasselli Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446" start="7869" end="7888" title="Rachel Fuller Brown" label="Rachel Fuller Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q43917" start="7976" end="7990" title="Eduard Buchner" label="Eduard Buchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="8039" end="8063" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134174" start="8065" end="8084" title="Stephen L. Buchwald" label="Stephen L. Buchwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q904693" start="8191" end="8217" title="Buchwald–Hartwig amination" label="Buchwald–Hartwig amination"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572442" start="8219" end="8244" title="Mary Van Rensselaer Buell" label="Mary Van Rensselaer Buell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24758230" start="8340" end="8355" title="Kathryn Bullock" label="Kathryn Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="8440" end="8461" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Wilhelm Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="8516" end="8523" title="Chemical element" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="8525" end="8532" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="8537" end="8545" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="8551" end="8567" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q221262" start="8585" end="8598" title="Bunsen burner" label="Bunsen burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851018" start="8600" end="8614" title="Jeanne Burbank" label="Jeanne Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q111011099" start="8758" end="8778" title="Winifred Burks-Houck" label="Winifred Burks-Houck"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003518" start="8818" end="8833" title="Stephanie Burns" label="Stephanie Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936168" start="8939" end="8961" title="William Merriam Burton" label="William Merriam Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q212749" start="9013" end="9029" title="thermal cracking" label="thermal cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="9042" end="9051" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327" start="9053" end="9068" title="Adolf Butenandt" label="Adolf Butenandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="9105" end="9129" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42254003" start="9131" end="9144" title="Alison Butler" label="Alison Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q315160" start="9199" end="9217" title="Aleksandr Butlerov" label="Aleksandr Butlerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q416211" start="9263" end="9279" title="formose reaction" label="formose reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780083" start="9289" end="9310" title="Mary Letitia Caldwell" label="Mary Letitia Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="9418" end="9431" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="9478" end="9502" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277250" start="9504" end="9523" title="Allison A. Campbell" label="Allison A. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426737" start="9612" end="9629" title="Constantin Cândea" label="Constantin Cândea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128759" start="9661" end="9681" title="Stanislao Cannizzaro" label="Stanislao Cannizzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q621539" start="9727" end="9746" title="Cannizzaro reaction" label="Cannizzaro reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q76603" start="9748" end="9767" title="Georg Ludwig Carius" label="Georg Ludwig Carius"/>
<link wikidata="Q76628" start="9797" end="9810" title="Heinrich Caro" label="Heinrich Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q333724" start="9840" end="9857" title="Wallace Carothers" label="Wallace Carothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="9916" end="9921" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447" start="9923" end="9935" title="Emma P. Carr" label="Emma P. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766235" start="9974" end="10000" title="Marjorie Constance Caserio" label="Marjorie Constance Caserio"/>
<link wikidata="Q72219411" start="10093" end="10108" title="Marta Catellani" label="Marta Catellani"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326799" start="10142" end="10160" title="Catellani reaction" label="Catellani reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131733" start="10162" end="10177" title="Henry Cavendish" label="Henry Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q229162" start="10210" end="10225" title="Elena Ceaușescu" label="Elena Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q135180" start="10273" end="10284" title="Thomas Cech" label="Thomas Cech"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10324" end="10348" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003512" start="10350" end="10371" title="María Cegarra Salcedo" label="María Cegarra Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106699" start="10430" end="10444" title="Martin Chalfie" label="Martin Chalfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10483" end="10507" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836958" start="10509" end="10523" title="Michelle Chang (biochemist)" label="Michelle Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="10579" end="10613" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202146" start="10615" end="10627" title="Yves Chauvin" label="Yves Chauvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10662" end="10686" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q271651" start="10688" end="10710" title="Chevreul" label="Michel Eugėne Chevreul"/>
<link wikidata="Q62090305" start="10789" end="10806" title="Christine S. Chow" label="Christine S. Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q233205" start="10826" end="10843" title="Aaron Ciechanover" label="Aaron Ciechanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10881" end="10905" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088813" start="10907" end="10930" title="Giacomo Luigi Ciamician" label="Giacomo Luigi Ciamician"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864601" start="10987" end="11002" title="G. Marius Clore" label="G. Marius Clore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="11003" end="11006" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="11029" end="11036" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="11139" end="11178" title="nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15904217" start="11180" end="11197" title="Edward L. Cochran" label="Edward L. Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="11275" end="11288" title="free radicals" label="free radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q320050" start="11290" end="11301" title="Ernst Cohen" label="Ernst Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465" start="11354" end="11366" title="Mildred Cohn" label="Mildred Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314341" start="11449" end="11463" title="David Collison (Chemist)" label="David Collison"/>
<link wikidata="Q59750132" start="11482" end="11494" title="Vicki Colvin" label="Vicki Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49355" start="11579" end="11598" title="James Bryant Conant" label="James Bryant Conant"/>
<link wikidata="Q826100" start="11638" end="11653" title="Priestley Medal" label="Priestley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q135171" start="11660" end="11677" title="Elias James Corey" label="Elias James Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="11736" end="11760" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093895" start="11762" end="11774" title="Robert Corey" label="Robert Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78501" start="11809" end="11828" title="Carl Ferdinand Cori" label="Carl Ferdinand Cori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="11860" end="11871" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q204733" start="11890" end="11900" title="Gerty Cori" label="Gerty Cori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="11935" end="11946" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q260328" start="11965" end="11983" title="Charles D. Coryell" label="Charles D. Coryell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="12041" end="12051" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q135154" start="12053" end="12067" title="John Cornforth" label="John Cornforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="12139" end="12163" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56073496" start="12165" end="12178" title="Brigid Cotter" label="Brigid Cotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q425980" start="12221" end="12240" title="Frank Albert Cotton" label="Frank Albert Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="12259" end="12282" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900605" start="12284" end="12299" title="Charles Coulson" label="Charles Coulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q633479" start="12342" end="12364" title="Archibald Scott Couper" label="Archibald Scott Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="12413" end="12425" title="Tetravalence" label="Tetravalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q383802" start="12427" end="12439" title="James Crafts" label="James Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q649999" start="12484" end="12507" title="Friedel–Crafts reaction" label="Friedel–Crafts reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q135151" start="12509" end="12523" title="Donald J. Cram" label="Donald J. Cram"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="12574" end="12598" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q189552" start="12600" end="12615" title="William Crookes" label="William Crookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="12669" end="12677" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q364956" start="12679" end="12699" title="Alexander Crum Brown" label="Alexander Crum Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q135139" start="12739" end="12754" title="Paul Josef Crutzen" label="Paul J. Crutzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="12802" end="12826" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766132" start="12828" end="12844" title="Ana Maria Cuervo" label="Ana Maria Cuervo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="12918" end="12929" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="12995" end="13001" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="13006" end="13014" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="13021" end="13043" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="13050" end="13074" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="13076" end="13088" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="13107" end="13129" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110930" start="13131" end="13142" title="Robert Curl" label="Robert Curl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="13189" end="13213" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q62234" start="13215" end="13230" title="Theodor Curtius" label="Theodor Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335971" start="13260" end="13276" title="Emil Czyrniański" label="Emil Czyrniański"/>
<link wikidata="Q28115390" start="13314" end="13323" title="Jeff Dahn" label="Jeff Dahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="13426" end="13437" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="13500" end="13513" title="atomic theory" label="atomic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15848288" start="13515" end="13533" title="Marie Maynard Daly" label="Marie Maynard Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190501" start="13653" end="13674" title="Carl Peter Henrik Dam" label="Carl Peter Henrik Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="13688" end="13694" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="13726" end="13763" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504610" start="13765" end="13788" title="Vincenzo, Count Dandolo" label="Vincenzo, Count Dandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q724239" start="13832" end="13853" title="Samuel J. Danishefsky" label="Samuel J. Danishefsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q644785" start="13909" end="13924" title="Total synthesis" label="Total synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="13933" end="13956" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="13958" end="13970" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="14020" end="14041" title="alkaline earth metals" label="alkaline earth metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q175519" start="14043" end="14061" title="Raymond Davis, Jr." label="Raymond Davis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q65944872" start="14102" end="14115" title="Serena DeBeer" label="Serena DeBeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103835" start="14218" end="14229" title="Peter Debye" label="Peter Debye"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="14277" end="14301" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76612" start="14303" end="14321" title="Johann Deisenhofer" label="Johann Deisenhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="14359" end="14383" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q45566299" start="14385" end="14402" title="Margarita del Val" label="Margarita del Val"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="14424" end="14431" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="14433" end="14445" title="immunologist" label="immunologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="14451" end="14461" title="virologist" label="virologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110977011" start="14463" end="14482" title="Nathalie Demassieux" label="Nathalie Demassieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527884" start="14533" end="14561" title="Gautam Radhakrishna Desiraju" label="Gautam Radhakrishna Desiraju"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191408" start="14611" end="14630" title="crystal engineering" label="crystal engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q277579" start="14632" end="14643" title="James Dewar" label="James Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q692634" start="14688" end="14706" title="François Diederich" label="François Diederich"/>
<link wikidata="Q76616" start="14740" end="14750" title="Otto Diels" label="Otto Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="14799" end="14823" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20179426" start="14825" end="14837" title="Robert Dirks" label="Robert Dirks"/>
<link wikidata="Q369472" start="14860" end="14881" title="computational chemistry" label="computational chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48978017" start="14883" end="14894" title="Martha Doan" label="Martha Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q908247" start="14957" end="14983" title="William von Eggers Doering" label="William von Eggers Doering"/>
<link wikidata="Q230612" start="15015" end="15027" title="Edward Adelbert Doisy" label="Edward Doisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="15081" end="15118" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997401" start="15120" end="15133" title="Davorin Dolar" label="Davorin Dolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247159" start="15204" end="15217" title="Vy Maria Dong" label="Vy Maria Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089712" start="15318" end="15340" title="David Adriaan van Dorp" label="David Adriaan van Dorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933549" start="15369" end="15386" title="Israel Dostrovsky" label="Israel Dostrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182" start="15472" end="15501" title="Weizmann Institute of Science" label="Weizmann Institute of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q908544" start="15503" end="15520" title="Herbert Henry Dow" label="Herbert Henry Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="15573" end="15580" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q365463" start="15593" end="15610" title="Cornelius Drebbel" label="Cornelius Drebbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942631" start="15663" end="15681" title="Vratislav Ducháček" label="Vratislav Ducháček"/>
<link wikidata="Q72175" start="15710" end="15723" title="Carl Duisberg" label="Carl Duisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164824" start="15794" end="15813" title="Jean Baptiste Dumas" label="Jean Baptiste Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="15851" end="15865" title="atomic weights" label="atomic weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562571" start="15867" end="15877" title="Helen Dyer" label="Helen Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383001" start="15948" end="15960" title="Sandra Eaton" label="Sandra Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q59484385" start="16032" end="16042" title="Eilaf Egap" label="Eilaf Egap"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="16062" end="16074" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="16123" end="16160" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76618" start="16162" end="16179" title="Arthur Eichengrün" label="Arthur Eichengrün"/>
<link wikidata="Q76600" start="16209" end="16222" title="Manfred Eigen" label="Manfred Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="16271" end="16295" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q265310" start="16297" end="16313" title="Mostafa El-Sayed" label="Mostafa El-Sayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182745" start="16363" end="16377" title="Fausto Elhuyar" label="Fausto Elhuyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="16422" end="16430" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q110712522" start="16432" end="16443" title="Lorne Elias" label="Lorne Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q35703" start="16513" end="16530" title="Gertrude B. Elion" label="Gertrude B. Elion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687162" start="16629" end="16644" title="Conrad Elvehjem" label="Conrad Elvehjem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="16690" end="16696" title="Niacin (substance)" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184831" start="16698" end="16718" title="Harry Julius Emeléus" label="Harry Julius Emeléus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12484239" start="16759" end="16782" title="Gladys Anderson Emerson" label="Gladys Anderson Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76597" start="16880" end="16895" title="Richard August Carl Emil Erlenmeyer" label="Emil Erlenmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122272" start="16925" end="16941" title="Richard R. Ernst" label="Richard R. Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="16984" end="17008" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60066" start="17010" end="17022" title="Gerhard Ertl" label="Gerhard Ertl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="17066" end="17090" title="Nobel prize in chemistry" label="Nobel prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28743912" start="17092" end="17109" title="Margaret C. Etter" label="Margaret C. Etter"/>
<link wikidata="Q76613" start="17214" end="17236" title="Hans von Euler-Chelpin" label="Hans von Euler-Chelpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="17286" end="17310" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q574810" start="17312" end="17324" title="Henry Eyring (chemist)" label="Henry Eyring"/>
<link wikidata="Q213667" start="17384" end="17400" title="Kazimierz Fajans" label="Kazimierz Fajans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="17448" end="17463" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="17519" end="17526" title="Benzene" label="Benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q63705" start="17528" end="17547" title="Hermann von Fehling" label="Hermann von Fehling"/>
<link wikidata="Q106738" start="17577" end="17594" title="John Bennett Fenn" label="John Bennett Fenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="17613" end="17637" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="17639" end="17651" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="17716" end="17738" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7470" start="17745" end="17763" title="Mary Peters Fieser" label="Mary Peters Fieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q26713902" start="17825" end="17851" title="Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts" label="Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="17892" end="17912" title="Hermann Emil Fischer" label="Hermann Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="17931" end="17955" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76601" start="18029" end="18054" title="Franz Joseph Emil Fischer" label="Franz Joseph Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="18102" end="18125" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q69998815" start="18127" end="18143" title="Emily V. Fischer" label="Emily V. Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057341" start="18247" end="18270" title="Ernst Gottfried Fischer" label="Ernst Gottfried Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44594" start="18300" end="18318" title="Ernst Otto Fischer" label="Ernst Otto Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18353" end="18377" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76604" start="18386" end="18398" title="Hans Fischer" label="Hans Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18441" end="18465" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79901934" start="18474" end="18491" title="Nellie Ivy Fisher" label="Nellie Ivy Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q62984" start="18538" end="18560" title="Wilhelm Rudolph Fittig" label="Wilhelm Rudolph Fittig"/>
<link wikidata="Q901404" start="18604" end="18625" title="Wurtz–Fittig reaction" label="Wurtz–Fittig reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q446848" start="18627" end="18644" title="Edith M. Flanigen" label="Edith M. Flanigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q446875" start="18721" end="18756" title="Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy" label="Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="18796" end="18803" title="Iridium" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213330" start="18844" end="18858" title="Nicolas Flamel" label="Nicolas Flamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="18882" end="18891" title="Alchemy" label="alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q176351" start="18893" end="18903" title="Paul Flory" label="Paul Flory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="18922" end="18946" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632763" start="18948" end="18961" title="Maria Forsyth" label="Maria Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006757" start="19023" end="19041" title="Margaret D. Foster" label="Margaret D. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7472" start="19159" end="19172" title="Joanna Fowler" label="Joanna Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q55235" start="19211" end="19226" title="Michelle Francl" label="Michelle Francl"/>
<link wikidata="Q361386" start="19260" end="19276" title="Edward Frankland" label="Edward Frankland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="19333" end="19340" title="valence (chemistry)" label="valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="19342" end="19359" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42821003" start="19411" end="19426" title="Katherine Franz" label="Katherine Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q77524" start="19521" end="19534" title="Herman Frasch" label="Herman Frasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q903794" start="19599" end="19613" title="Frasch process" label="Frasch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208426" start="19615" end="19634" title="Bertram Fraser-Reid" label="Bertram Fraser-Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054443" start="19701" end="19752" title="Glycosyl donor" label="armed-disarmed principle in glycosylation chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476" start="19858" end="19875" title="Helen Murray Free" label="Helen Murray Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q77530" start="19955" end="19978" title="Carl Remigius Fresenius" label="Carl Remigius Fresenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987009" start="20008" end="20018" title="Ida Freund" label="Ida Freund"/>
<link wikidata="Q366724" start="20085" end="20100" title="Charles Friedel" label="Charles Friedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q649999" start="20143" end="20166" title="Friedel–Crafts reaction" label="Friedel–Crafts reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448727" start="20168" end="20195" title="Alexander Naumovich Frumkin" label="Alexander Naumovich Frumkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217734" start="20237" end="20250" title="Kenichi Fukui" label="Kenichi Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="20269" end="20293" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478" start="20295" end="20312" title="Elizabeth Fulhame" label="Elizabeth Fulhame"/>
<link wikidata="Q106369324" start="20388" end="20400" title="Vera Furness" label="Vera Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q312571" start="20462" end="20475" title="Johan Gadolin" label="Johan Gadolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="20489" end="20496" title="Finns" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820193" start="20506" end="20521" title="Merrill Garnett" label="Merrill Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="20544" end="20554" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="20556" end="20579" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q202151" start="20638" end="20652" title="Gay-Lussac law" label="Gay-Lussac law"/>
<link wikidata="Q446900" start="20654" end="20679" title="Charles Frédéric Gerhardt" label="Charles Frédéric Gerhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="20721" end="20741" title="acetylsalicylic acid" label="acetylsalicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647901" start="20743" end="20761" title="Jnan Chandra Ghosh" label="Jnan Chandra Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q110073" start="20880" end="20895" title="William Giauque" label="William Giauque"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="20914" end="20938" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="20940" end="20960" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217486" start="21016" end="21030" title="Walter Gilbert" label="Walter Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="21049" end="21073" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560573" start="21075" end="21092" title="Cornelia Gillyard" label="Cornelia Gillyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="21124" end="21151" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q905030" start="21212" end="21224" title="Henry Gilman" label="Henry Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q516741" start="21271" end="21285" title="Gilman reagent" label="Gilman reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q62088529" start="21287" end="21301" title="Judith Giordan" label="Judith Giordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57330" start="21386" end="21407" title="Johann Rudolf Glauber" label="Johann Rudolf Glauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q904562" start="21457" end="21478" title="Lawrence E. Glendenin" label="Lawrence E. Glendenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="21536" end="21546" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60639" start="21548" end="21562" title="Leopold Gmelin" label="Leopold Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408810" start="21603" end="21625" title="potassium ferricyanide" label="potassium ferricyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q718091" start="21627" end="21650" title="Theodore Nicolas Gobley" label="Theodore Nicolas Gobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q241595" start="21729" end="21737" title="lecithin" label="lecithin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107426460" start="21739" end="21754" title="Adolph Goetting" label="Adolph Goetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q791285" start="21795" end="21821" title="Avon Products" label="California Perfume Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899781" start="21823" end="21841" title="Sulamith Goldhaber" label="Sulamith Goldhaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="21935" end="21953" title="Victor Goldschmidt" label="Victor Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q904804" start="21998" end="22011" title="Moses Gomberg" label="Moses Gomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="22080" end="22097" title="radical (chemistry)" label="radical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481" start="22099" end="22111" title="Mary L. Good" label="Mary L. Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538668" start="22153" end="22169" title="David van Goorle" label="David van Goorle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="22243" end="22251" title="atomists" label="atomists"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878519" start="22253" end="22265" title="Loney Gordon" label="Loney Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62971" start="22344" end="22354" title="Carl Gräbe" label="Carl Gräbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q267813" start="22403" end="22411" title="alizarin" label="alizarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333762" start="22413" end="22426" title="Thomas Graham (chemist)" label="Thomas Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043671" start="22458" end="22466" title="Dialysis (chemistry)" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="22471" end="22480" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q369975" start="22482" end="22495" title="Harry B. Gray" label="Harry B. Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="22514" end="22537" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56176" start="22539" end="22556" title="Martha Greenblatt" label="Martha Greenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013430" start="22667" end="22691" title="Bettye Washington Greene" label="Bettye Washington Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18222071" start="22748" end="22763" title="Sandra C. Greer" label="Sandra C. Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104582" start="22881" end="22913" title="Victor Grignard" label="François Auguste Victor Grignard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="22932" end="22956" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202140" start="22970" end="22986" title="Robert H. Grubbs" label="Robert H. Grubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="23005" end="23029" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130427599" start="23031" end="23047" title="Vilmosné Gryllus" label="Vilmosné Gryllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57075" start="23110" end="23121" title="Fritz Haber" label="Fritz Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="23156" end="23180" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="23196" end="23209" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997941" start="23211" end="23223" title="Dorothy Hahn" label="Dorothy Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="23300" end="23309" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="23353" end="23368" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="23375" end="23399" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="23411" end="23428" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563919" start="23430" end="23446" title="Sossina M. Haile" label="Sossina M. Haile"/>
<link wikidata="Q56097" start="23533" end="23544" title="Naomi Halas" label="Naomi Halas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="23608" end="23637" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="John Burdon Sanderson Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q559029" start="23721" end="23739" title="John Scott Haldane" label="John Scott Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q443131" start="23773" end="23792" title="Charles Martin Hall" label="Charles Martin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q898555" start="23835" end="23855" title="Hall-Héroult process" label="Hall-Héroult process"/>
<link wikidata="Q106693175" start="23857" end="23875" title="Frances Mary Hamer" label="Frances Mary Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934650" start="23962" end="23979" title="George S. Hammond" label="George S. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q903818" start="24022" end="24046" title="Hammond&amp;#x27;s postulate" label="Hammond&amp;#x27;s postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189803" start="24048" end="24061" title="Arthur Harden" label="Arthur Harden"/>
<link wikidata="Q27554958" start="24153" end="24168" title="Elizabeth Hardy (chemist)" label="Elizabeth Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485" start="24241" end="24257" title="Anna J. Harrison" label="Anna J. Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q157212" start="24328" end="24338" title="Odd Hassel" label="Odd Hassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="24375" end="24399" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q378065" start="24401" end="24417" title="Charles Hatchett" label="Charles Hatchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="24462" end="24469" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q107422" start="24471" end="24490" title="Herbert A. Hauptman" label="Herbert A. Hauptman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="24509" end="24533" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76625" start="24535" end="24550" title="Robert Havemann" label="Robert Havemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965458" start="24580" end="24594" title="Walter Lincoln Hawkins" label="Walter Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q750446" start="24666" end="24683" title="polymer chemistry" label="polymer chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204600" start="24786" end="24800" title="Walter Haworth" label="Walter Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="24819" end="24843" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42059685" start="24845" end="24852" title="Sam Hay (Chemist)" label="Sam Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29856870" start="24875" end="24893" title="Alma Levant Hayden" label="Alma Levant Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167852" start="24972" end="24988" title="Jabir Ibn Hayyan" label="Jabir Ibn Hayyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130239" start="25036" end="25053" title="Clayton Heathcock" label="Clayton Heathcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q54130741" start="25085" end="25100" title="Philipp R. Heck" label="Philipp R. Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q106751" start="25116" end="25130" title="Alan J. Heeger" label="Alan J. Heeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25149" end="25173" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q294169" start="25175" end="25198" title="Jan Baptist van Helmont" label="Jan Baptist van Helmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674742" start="25227" end="25246" title="pneumatic chemistry" label="pneumatic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q243196" start="25248" end="25268" title="Dudley R. Herschbach" label="Dudley R. Herschbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25305" end="25329" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q232302" start="25331" end="25344" title="Avram Hershko" label="Avram Hershko"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25363" end="25387" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079018" start="25389" end="25402" title="Charles Herty" label="Charles Herty"/>
<link wikidata="Q76602" start="25434" end="25450" title="Gerhard Herzberg" label="Gerhard Herzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25494" end="25518" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q115669" start="25520" end="25538" title="Germain Henri Hess" label="Germain Henri Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q220060" start="25592" end="25607" title="Hess&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hess&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q76951" start="25609" end="25625" title="George de Hevesy" label="George de Hevesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25680" end="25704" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157701" start="25711" end="25729" title="Jaroslav Heyrovský" label="Jaroslav Heyrovský"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="25743" end="25748" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25763" end="25787" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043842" start="25789" end="25804" title="Evelyn Hickmans" label="Evelyn Hickmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q906469" start="25879" end="25894" title="Joel Hildebrand" label="Joel Hildebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q29109891" start="25991" end="26008" title="Mary Elliott Hill" label="Mary Elliott Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48986" start="26097" end="26121" title="Cyril Norman Hinshelwood" label="Cyril Norman Hinshelwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="26185" end="26196" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013001" start="26219" end="26241" title="Gladys Lounsbury Hobby" label="Gladys Lounsbury Hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="26341" end="26356" title="Dorothy Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="26375" end="26399" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102822" start="26401" end="26434" title="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff" label="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26448" end="26453" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="26454" end="26470" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="26477" end="26501" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="26503" end="26517" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="26558" end="26584" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="Lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q76360" start="26592" end="26614" title="August Wilhelm Hofmann" label="August Wilhelm Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q407131" start="26661" end="26672" title="sorbic acid" label="sorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56174" start="26674" end="26693" title="Darleane C. Hoffman" label="Darleane C. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76607" start="26733" end="26751" title="Friedrich Hoffmann" label="Friedrich Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q273279" start="26788" end="26802" title="Roald Hoffmann" label="Roald Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="26851" end="26875" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64358533" start="26877" end="26885" title="Mei Hong (chemist)" label="Mei Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q233976" start="26937" end="26962" title="Frederick Gowland Hopkins" label="Frederick Gowland Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="27019" end="27027" title="vitamins" label="vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="27029" end="27066" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18222303" start="27076" end="27095" title="Marjorie G. Horning" label="Marjorie G. Horning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551658" start="27160" end="27178" title="Linda Hsieh-Wilson" label="Linda Hsieh-Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="27198" end="27232" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700171" start="27234" end="27268" title="Heinrich Hubert Maria Josef Houben" label="Heinrich Hubert Maria Josef Houben"/>
<link wikidata="Q906203" start="27306" end="27334" title="Coenraad Johannes van Houten" label="Coenraad Johannes van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q472005" start="27406" end="27421" title="Amir H. Hoveyda" label="Amir H. Hoveyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888836" start="27475" end="27489" title="Benjamin Hsiao" label="Benjamin Hsiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="27529" end="27551" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q466113" start="27567" end="27592" title="American Physical Society" label="American Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="27608" end="27633" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="27649" end="27700" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q70938390" start="27702" end="27714" title="Marcia Huber" label="Marcia Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76623" start="27796" end="27808" title="Robert Huber" label="Robert Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="27827" end="27851" title="Nobel Prize in chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20986765" start="27853" end="27870" title="Catherine T. Hunt" label="Catherine T. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q127779" start="28008" end="28031" title="Christopher Kelk Ingold" label="Christopher Kelk Ingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q328995" start="28062" end="28079" title="Vladimir Ipatieff" label="Vladimir Ipatieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="28129" end="28146" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062325" start="28156" end="28172" title="Nancy B. Jackson" label="Nancy B. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430182" start="28204" end="28220" title="Marilyn E. Jacox" label="Marilyn E. Jacox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205528" start="28310" end="28321" title="Hope Jahren" label="Hope Jahren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385182" start="28373" end="28385" title="Paul Janssen" label="Paul Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493" start="28441" end="28454" title="Allene Jeanes" label="Allene Jeanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150989" start="28544" end="28565" title="Frédéric Joliot-Curie" label="Frédéric Joliot-Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="28614" end="28638" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504" start="28640" end="28658" title="Irène Joliot-Curie" label="Irène Joliot-Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="28707" end="28731" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887700" start="28733" end="28753" title="Madeleine M. Joullié" label="Madeleine M. Joullié"/>
<link wikidata="Q705852" start="28889" end="28907" title="Percy Lavon Julian" label="Percy Lavon Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="28979" end="28997" title="chemical synthesis" label="chemical synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="29011" end="29016" title="Medication" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q410595" start="29081" end="29094" title="physostigmine" label="physostigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q354979" start="29105" end="29119" title="Henri B. Kagan" label="Henri B. Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="29138" end="29161" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q512459" start="29163" end="29177" title="Isabella Karle" label="Isabella Karle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106733" start="29298" end="29310" title="Jerome Karle" label="Jerome Karle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="29329" end="29353" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093" start="29355" end="29366" title="Paul Karrer" label="Paul Karrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="29385" end="29409" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q216166" start="29411" end="29439" title="Karl Wilhelm Gottlob Kastner" label="Karl Wilhelm Gottlob Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607769" start="29453" end="29470" title="Alan R. Katritzky" label="Alan R. Katritzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506" start="29519" end="29541" title="Joyce Jacobson Kaufman" label="Joyce Jacobson Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796363" start="29613" end="29629" title="Melinda H. Keefe" label="Melinda H. Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76784" start="29715" end="29728" title="Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz" label="August Kekulé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564331" start="29766" end="29786" title="Sinah Estelle Kelley" label="Sinah Estelle Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q232295" start="29867" end="29879" title="John Kendrew" label="John Kendrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="29898" end="29922" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508" start="29924" end="29937" title="Ann Kiessling" label="Ann Kiessling"/>
<link wikidata="Q362796" start="29996" end="30015" title="Petrus Jacobus Kipp" label="Petrus Jacobus Kipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q162514" start="30072" end="30086" title="Johan Kjeldahl" label="Johan Kjeldahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q113215" start="30132" end="30149" title="Carlsberg Brewery" label="Carlsberg Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q160196" start="30173" end="30197" title="Martin Heinrich Klaproth" label="Martin Heinrich Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="30250" end="30257" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839261" start="30259" end="30271" title="Trevor Kletz" label="Trevor Kletz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190626" start="30324" end="30334" title="Aaron Klug" label="Aaron Klug"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="30367" end="30391" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77546" start="30393" end="30409" title="Emil Knoevenagel" label="Emil Knoevenagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q301313" start="30423" end="30445" title="Jeremy R. Knowles" label="Jeremy Randall Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q110947" start="30476" end="30500" title="William Standish Knowles" label="William Standish Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="30519" end="30543" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78510" start="30545" end="30556" title="Walter Kohn" label="Walter Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="30575" end="30599" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76621" start="30601" end="30629" title="Adolph Wilhelm Hermann Kolbe" label="Adolph Wilhelm Hermann Kolbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q455326" start="30668" end="30691" title="Kolbe nitrile synthesis" label="Kolbe nitrile synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845271" start="30693" end="30707" title="Izaak Kolthoff" label="Izaak Kolthoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="30765" end="30785" title="analytical chemistry" label="Analytical Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170676" start="30793" end="30810" title="Roger D. Kornberg" label="Roger D. Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="30829" end="30853" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357316" start="30855" end="30870" title="Teresa Kowalska" label="Teresa Kowalska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9138970" start="30920" end="30940" title="Acta Chromatographica" label="Acta Chromatographia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57191" start="30948" end="30961" title="Hans A. Krebs" label="Hans A. Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q157250" start="31020" end="31032" title="Harold Kroto" label="Harold Kroto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="31068" end="31092" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78483" start="31094" end="31106" title="Richard Kuhn" label="Richard Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="31125" end="31149" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277725" start="31151" end="31168" title="Eugenia Kumacheva" label="Eugenia Kumacheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q110752050" start="31187" end="31202" title="Theodore Kuwana" label="Theodore Kuwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q96212237" start="31259" end="31282" title="spectroelectrochemistry" label="spectroelectrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184286" start="31292" end="31307" title="Irving Langmuir" label="Irving Langmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="31346" end="31370" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q766718" start="31372" end="31387" title="Auguste Laurent" label="Auguste Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q422152" start="31428" end="31438" title="anthracene" label="anthracene"/>
<link wikidata="Q106547" start="31440" end="31454" title="Paul Lauterbur" label="Paul Lauterbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="31486" end="31503" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14307" start="31541" end="31556" title="Nicolas Leblanc" label="Nicolas Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q121926" start="31598" end="31622" title="Henri Louis Le Chatelier" label="Henri Louis Le Chatelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q243190" start="31652" end="31663" title="Yuan T. Lee" label="Yuan T. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="31711" end="31735" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q377461" start="31737" end="31751" title="Valery Legasov" label="Valery Legasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="31857" end="31875" title="Chernobyl Disaster" label="Chernobyl Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q107690" start="31877" end="31892" title="Jean-Marie Lehn" label="Jean-Marie Lehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="31934" end="31958" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771165" start="31960" end="31970" title="Marko Leko" label="Marko Leko"/>
<link wikidata="Q233985" start="32001" end="32021" title="Luis Federico Leloir" label="Luis Federico Leloir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="32079" end="32103" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q513043" start="32105" end="32120" title="Raymond Lemieux" label="Raymond Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="32160" end="32183" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208858" start="32185" end="32205" title="Gilbert Newton Lewis" label="Gilbert Newton Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864145" start="32258" end="32287" title="Berkeley College of Chemistry" label="Berkeley College of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q31161" start="32289" end="32305" title="Andreas Libavius" label="Andreas Libavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q63622" start="32346" end="32370" title="Carl Theodore Liebermann" label="Carl Theodore Liebermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q267813" start="32423" end="32431" title="alizarin" label="alizarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190486" start="32433" end="32446" title="Willard Libby" label="Willard Libby"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="32493" end="32517" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="32519" end="32536" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="32598" end="32618" title="biological chemistry" label="biological chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732565" start="32620" end="32634" title="Karl Paul Link" label="Karl Paul Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="32684" end="32697" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="32698" end="32706" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264019" start="32708" end="32728" title="Jack Linnett" label="John Wilfrid Linnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q110935" start="32804" end="32820" title="William Lipscomb" label="William Lipscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="32857" end="32881" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="32883" end="32914" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798933" start="32945" end="32964" title="Arthur H. Livermore" label="Arthur H. Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q58720" start="33008" end="33025" title="Mikhail Lomonosov" label="Mikhail Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q899772" start="33113" end="33143" title="H. Christopher Longuet-Higgins" label="H. Christopher Longuet-Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694139" start="33174" end="33185" title="Janis Louie" label="Janis Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q908567" start="33217" end="33229" title="Martin Lowry" label="Martin Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053165" start="33260" end="33272" title="Sima Lozanić" label="Sima Lozanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="33286" end="33293" title="Serbs" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835292" start="33303" end="33315" title="Alfred Lucas (chemist)" label="Alfred Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28978" start="33376" end="33394" title="Ignacy Łukasiewicz" label="Ignacy Łukasiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q110942" start="33435" end="33450" title="Alan MacDiarmid" label="Alan MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="33499" end="33523" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873594" start="33525" end="33556" title="Carolina Henriette Mac Gillavry" label="Carolina Henriette Mac Gillavry"/>
<link wikidata="Q211482" start="33606" end="33624" title="Roderick MacKinnon" label="Roderick MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="33643" end="33667" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902205" start="33669" end="33683" title="Pierre Macquer" label="Pierre Macquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q239067" start="33725" end="33742" title="Rudolph A. Marcus" label="Rudolph A. Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="33761" end="33785" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q904506" start="33787" end="33804" title="Jacob A. Marinsky" label="Jacob A. Marinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="33862" end="33872" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q124045" start="33874" end="33908" title="Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac" label="Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855" start="33948" end="33957" title="ytterbium" label="ytterbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832" start="33976" end="33986" title="gadolinium" label="gadolinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q467705" start="33988" end="34019" title="Vladimir Vasilevich Markovnikov" label="Vladimir Vasilevich Markovnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q899214" start="34033" end="34047" title="Tobin J. Marks" label="Tobin J. Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706660" start="34113" end="34129" title="Alan G. Marshall" label="Alan G. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977" start="34246" end="34271" title="Archer John Porter Martin" label="Archer John Porter Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="34290" end="34314" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q474022" start="34316" end="34334" title="Martin van Marum" label="Martinus van Marum"/>
<link wikidata="Q52354" start="34363" end="34377" title="Elmer McCollum" label="Elmer McCollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19009" start="34446" end="34460" title="Edwin McMillan" label="Edwin McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="34479" end="34503" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="34505" end="34517" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="34549" end="34575" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="34621" end="34647" title="Periodic table of elements" label="Periodic table of elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q908655" start="34649" end="34660" title="John Mercer (scientist)" label="John Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q224153" start="34701" end="34724" title="Robert Bruce Merrifield" label="Robert Bruce Merrifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="34764" end="34788" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77073" start="34790" end="34809" title="Julius Lothar Meyer" label="Julius Lothar Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="34861" end="34887" title="periodic table of elements" label="periodic table of elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q76622" start="34915" end="34927" title="Viktor Meyer" label="Viktor Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211773" start="34942" end="34956" title="Dan Meyerstein" label="Dan Meyerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q201325" start="35003" end="35019" title="Ariel University" label="Ariel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q71590" start="35021" end="35037" title="August Michaelis" label="August Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62926" start="35067" end="35083" title="Leonor Michaelis" label="Leonor Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q77086" start="35137" end="35151" title="Hartmut Michel" label="Hartmut Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="35170" end="35194" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925645" start="35196" end="35208" title="Huang Minlon" label="Huang Minlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130347" start="35239" end="35253" title="Stanley Miller" label="Stanley Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q208625" start="35304" end="35326" title="Miller–Urey experiment" label="Miller–Urey experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q766820" start="35328" end="35341" title="Eugène Millon" label="Eugène Millon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46271067" start="35371" end="35385" title="David P. Mills" label="David P. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q535388" start="35404" end="35422" title="Luis E. Miramontes" label="Luis E. Miramontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="35455" end="35487" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="combined oral contraceptive pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207992" start="35489" end="35506" title="Peter D. Mitchell" label="Peter D. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="35525" end="35549" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989294" start="35551" end="35570" title="William A. Mitchell" label="William A. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448091" start="35604" end="35613" title="Pop Rocks" label="Pop Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744433" start="35615" end="35619" title="Tang (drink)" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167367" start="35625" end="35634" title="Cool Whip" label="Cool Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q62518" start="35636" end="35657" title="Eilhardt Mitscherlich" label="Eilhardt Mitscherlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q73148" start="35727" end="35749" title="Alexander Mitscherlich (chemist)" label="Alexander Mitscherlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q62540" start="35779" end="35798" title="Karl Friedrich Mohr" label="Karl Friedrich Mohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="35859" end="35881" title="Conservation of energy" label="Conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102804" start="35883" end="35896" title="Henri Moissan" label="Henri Moissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="35952" end="35976" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19045" start="35978" end="35993" title="Mario J. Molina" label="Mario J. Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="36012" end="36036" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q231402" start="36038" end="36051" title="Jacques Monod" label="Jacques Monod"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="36087" end="36124" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119360" start="36134" end="36150" title="Jeffrey S. Moore (chemist)" label="Jeffrey S. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077123" start="36192" end="36203" title="Peter Moore (chemist)" label="Peter Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q608197" start="36238" end="36269" title="Sterling Professor" label="Sterling Professor of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110952" start="36290" end="36304" title="Stanford Moore" label="Stanford Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="36323" end="36347" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352294" start="36349" end="36364" title="Hamilton Morris" label="Hamilton Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209457" start="36448" end="36476" title="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Pharmacopeia" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Pharmacopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310759" start="36484" end="36511" title="Henry Gwyn Jeffreys Moseley" label="Henry Gwyn Jeffreys Moseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q936481" start="36555" end="36573" title="Moseley&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moseley&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q901512" start="36575" end="36599" title="Gerardus Johannes Mulder" label="Gerardus Johannes Mulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q115475" start="36636" end="36647" title="Paul Hermann Müller" label="Paul Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="36687" end="36690" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="36700" end="36737" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233355" start="36747" end="36765" title="Robert S. Mulliken" label="Robert S. Mulliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="36813" end="36837" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20738401" start="36839" end="36863" title="Jnanendra Nath Mukherjee" label="Jnanendra Nath Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q157224" start="36909" end="36920" title="Kary Mullis" label="Kary Mullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="36939" end="36963" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277122" start="36965" end="36981" title="Earl Muetterties" label="Earl Muetterties"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154693" start="37013" end="37032" title="Catherine J. Murphy" label="Catherine J. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347949" start="37096" end="37113" title="Robert Nalbandyan" label="Robert Nalbandyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821249" start="37153" end="37168" title="Sergey Nametkin" label="Sergey Nametkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57901593" start="37206" end="37221" title="Louise Natrajan" label="Louise Natrajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234145" start="37240" end="37252" title="Giulio Natta" label="Giulio Natta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="37288" end="37312" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q869351" start="37314" end="37330" title="Costin Nenițescu" label="Costin Nenițescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857377" start="37362" end="37374" title="Antonio Neri" label="Antonio Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q57125" start="37423" end="37437" title="Walther Nernst" label="Walther Nernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="37472" end="37496" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q318214" start="37498" end="37527" title="John Alexander Reina Newlands" label="John Alexander Reina Newlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695200" start="37569" end="37586" title="William Nicholson (chemist)" label="William Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q355096" start="37617" end="37640" title="Kyriacos Costa Nicolaou" label="Kyriacos Costa Nicolaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q88145" start="37680" end="37696" title="Julius Nieuwland" label="Julius Nieuwland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="37736" end="37752" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q143937" start="37764" end="37772" title="neoprene" label="neoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43137506" start="37774" end="37789" title="Mathias Nilsson" label="Mathias Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="37808" end="37820" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46524148" start="37851" end="37869" title="Philiswa Nomngongo" label="Philiswa Nomngongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235834" start="37963" end="37993" title="Ronald George Wreyford Norrish" label="Ronald George Wreyford Norrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38012" end="38036" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106399" start="38038" end="38058" title="John Howard Northrop" label="John Howard Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38077" end="38101" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157210" start="38103" end="38115" title="Ryōji Noyori" label="Ryōji Noyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="38134" end="38157" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38164" end="38188" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018970" start="38190" end="38201" title="Ralph Nuzzo" label="Ralph Nuzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192603" start="38265" end="38283" title="George Andrew Olah" label="George Andrew Olah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38302" end="38326" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q62519271" start="38328" end="38341" title="Simon Olivier" label="Simon Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q108559557" start="38370" end="38386" title="Marilyn Olmstead" label="Marilyn Olmstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666079" start="38451" end="38461" title="Fred Olsen" label="Fred Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005197" start="38491" end="38506" title="ball propellant" label="ball propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q107405" start="38530" end="38542" title="Lars Onsager" label="Lars Onsager"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="38556" end="38572" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38579" end="38603" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199130" start="38605" end="38617" title="Tony Orchard" label="Tony Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q783922" start="38688" end="38696" title="Joan Oró" label="Joan Oró"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="38710" end="38717" title="Catalan people" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="38805" end="38815" title="nucleobase" label="nucleobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="38816" end="38823" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="38829" end="38845" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44412" start="38847" end="38868" title="Hans Christian Ørsted" label="Hans Christian Ørsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="38899" end="38908" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="38910" end="38925" title="Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="38944" end="38968" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q765613" start="38970" end="38986" title="Larry E. Overman" label="Larry E. Overman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88051013" start="39026" end="39039" title="Geoffrey Ozin" label="Geoffrey Ozin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="39080" end="39090" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q737365" start="39115" end="39130" title="Rudolph Pariser" label="Rudolph Pariser"/>
<link wikidata="Q321150" start="39144" end="39155" title="theoretical chemistry" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="39160" end="39175" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q908642" start="39177" end="39191" title="Robert G. Parr" label="Robert G. Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q321150" start="39205" end="39224" title="theoretical chemistry" label="theoretical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="39226" end="39239" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="39260" end="39270" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="39282" end="39296" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="39298" end="39311" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="39325" end="39336" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q244998" start="39362" end="39381" title="Charles J. Pedersen" label="Charles J. Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="39400" end="39424" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q903801" start="39426" end="39449" title="Eugène-Melchior Péligot" label="Eugène-Melchior Péligot"/>
<link wikidata="Q165749" start="39510" end="39530" title="Sir William Henry Perkin" label="William Henry Perkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421898" start="39584" end="39592" title="mauveine" label="mauveine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631780" start="39600" end="39625" title="William Henry Perkin, Jr." label="William Henry Perkin, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q78480" start="39697" end="39707" title="Max Perutz" label="Max Perutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="39726" end="39750" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415147" start="39752" end="39763" title="Eva Philbin" label="Eva Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230780" start="39792" end="39812" title="David Andrew Phoenix" label="David Andrew Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356709" start="39846" end="39863" title="Georgy Pigulevsky" label="Georgy Pigulevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q908166" start="39909" end="39924" title="Roy J. Plunkett" label="Roy J. Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="39952" end="39958" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q237825" start="39960" end="39980" title="John Charles Polanyi" label="John Charles Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40012" end="40036" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233973" start="40043" end="40056" title="John Pople" label="John A. Pople"/>
<link wikidata="Q321150" start="40070" end="40089" title="theoretical chemistry" label="theoretical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40096" end="40120" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372654" start="40122" end="40146" title="Vera Yevstafievna Popova" label="Vera Vevstafievna Popova"/>
<link wikidata="Q106762" start="40202" end="40215" title="George Porter" label="George Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40234" end="40258" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78482" start="40260" end="40271" title="Fritz Pregl" label="Fritz Pregl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40309" end="40333" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83501" start="40340" end="40355" title="Vladimir Prelog" label="Vladimir Prelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40374" end="40398" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="40400" end="40416" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="40488" end="40494" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183509" start="40496" end="40510" title="Ilya Prigogine" label="Ilya Prigogine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40529" end="40553" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159923" start="40555" end="40574" title="Joseph Louis Proust" label="Joseph Louis Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q327158" start="40603" end="40630" title="Law of definite proportions" label="Law of definite proportions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47453326" start="40632" end="40651" title="Evgenii Przhevalsky" label="Evgenii Przhevalsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="40703" end="40723" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205655" start="40741" end="40757" title="Ronald T. Raines" label="Ronald T. Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q60061" start="40789" end="40813" title="Venkatraman Ramakrishnan" label="Venkatraman Ramakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40832" end="40856" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="40858" end="40872" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="40909" end="40933" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248892" start="40935" end="40947" title="C. N. R. Rao" label="C. N. R. Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q379506" start="40977" end="40998" title="François-Marie Raoult" label="François-Marie Raoult"/>
<link wikidata="Q241687" start="41038" end="41055" title="Raoult&amp;#x27;s law" label="Raoult&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727390" start="41057" end="41071" title="Henry Rapoport" label="Henry Rapoport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018043" start="41116" end="41135" title="William Sage Rapson" label="William Sage Rapson"/>
<link wikidata="Q84759796" start="41200" end="41214" title="Nil Ratan Dhar" label="Nil Ratan Dhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388340" start="41260" end="41271" title="Ken Raymond" label="Ken Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="41294" end="41303" title="inorganic" label="inorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q803925" start="41308" end="41328" title="Bioinorganic chemistry" label="bioinorganic chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351086" start="41343" end="41363" title="Prafulla Chandra Ray" label="Prafulla Chandra Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370162" start="41393" end="41405" title="Julius Rebek" label="Julius Rebek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18738713" start="41447" end="41464" title="Charles Lee Reese" label="Charles Lee Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="41520" end="41526" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q311115" start="41528" end="41549" title="Henri Victor Regnault" label="Henri Victor Regnault"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="41582" end="41591" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q115490" start="41593" end="41610" title="Tadeus Reichstein" label="Tadeus Reichstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="41638" end="41675" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169234" start="41677" end="41683" title="Rhazes" label="Rhazes"/>
<link wikidata="Q715584" start="41748" end="41762" title="Stuart A. Rice" label="Stuart A. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273" start="41794" end="41816" title="Ellen Swallow Richards" label="Ellen Swallow Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q189465" start="41868" end="41893" title="Theodore William Richards" label="Theodore William Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="41912" end="41936" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023484" start="41938" end="41949" title="Wim Richter" label="Wim Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q61680" start="41977" end="42002" title="Jeremias Benjamin Richter" label="Jeremias Benjamin Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="42052" end="42065" title="stoichiometry" label="stoichiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q72983" start="42067" end="42081" title="Nikolaus Riehl" label="Nikolaus Riehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q524465" start="42111" end="42132" title="Andrés Manuel del Río" label="Andrés Manuel del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="42185" end="42193" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49351" start="42195" end="42210" title="Robert Robinson (organic chemist)" label="Robert Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42245" end="42269" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902460" start="42271" end="42291" title="Pierre Jean Robiquet" label="Pierre Jean Robiquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762506" start="42365" end="42379" title="Hillar Rootare" label="Hillar Rootare"/>
<link wikidata="Q230652" start="42429" end="42439" title="Irwin Rose" label="Irwin Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42458" end="42482" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902573" start="42484" end="42510" title="Guillaume-François Rouelle" label="Guillaume-François Rouelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q908586" start="42540" end="42561" title="Hilaire-Marin Rouelle" label="Hilaire-Marin Rouelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q111190" start="42591" end="42613" title="Frank Sherwood Rowland" label="Frank Sherwood Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42632" end="42656" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q313067" start="42658" end="42675" title="Daniel Rutherford" label="Daniel Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="42707" end="42724" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="42801" end="42807" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42809" end="42833" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122996" start="42840" end="42855" title="Leopold Ruzicka" label="Leopold Ruzicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42893" end="42917" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q104575" start="42927" end="42940" title="Paul Sabatier (chemist)" label="Paul Sabatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="42975" end="42999" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="43014" end="43030" title="Frederick Sanger" label="Frederick Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43058" end="43082" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q70538" start="43084" end="43104" title="Carl Wilhelm Scheele" label="Carl Wilhelm Scheele"/>
<link wikidata="Q61319" start="43178" end="43207" title="Christian Friedrich Schönbein" label="Christian Friedrich Schönbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="43256" end="43265" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="43282" end="43292" title="gun cotton" label="gun cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="43297" end="43302" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q906562" start="43304" end="43323" title="Stuart L. Schreiber" label="Stuart L. Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q202159" start="43397" end="43415" title="Richard R. Schrock" label="Richard R. Schrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43434" end="43458" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q899840" start="43460" end="43473" title="Peter G. Schultz" label="Peter Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="43505" end="43521" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43540" end="43564" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q717081" start="43566" end="43587" title="Nils Gabriel Sefström" label="Nils Gabriel Sefström"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065181" start="43610" end="43625" title="Francesco Selmi" label="Francesco Selmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48990" start="43656" end="43685" title="Nikolay Nikolayevich Semyonov" label="Nikolay Nikolayevich Semyonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43727" end="43751" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983063" start="43753" end="43767" title="T. R. Seshadri" label="T. R. Seshadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q110925" start="43825" end="43843" title="K. Barry Sharpless" label="K. Barry Sharpless"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="43862" end="43885" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43892" end="43916" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44111" start="43918" end="43931" title="Dan Shechtman" label="Dan Shechtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="43950" end="43974" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q263214" start="43987" end="43999" title="quasicrystal" label="quasicrystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306" start="44002" end="44018" title="Patsy O. Sherman" label="Patsy O. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617506" start="44047" end="44060" title="John Sherwood (chemist)" label="John Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420638" start="44100" end="44122" title="Nevil Vincent Sidgwick" label="Nevil Vincent Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="44183" end="44190" title="valence (chemistry)" label="valency"/>
<link wikidata="Q205345" start="44192" end="44207" title="Osamu Shimomura" label="Osamu Shimomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44226" end="44250" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110916" start="44252" end="44268" title="Hideki Shirakawa" label="Hideki Shirakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44287" end="44311" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="44313" end="44330" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515727" start="44366" end="44384" title="Psychopharmacology" label="Psychopharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="44389" end="44399" title="Entheogens" label="Entheogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696065" start="44401" end="44422" title="Salimuzzaman Siddiqui" label="Salimuzzaman Siddiqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064310" start="44494" end="44509" title="Oktay Sinanoglu" label="Oktay Sinanoglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="44523" end="44530" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q66124521" start="44540" end="44556" title="Joseph H. Simons" label="Joseph H. Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="44598" end="44611" title="fluorocarbons" label="fluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="44621" end="44638" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="44654" end="44671" title="Manhattan project" label="Manhattan project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687170" start="44673" end="44692" title="Jens Christian Skou" label="Jens Christian Skou"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44711" end="44735" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106746" start="44737" end="44752" title="Richard Smalley" label="Richard Smalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44771" end="44795" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q232289" start="44797" end="44810" title="Michael Smith (chemist)" label="Michael Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44829" end="44853" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q351377" start="44855" end="44870" title="Ascanio Sobrero" label="Ascanio Sobrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q102830" start="44930" end="44945" title="Frederick Soddy" label="Frederick Soddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44981" end="45005" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q445519" start="45007" end="45020" title="Susan Solomon" label="Susan Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311665" start="45064" end="45077" title="Ernest Solvay" label="Ernest Solvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q319325" start="45126" end="45141" title="S.P.L. Sørensen" label="S.P.L. Sørensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q904664" start="45171" end="45188" title="Gabor A. Somorjai" label="Gabor A. Somorjai"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="45207" end="45230" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57566" start="45232" end="45249" title="Georg Ernst Stahl" label="Georg Ernst Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q105937" start="45295" end="45319" title="Wendell Meredith Stanley" label="Wendell Meredith Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="45338" end="45362" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q560706" start="45364" end="45381" title="Jean Servais Stas" label="Jean Servais Stas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491326" start="45423" end="45439" title="Branko Stanovnik" label="Branko Stanovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q48956" start="45462" end="45480" title="Hermann Staudinger" label="Hermann Staudinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="45516" end="45540" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586808" start="45542" end="45557" title="Harry Steenbock" label="Harry Steenbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="45600" end="45611" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737837" start="45612" end="45623" title="irradiation" label="irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156492" start="45625" end="45645" title="William Howard Stein" label="William Howard Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="45664" end="45688" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109559" start="45690" end="45706" title="Thomas A. Steitz" label="Thomas A. Steitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="45725" end="45749" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19401606" start="45751" end="45766" title="Douglas Stephan" label="Douglas Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q77544" start="45792" end="45804" title="Alfred Stock" label="Alfred Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="45862" end="45879" title="mercury poisoning" label="mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062532" start="45881" end="45893" title="Brian Stoltz" label="Brian Stoltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q376243" start="45948" end="45963" title="James Fraser Stoddart" label="Fraser Stoddart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8204875" start="46025" end="46040" title="mechanical bond" label="mechanical bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710990" start="46042" end="46056" title="Molly Shoichet" label="Molly Shoichet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540285" start="46123" end="46141" title="tissue engineering" label="tissue engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966910" start="46194" end="46212" title="National Academies" label="National Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380972" start="46224" end="46242" title="F. Gordon A. Stone" label="F. Gordon A. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943362" start="46283" end="46300" title="S. Donald Stookey" label="S. Donald Stookey"/>
<link wikidata="Q901783" start="46350" end="46363" title="Gilbert Stork" label="Gilbert Stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="46384" end="46407" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76784" start="46409" end="46447" title="Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz" label="Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="46506" end="46524" title="chemical structure" label="chemical structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320678" start="46526" end="46547" title="Yellapragada Subbarow" label="Yellapragada Subbarow"/>
<link wikidata="Q106756" start="46659" end="46674" title="James B. Sumner" label="James B. Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="46693" end="46717" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390663" start="46719" end="46737" title="Kenneth S. Suslick" label="Kenneth S. Suslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q906892" start="46843" end="46861" title="Edwin Sutermeister" label="Edwin Sutermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q186391" start="46928" end="46944" title="Theodor Svedberg" label="Theodor Svedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="46963" end="46987" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q315422" start="46989" end="47000" title="Joseph Swan" label="Joseph Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q979136" start="47055" end="47070" title="Frédéric Swarts" label="Frédéric Swarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="47120" end="47138" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48979" start="47149" end="47182" title="Richard Laurence Millington Synge" label="Richard Laurence Millington Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="47201" end="47225" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110963" start="47235" end="47248" title="Koichi Tanaka" label="Koichi Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="47297" end="47321" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q235983" start="47323" end="47334" title="Henry Taube" label="Henry Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="47372" end="47396" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q327722" start="47398" end="47419" title="Louis Jacques Thénard" label="Louis Jacques Thénard"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="47460" end="47477" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425278" start="47482" end="47501" title="cobalt blue" label="Thenard&amp;#x27;s Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661942" start="47507" end="47529" title="Harold Warris Thompson" label="Harold Warris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47285" start="47569" end="47582" title="J. J. Thomson" label="J. J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="47651" end="47658" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323609" start="47661" end="47674" title="Don Tilley" label="T. Don Tilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q233026" start="47712" end="47725" title="Arne Tiselius" label="Arne Tiselius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="47764" end="47788" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122620" start="47790" end="47801" title="Max Tishler" label="Max Tishler"/>
<link wikidata="Q826100" start="47838" end="47853" title="Priestley Medal" label="Priestley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157242" start="47855" end="47884" title="Alexander R. Todd, Baron Todd" label="Alexander R. Todd, Baron Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="47923" end="47947" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102490" start="47949" end="47971" title="Evangelista Torricelli" label="Evangelista Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="48049" end="48056" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200470" start="48058" end="48072" title="Roger Y. Tsien" label="Roger Y. Tsien"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="48113" end="48137" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q241118" start="48139" end="48152" title="Mikhail Tsvet" label="Mikhail Tsvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="48194" end="48219" title="adsorption chromatography" label="adsorption chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q95995560" start="48221" end="48234" title="Kristy Turner" label="Kristy Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q560404" start="48261" end="48275" title="Georges Urbain" label="Georges Urbain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857" start="48328" end="48336" title="lutetium" label="lutetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179777" start="48338" end="48357" title="Harold Clayton Urey" label="Harold Clayton Urey"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="48421" end="48430" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="48437" end="48461" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q562033" start="48471" end="48482" title="Lauri Vaska" label="Lauri Vaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q333438" start="48523" end="48546" title="Louis Nicolas Vauquelin" label="Louis Nicolas Vauquelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="48615" end="48624" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="48629" end="48637" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q33128" start="48639" end="48658" title="Vincent du Vigneaud" label="Vincent du Vigneaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="48677" end="48701" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157239" start="48703" end="48726" title="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen" label="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65226" start="48771" end="48781" title="Max Volmer" label="Max Volmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q680" start="48804" end="48820" title="Alessandro Volta" label="Alessandro Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q907372" start="48885" end="48905" title="Alexander Vinogradov (geochemist)" label="Alexander Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q131721" start="48946" end="48976" title="Johannes Diderik van der Waals" label="Johannes Diderik van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q909857" start="49008" end="49024" title="James Walker (chemist)" label="Sir James Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q235184" start="49065" end="49079" title="John E. Walker" label="John E. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="49115" end="49139" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57127" start="49141" end="49153" title="Otto Wallach" label="Otto Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="49188" end="49212" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878573" start="49214" end="49225" title="John Warner (chemist)" label="John Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385301" start="49262" end="49274" title="Perkin Medal" label="Perkin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123014" start="49328" end="49341" title="Alfred Werner" label="Alfred Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="49375" end="49399" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794273" start="49401" end="49420" title="Thomas Summers West" label="Thomas Summers West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174932" start="49462" end="49484" title="Peter Jaffrey Wheatley" label="Peter Jaffrey Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q172183" start="49515" end="49529" title="Chaim Weizmann" label="Chaim Weizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823838" start="49574" end="49585" title="Acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation" label="ABE-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q701501" start="49587" end="49607" title="George M. Whitesides" label="George M. Whitesides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769803" start="49639" end="49657" title="John Rex Whinfield" label="John Rex Whinfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q730128" start="49717" end="49731" title="Otto Wichterle" label="Otto Wichterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="49787" end="49801" title="contact lenses" label="contact lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q76610" start="49803" end="49824" title="Heinrich Otto Wieland" label="Heinrich Otto Wieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="49858" end="49882" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60132" start="49884" end="49899" title="Julius Wilbrand" label="Julius Wilbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="49941" end="49944" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677667" start="49946" end="49961" title="Harvey W. Wiley" label="Harvey W. Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q274128" start="50022" end="50044" title="Sir Geoffrey Wilkinson" label="Sir Geoffrey Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="50080" end="50104" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q374493" start="50106" end="50134" title="Alexander William Williamson" label="Alexander William Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q898790" start="50176" end="50202" title="Williamson ether synthesis" label="Williamson ether synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795218" start="50204" end="50218" title="Thomas Willson" label="Thomas Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="50232" end="50240" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q421801" start="50308" end="50323" title="calcium carbide" label="calcium carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q77072" start="50325" end="50344" title="Richard Willstätter" label="Richard Willstätter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="50379" end="50403" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77142" start="50405" end="50432" title="Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus" label="Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="50467" end="50491" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627036" start="50493" end="50506" title="Günter Wirths" label="Günter Wirths"/>
<link wikidata="Q77171" start="50536" end="50548" title="Georg Wittig" label="Georg Wittig"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="50583" end="50607" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="50609" end="50625" title="Friedrich Wöhler" label="Friedrich Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="50687" end="50691" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="50693" end="50715" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="50770" end="50779" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="50784" end="50791" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="50793" end="50811" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert B. Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="50848" end="50872" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989954" start="50874" end="50890" title="Charles de Worms" label="Charles de Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q366051" start="50939" end="50960" title="Charles-Adolphe Wurtz" label="Charles-Adolphe Wurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="50974" end="50982" title="Alsace" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q898901" start="51014" end="51028" title="Wurtz reaction" label="Wurtz reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q110957" start="51030" end="51043" title="Kurt Wüthrich" label="Kurt Wüthrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="51062" end="51086" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q906616" start="51096" end="51116" title="Xiaoliang Sunney Xie" label="Xiaoliang Sunney Xie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="51199" end="51209" title="Microscopy" label="Microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q903528" start="51214" end="51218" title="Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy" label="CARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16907149" start="51273" end="51279" title="Xie Yi" label="Xie Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="51293" end="51300" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="51324" end="51351" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="51372" end="51398" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426" start="51409" end="51419" title="Ada Yonath" label="Ada Yonath"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="51457" end="51480" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="51487" end="51511" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996054" start="51513" end="51526" title="Sabir Yunusov" label="Sabir Yunusov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="51540" end="51546" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="51556" end="51565" title="alkaloids" label="alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q900837" start="51576" end="51588" title="Richard Zare" label="Richard Zare"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="51625" end="51648" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191666" start="51650" end="51665" title="Nikolay Zefirov" label="Nikolay Zefirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q435709" start="51729" end="51745" title="Nikolay Zelinsky" label="Nikolay Zelinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q754396" start="51827" end="51835" title="gas mask" label="gas mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q106624" start="51844" end="51859" title="Ahmed H. Zewail" label="Ahmed H. Zewail"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="51873" end="51878" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="51896" end="51920" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q910223" start="51937" end="51951" title="femtochemistry" label="femtochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76624" start="51953" end="51965" title="Karl Ziegler" label="Karl Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="52000" end="52024" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78481" start="52026" end="52049" title="Richard Adolf Zsigmondy" label="Richard Adolf Zsigmondy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="52068" end="52092" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q938243" start="52130" end="52142" title="Marion Barry" label="Marion Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q164004" start="52207" end="52224" title="Alexander Borodin" label="Alexander Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509908" start="52268" end="52278" title="Jerry Buss" label="Jerry Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468" start="52375" end="52392" title="Catherine Coleman" label="Catherine Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707390" start="52490" end="52506" title="Emmanuel Dongala" label="Emmanuel Dongala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534" start="52552" end="52572" title="Elizabeth J. Feinler" label="Elizabeth J. Feinler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781172" start="52713" end="52727" title="Marye Anne Fox" label="Marye Anne Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q181678" start="52785" end="52799" title="Dolph Lundgren" label="Dolph Lundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q153670" start="52850" end="52860" title="Primo Levi" label="Primo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58720" start="52916" end="52933" title="Mikhail Lomonosov" label="Mikhail Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="52998" end="53011" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="53057" end="53078" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q206832" start="53092" end="53105" title="Gaspard Monge" label="Gaspard Monge"/>
<link wikidata="Q638755" start="53128" end="53148" title="descriptive geometry" label="descriptive geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064557" start="53150" end="53164" title="Francis Muguet" label="Francis Muguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q320889" start="53215" end="53231" title="Edward W. Morley" label="Edward W. Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q154844" start="53259" end="53286" title="Michelson–Morley experiment" label="Michelson–Morley experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770885" start="53288" end="53300" title="Knute Rockne" label="Knute Rockne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15048" start="53349" end="53361" title="Elio Di Rupo" label="Elio Di Rupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379399" start="53402" end="53415" title="Israel Shahak" label="Israel Shahak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="53429" end="53446" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="53460" end="53496" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836863" start="53530" end="53541" title="BX Plastics" label="BX Plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607560" start="53558" end="53577" title="List of biochemists" label="List of biochemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141693" start="53580" end="53610" title="List of computational chemists" label="List of computational chemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116932" start="53613" end="53637" title="List of Russian chemists" label="List of Russian chemists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80149" wikidata="Q301646" url="?curid=80149" title="John Gotti">
<text>John Joseph Gotti Jr. ( , ; October 27, 1940 – June 10, 2002) was an American &quot;mafioso&quot; and boss of the Gambino crime family in New York City. He ordered and helped to orchestrate the murder of Gambino boss Paul Castellano in December 1985 and took over the family shortly thereafter, leading what was described as America&#x27;s most powerful crime syndicate.

Gotti and his brothers grew up in poverty and turned to a life of crime at an early age. Gotti quickly became one of the Gambino family&#x27;s biggest earners and a protégé of Aniello Dellacroce, the family&#x27;s underboss, operating out of Ozone Park, Queens. Following the FBI&#x27;s indictment of members of Gotti&#x27;s crew for selling narcotics, Gotti began to fear that Castellano would kill him and his brother Gene for dealing drugs. As this fear continued to grow, and amidst growing dissent over the leadership of the family, Gotti arranged the murder of Castellano.

At his peak, Gotti was one of the most powerful and dangerous crime bosses in the United States. While his peers generally avoided attracting attention, especially from the media, Gotti became known as &quot;The Dapper Don&quot; for his expensive clothes and outspoken personality in front of news cameras. He was later given the nickname &quot;The [[Teflon]] Don&quot; after three high-profile trials in the 1980s resulted in acquittals, though it was later revealed that the trials had been tainted by jury tampering, juror misconduct and witness intimidation. Law enforcement continued gathering evidence against Gotti, who reportedly earned between $5million and $20million per year as Gambino boss.

Gotti&#x27;s underboss, Salvatore &quot;Sammy the Bull&quot; Gravano, aided the FBI in convicting Gotti; in 1991, Gravano agreed to turn state&#x27;s evidence and testified against Gotti after hearing the boss make disparaging remarks about him on a wiretap that implicated them both in several murders. In 1992, Gotti was convicted of five murders, conspiracy to commit murder, racketeering, obstruction of justice, tax evasion, illegal gambling, extortion and loansharking. He received life in prison without parole and was transferred to United States Penitentiary, Marion in Illinois.

Gotti died of throat cancer on June 10, 2002, at the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri. According to Anthony &quot;Gaspipe&quot; Casso, the former underboss of the Lucchese crime family, &quot;what John Gotti did was the beginning of the end of &quot;Cosa Nostra&quot;.&quot;

== Early life ==
John Gotti was born in the Bronx borough of New York City on October 27, 1940. He was the fifth of the thirteen children (two had died at birth) of John Joseph Gotti Sr. and Philomena &quot;Fannie&quot; DeCarlo. Both of Gotti&#x27;s parents were born in New York, but it is presumed that his grandparents were from San Giuseppe Vesuviano, in the Italian province of Naples, because his parents were married and lived there for some time. Gotti was one of five brothers who became made men in the Gambino crime family: Eugene &quot;Gene&quot; Gotti was initiated before John due to the latter&#x27;s incarceration, Peter Gotti was initiated under John&#x27;s leadership in 1988, and Richard V. Gotti was identified as a &quot;caporegime&quot; (captain, or head of a &quot;crew&quot;) by 2002. The fifth, Vincent, was initiated in 2002.

By the time he reached the age of 12, Gotti&#x27;s family settled in East New York, Brooklyn, where he grew up in poverty alongside his brothers. His father worked irregularly as a day laborer. As an adult, Gotti came to resent his father for being unable to provide for his family. In school, he had a history of truancy and bullying other students, and ultimately dropped out of Franklin K. Lane High School at the age of 16.

Gotti was involved in street gangs associated with New York &quot;mafiosi&quot; from the age of 12. When he was aged 14, he was attempting to steal a cement mixer from a construction site when it fell, crushing his toes; this injury left him with a permanent limp. After leaving school, Gotti devoted himself to working with the Mafia-associated Fulton-Rockaway Boys gang, where he met and befriended fellow future Gambino mobsters Angelo Ruggiero and Wilfred &quot;Willie Boy&quot; Johnson.

Gotti met his future wife, Victoria DiGiorgio, who was of half-Italian and half-Russian descent, at a bar in 1958. The couple were married on March 6, 1962. According to FBI documents, DiGiorgio was married previously and had one child by that marriage. Gotti and his wife had five children: Angela, Victoria, John Jr., Frank (d. 1980) and Peter. Gotti attempted to work legitimately in 1962 as a presser in a coat factory and as an assistant truck driver. However, he could not stay crime-free and, by 1966, had been jailed twice.

== Gambino crime family ==
=== Associate ===
As early as his teens, Gotti was running errands for Carmine Fatico, a &quot;soldier&quot; in the Gambino family, then known as the Anastasia family under the leadership of boss Albert Anastasia. Gotti carried out truck hijackings at Idlewild Airport (now John F. Kennedy International Airport) together with his brother Gene and friend Ruggiero. During this time, he befriended fellow mob hijacker and future Bonanno family boss Joseph Massino, and was given the nicknames &quot;Black John&quot; and &quot;Crazy Horse.&quot; It was around this time that Gotti met his mentor, Gambino underboss Aniello &quot;Neil&quot; Dellacroce.

In February 1968, United Airlines employees identified Gotti as the man who had signed for stolen merchandise; the FBI arrested him for that hijacking soon after. Gotti was arrested a third time for hijacking while out on bail two months later, this time for stealing a load of cigarettes worth $50,000 on the New Jersey Turnpike. Later that year, Gotti pleaded guilty to the hijacking of Northwest Airlines cargo trucks and was sentenced to three years at Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary.

Gotti and Ruggiero were paroled in 1972 and returned to their old crew at the Bergin Hunt and Fish Club, still working under Fatico. Gotti took responsibility for managing the Bergin crew&#x27;s illegal gambling operation, where he proved himself to be an effective enforcer. Fatico was indicted on loansharking charges in 1972; as a condition of his release, he could not associate with known felons. Gotti was not yet a made man due to the membership books&#x27; having been closed following the 1957 Apalachin meeting, but Fatico named him acting &quot;capo&quot; of the Bergin crew soon after he was paroled. In this new role, Gotti frequently traveled to Dellacroce&#x27;s headquarters at the Ravenite Social Club to brief the underboss on the crew&#x27;s activities. Dellacroce had already taken a liking to Gotti, and the two became even closer during this time. The two were very similar — both had strong violent streaks, cursed frequently and were heavy gamblers.

After Emanuel Gambino, nephew to boss Carlo Gambino, was kidnapped and murdered in 1973, Gotti was assigned to the hit team alongside Ruggiero and fellow enforcer Ralph Galione to search for the main suspect, gangster James McBratney. The three men botched their attempt to abduct McBratney at a Staten Island bar when they attempted to arrest him while posing as police detectives, and Galione shot McBratney dead when his accomplices managed to restrain him. Gotti was identified by eyewitnesses and by a police insider, and was arrested for the killing in June 1974. He was able to strike a plea bargain, however, with the help of attorney Roy Cohn, and was sentenced to four years&#x27; imprisonment for attempted manslaughter for his part in the hit. Following Gotti&#x27;s death, he was also identified by Massino as the killer of Vito Borelli, a Gambino associate murdered in 1975.

Remo Franceschini, a member of the New York City Police Department (NYPD) from 1957 to 1991 who specialized in organized crime; when asked in 1993 why he knew at an early stage that Gotti would become a major figure in the Mafia, said: &quot;He was charismatic and a leader. He wasn&#x27;t a womanizer. He spent all his time with his men. He also had a very sharp mind and total recall. And he exuded toughness. There were few men who would go against him.&quot;

=== Captain ===
On October 15, 1976, Carlo Gambino died at his home of natural causes. Against expectations, he had appointed Paul Castellano to succeed him over his underboss Dellacroce. Gambino appeared to believe that his crime family would benefit from Castellano&#x27;s focus on white-collar businesses. Dellacroce, at the time, was imprisoned for tax evasion and was unable to contest the succession. Castellano&#x27;s succession was confirmed at a meeting on November 24, with Dellacroce present. Castellano arranged for Dellacroce to remain as underboss while directly running the family&#x27;s affairs. While Dellacroce accepted Castellano&#x27;s succession, the deal effectively split the Gambino family into two rival factions.

In 1976, the Gambino family&#x27;s membership books were reportedly reopened. Gotti was released in July 1977, after two years&#x27; imprisonment; he was subsequently initiated into the family, now under the command of Castellano, and immediately promoted to replace Fatico as &quot;capo&quot; of the Bergin crew. Gotti&#x27;s crew reported directly to Dellacroce as part of the concessions given by Castellano to keep Dellacroce as underboss, and Gotti was regarded as Dellacroce&#x27;s protégé. Under Gotti, the crew were Dellacroce&#x27;s biggest earners. Besides his cut of his subordinates&#x27; earnings, Gotti ran his own loansharking operation and held a no-show job as a plumbing supply salesman. Unconfirmed allegations by FBI informants claimed that Gotti also financed drug deals.

In December 1978, Gotti assisted in the Lufthansa heist at Kennedy Airport, the largest unrecovered cash robbery in history. He had made arrangements for the getaway van to be crushed and baled at a scrapyard in Brooklyn. However, the driver of the van, Parnell &quot;Stacks&quot; Edwards, failed to follow orders; rather than driving the vehicle to the scrapyard, he parked it near a fire hydrant and went to sleep at his girlfriend&#x27;s apartment.

Gotti mostly tried to distance his personal family from his life of crime, with the exception of his son John Jr., who was a mob associate by 1982. However, on March 18, 1980, Gotti&#x27;s youngest son, 12-year-old Frank, was run over and killed on a family friend&#x27;s minibike by a neighbor named John Favara. Frank&#x27;s death was ruled an accident, but Favara subsequently received death threats and was attacked by Gotti&#x27;s wife with a baseball bat when he visited their home to apologize. Four months later, Favara disappeared, presumed murdered. Accounts have differed on what was done with his body. One account said that while Favara was dismembered alive with a chainsaw, his remains were stuffed into a barrel filled with concrete and dumped in the ocean or buried somewhere on the lot of a chop shop. In January 2009, court papers filed by federal prosecutors in Brooklyn contained allegations that mob hitman Charles Carneglia killed Favara and disposed of his body in acid. Gotti is widely assumed to have ordered Favara&#x27;s murder despite him and his family leaving on vacation for Florida three days prior.

Gotti was indicted on two occasions in his last two years as the Bergin &quot;capo&quot;, with both cases coming to trial after his ascension to boss of the Gambino family. In September 1984 he had an altercation with a refrigerator mechanic named Romual Piecyk and was subsequently charged with assault and robbery. In 1985, he was indicted alongside Dellacroce and several Bergin crew members in a racketeering case by Assistant U.S. Attorney Diane Giacalone. The indictment revealed that Gotti&#x27;s friend and co-defendant, Wilfred &quot;Willie Boy&quot; Johnson, had been an FBI informant.

=== Taking over the Gambino family ===
Gotti quickly became dissatisfied with Castellano&#x27;s leadership of the Gambino family, regarding the new boss as being too isolated and greedy. Like other members of the family, he also personally disliked Castellano. The boss lacked street credibility, and those who had paid their dues running street-level jobs did not respect him. Gotti had an economic interest as well: he had a running dispute with Castellano on the split Gotti took from truck hijackings at Kennedy Airport. 

Gotti was also rumored to be expanding into drug dealing, a lucrative trade Castellano had banned under threat of death. In August 1983, Ruggiero and Gotti&#x27;s brother Gene were arrested for dealing heroin, based primarily on recordings from a bug in Ruggiero&#x27;s house. Castellano demanded transcripts of the tapes and, when Ruggiero refused, he threatened to demote Gotti.

In 1984, Castellano was arrested and indicted in a RICO case for the crimes of Gambino hitman Roy DeMeo and his crew. The following year, he received a second indictment for his role on the Commission, the Mafia&#x27;s governing body. Facing life imprisonment for either case, Castellano arranged for Gotti to serve as acting boss alongside Thomas Bilotti, Castellano&#x27;s favorite &quot;capo&quot;, and Thomas Gambino in his absence. Gotti, meanwhile, began conspiring with fellow disgruntled &quot;capos&quot; Frank DeCicco and Joseph &quot;Joe Piney&quot; Armone and soldiers Sammy &quot;the Bull&quot; Gravano and Robert &quot;DiB&quot; DiBernardo (collectively dubbed &quot;The Fist&quot;) to overthrow Castellano, insisting, despite the boss&#x27; inaction, that Castellano would eventually try to kill him. Armone&#x27;s support was critical; as a respected old-timer who dated back to the family&#x27;s founder, Vincent Mangano, he would lend needed credibility to the conspirators&#x27; cause.

It had long been a rule in the Mafia that a boss could only be killed with the approval of a majority of the Commission. Indeed, Gotti&#x27;s planned hit would have been the first unsanctioned hit on a boss of the Five Families since Frank Costello was nearly killed in 1957 and would have been the first on any boss since Angelo Bruno in 1980. Gotti knew that it would be too risky to solicit support from the other four bosses, since they had longstanding ties to Castellano. To get around this, he got the support of several important figures of his generation in the Lucchese, Colombo and Bonanno families. He did not consider approaching the Genovese family; Castellano&#x27;s ties with Genovese boss Vincent &quot;the Chin&quot; Gigante were so close that any overture to a Genovese soldier would have been a tipoff. However, Gotti could also count on the complicity of Gambino &quot;consigliere&quot; Joseph N. Gallo.

After Dellacroce died of cancer on December 2, 1985, Castellano revised his succession plan: appointing Bilotti as underboss to Thomas Gambino as the sole acting boss, while making plans to break up Gotti&#x27;s crew. Infuriated by this, and by Castellano&#x27;s refusal to attend Dellacroce&#x27;s wake, Gotti resolved to kill his boss. When DeCicco tipped off Gotti that he would be having a meeting with Castellano and several other Gambino mobsters at Sparks Steak House on December 16, Gotti chose to take the opportunity. Both Castellano and Bilotti were ambushed and shot dead by assassins under Gotti&#x27;s command when they arrived that evening. Gotti watched the hit from his car alongside Gravano.

Several days after the murder, Gotti was named to a three-man committee to temporarily run the Gambino family pending the election of a new boss, along with Gallo and DeCicco. It was also announced that an internal investigation into Castellano&#x27;s murder was underway. However, it was an open secret that Gotti was acting boss in all but name, and nearly all of the family&#x27;s &quot;capos&quot; knew he had been the one behind the hit. Gotti was formally acclaimed as the new boss of the family at a meeting of twenty &quot;capos&quot; held on January 15, 1986. He appointed DeCicco as the new underboss while retaining Gallo as &quot;consigliere&quot;.

== Crime boss ==
Identified as both Castellano&#x27;s likely murderer and his successor, Gotti rose to fame throughout 1986. At the time of his takeover, the Gambino family was regarded as the most powerful American Mafia family, with an annual income of $500 million. In the book &quot;Underboss&quot;, Gravano estimated that Gotti himself had an annual income of no less than $5 million during his years as boss, and more likely between $10 million and $12 million. To protect himself legally, Gotti banned members of the family from accepting plea bargains that acknowledged the existence of the organization.

=== &quot;The Teflon Don&quot; ===
Gotti often smiled and waved at news cameras at his trials, which gained him favor with some of the general public. His newfound notoriety had at least one positive effect; upon the revelation of his attacker&#x27;s occupation, and amid reports of intimidation by the Gambinos, Piecyk decided not to testify against Gotti thanks to Boško &quot;The Yugo&quot; Radonjić, the head of the Westies in Hell&#x27;s Kitchen. When Gotti&#x27;s trial began in March 1986, Piecyk testified he was unable to remember who attacked him. The case was promptly dismissed, with the &quot;New York Post&quot; summarizing the proceedings with the headline, &quot;I For Gotti!&quot; It was later revealed that Gambino mobsters had severed Piecyk&#x27;s brake lines, made threatening phone calls and stalked Piecyk before the trial.

On April 13, 1986, DeCicco was killed in a car bombing following a visit to Castellano loyalist James Failla. The bombing was carried out by Victor Amuso and Anthony Casso of the Lucchese family, under orders of Gigante and Lucchese boss Anthony Corallo, to avenge Castellano and Bilotti by killing their successors; Gotti also planned to visit Failla that day but canceled, and the bomb was detonated after a soldier who rode with DeCicco was mistaken for the boss. Bombs had long been banned by the Mafia out of concern that it would put innocent people in harm&#x27;s way, leading the Gambinos to initially suspect that &quot;zips&quot;—Sicilian &quot;mafiosi&quot; working in the U.S.—were behind it; zips were well known for using bombs.

Following the bombing, Judge Eugene Nickerson, presiding over Gotti&#x27;s racketeering trial, rescheduled to avoid a jury tainted by the resulting publicity, while Giacalone had Gotti&#x27;s bail revoked due to evidence of witness intimidation in the Piecyk case. From jail, Gotti ordered the murder of DiBernardo by Gravano; both DiBernardo and Ruggiero had been vying to succeed DeCicco until Ruggiero accused DiBernardo of challenging Gotti&#x27;s leadership. When Ruggiero, also under indictment, had his bail revoked for his abrasive behavior in preliminary hearings, a frustrated Gotti instead promoted Armone to underboss.

Jury selection for the racketeering case began again in August 1986, with Gotti standing trial alongside his ex-companion Johnson (who, despite being exposed as an informant, refused to turn state&#x27;s evidence), Leonard DiMaria, Tony Rampino, Nicholas Corozzo and John Carneglia. At this point, the Gambino family were able to compromise the case when George Pape hid his friendship with Radonjić and was empaneled as juror No. 11. Through Radonjić, Pape contacted Gravano and agreed to sell his vote on the jury for $60,000.

In the trial&#x27;s opening statements on September 25, Gotti&#x27;s defense attorney Bruce Cutler denied the existence of the Gambino family and framed the government&#x27;s entire effort as a personal vendetta. His main defense strategy during the prosecution was to attack the credibility of Giacalone&#x27;s witnesses by discussing their crimes committed before their turning state&#x27;s evidence. During Gotti&#x27;s defense, Cutler called bank robber Matthew Traynor, a would-be prosecution witness dropped for unreliability, who testified that Giacalone offered him drugs and her underwear as a masturbation aid in exchange for his testimony; Traynor&#x27;s allegations would be dismissed by Judge Nickerson as &quot;wholly unbelievable&quot; after the trial, and he was subsequently convicted of perjury.

Despite Cutler&#x27;s defense and critiques about the prosecution&#x27;s performance, according to mob writers Jerry Capeci and Gene Mustain, when the jury&#x27;s deliberations began, a majority were in favor of convicting Gotti. However, due to Pape&#x27;s misconduct, Gotti knew from the beginning of the trial that he could do no worse than a hung jury. During deliberations, Pape held out for acquittal until the rest of the jury began to fear their own safety would be compromised. On March 13, 1987, they acquitted Gotti and his codefendants of all charges including loansharking, illegal gambling, murder and truck hijackings. Five years later, Pape was convicted of obstruction of justice for his part in the fix, and sentenced to three years in prison.

In the face of previous Mafia convictions, particularly the success of the Mafia Commission Trial, Gotti&#x27;s acquittal was a major upset that further added to his reputation. The American media dubbed him &quot;The Teflon Don&quot; in reference to the failure of any charges to &quot;stick.&quot;

=== Reorganization ===

While Gotti himself had escaped conviction, his associates were not as fortunate. The other two men in the Gambino administration, underboss Armone and &quot;consigliere&quot; Gallo, had been indicted on racketeering charges in 1986 and were both convicted in December 1987. Ruggiero and Gene Gotti&#x27;s heroin trial also commenced in June of that year.

Prior to their convictions, Gotti demoted Gallo, who retired to allow Gravano to take his place, while slating Frank LoCascio to serve as acting underboss in the event of Armone&#x27;s imprisonment. The Gambino family also worked to compromise the heroin trial&#x27;s jury, resulting in two mistrials. When the terminally ill Ruggiero was severed and released in 1989, Gotti refused to contact him, blaming him for the family&#x27;s misfortunes. According to Gravano, Gotti also considered murdering Ruggiero and when he finally died, &quot;I literally had to drag him to the funeral.&quot;

Beginning in January 1988, Gotti, against Gravano&#x27;s advice, required his &quot;capos&quot; to meet with him at the Ravenite Social Club once a week. Regarded by Gene as an unnecessary vanity-inspired risk, and by FBI Gambino squad leader Bruce Mouw as antithetical to the &quot;secret society,&quot; this move allowed FBI surveillance to record and identify much of the Gambino hierarchy. It also provided strong circumstantial evidence that Gotti was a boss; long-standing protocol in the Mafia requires public demonstrations of loyalty to the boss. The FBI also bugged the Ravenite, but failed to produce any high-quality incriminating recordings.

Later in 1988, Gotti, Gigante and new Lucchese boss Amuso attended the first Commission meeting since the Commission Trial, located at the LaBar Bat Club in Manhattan. Two years earlier, Casso had been injured in an unauthorized hit by Gambino &quot;capo&quot; Mickey Paradiso. In 1987, the FBI warned Gotti they had recorded Genovese &quot;consigliere&quot; Louis Manna discussing another hit on Gotti and his brother. In order to avoid a war, the leaders of the three families met, denied knowledge of their violence against one another and agreed to &quot;communicate better.&quot; The bosses also agreed to allow Colombo acting boss Victor Orena to join the Commission, but Gigante, wary of giving Gotti a majority by admitting another ally, blocked the reentry of Massino and the Bonannos.

Gotti was also able to influence the New Jersey-based DeCavalcante crime family in 1988. According to the DeCavalcante &quot;capo&quot;-turned-informant Anthony Rotondo, Gotti attended his father&#x27;s wake with numerous other Gambino mobsters in a &quot;show of force&quot; and forced boss Giovanni Riggi to agree to run his family on the Gambinos&#x27; behalf. The DeCavalcantes remained in the Gambino family&#x27;s sphere of influence until Gotti&#x27;s imprisonment.

Gotti&#x27;s son, John Jr., was initiated into the Gambino family on Christmas Eve 1988. According to fellow mobster Michael DiLeonardo, initiated on the same night, Gravano held the ceremony to keep Gotti from being accused of nepotism. John Jr. was promptly promoted to &quot;capo&quot;.

In 1989, Gotti ordered the murder of real estate developer Fred Weiss because he was worried that Weiss might become a government witness in exchange for leniency, requesting that the DeCavalcante family carry out the hit. Gallo and Vincent &quot;Vinny Ocean&quot; Palermo shot Weiss in the face, killing him instantly, with Anthony Capo serving as the getaway driver in the hit. In 1990, Riggi appointed John D&#x27;Amato as acting boss of the DeCavalcante family when Riggi went to prison.

=== Assault acquittal ===
On the evening of January 23, 1989, Gotti was arrested outside the Ravenite and charged with ordering the 1986 assault of labor union official John O&#x27;Connor. In the back of the police car, he remarked, &quot;Three to one I beat this charge.&quot; O&#x27;Connor, a leader in the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America (UBC) Local 608 who was later convicted of racketeering himself, was believed to have ordered an attack on a Gambino-associated restaurant that had snubbed the union and was subsequently shot and wounded by the Westies. After one night in jail, Gotti was released on $100,000 bail. He had his occupation listed as a salesman for a plumbing contracting company.

By this time, the FBI had cultivated new informants and learned part of the reason the Ravenite bug failed was because Gotti would hold sensitive conversations elsewhere, either in a rear hallway in the building the club occupied or in an apartment in its upper floors where the friendly widow of a Gambino soldier lived; by November 1989, both locations were bugged. The apartment bug was particularly fruitful due to Gotti&#x27;s frankness as he discussed his position as boss in meetings there. In a December 12 conversation with Locascio, Gotti plainly acknowledged ordering the murders of DiBernardo and Liborio Milito — the latter being one of Gravano&#x27;s partners killed for insubordination. He also announced his intent to kill soldier Louis DiBono, who had ignored a summons to meet with Gotti to discuss his mismanagement of a drywall business he held with Gotti and Gravano. The FBI, however, misheard the namedrop and failed to warn DiBono, who was killed on October 4, 1990. In another taped meeting on January 4, 1990, Gotti promoted Gravano to underboss, preferring him to lead the family if Gotti was convicted in the assault case.

State prosecutors linked Gotti to the case with a recording of him discussing O&#x27;Connor and announcing his intention to &quot;bust him up,&quot; and the testimony of Westies gangster James McElroy. However, Gotti was acquitted of all six assault and conspiracy charges at trial on February 9, 1990. After the trial, there were firework displays by locals. Jules J. Bonavolonta, director of the FBI&#x27;s organized crime division in New York, stated, &quot;With all this media coverage he&#x27;s beginning to look like a folk hero... What the public should realize is that he is the boss of the largest &quot;Cosa Nostra&quot; family, that he surrounds himself with ruthless killers and that he is flat out a criminal.&quot;

It later emerged that FBI bugs had apparently caught Gotti discussing plans to fix the jury as he had in the 1986–87 racketeering case. To the outrage of Manhattan district attorney Robert Morgenthau and state organized crime taskforce chief Ronald Goldstock, the FBI and federal prosecutors chose not to reveal this information to them. Morgenthau later said that had he known about these bugged conversations, he would have asked for a mistrial.

== 1992 conviction ==

Gotti, Gravano and Locascio were often recorded by the bugs placed throughout the Ravenite (concealed in the main room, the first-floor hallway and the upstairs apartment) discussing incriminating events. On December 11, 1990, FBI agents and NYPD detectives raided the Ravenite, arresting Gotti, Gravano and Locascio. Federal prosecutors charged Gotti, in this new racketeering case, with five murders (Castellano, Bilotti, DiBernardo, Milito and, after review of the apartment tapes, DiBono), conspiracy to murder Gaetano &quot;Corky&quot; Vastola, loansharking, illegal gambling, obstruction of justice, bribery and tax evasion. 

Based on tapes from FBI bugs played at pretrial hearings, the Gambino administration was denied bail. At the same time, attorneys Cutler and Gerald Shargel were disqualified from defending Gotti and Gravano after prosecutors successfully contended they were &quot;part of the evidence&quot; and thus liable to be called as witnesses. Prosecutors argued that Cutler and Shargel not only knew about potential criminal activity, but had worked as &quot;in-house counsel&quot; for the Gambino family. Gotti subsequently hired Albert Krieger, a Miami attorney who had worked with Joseph Bonanno, to replace Cutler.

The tapes also created a rift between Gotti and Gravano, where the Gambino boss described his newly appointed underboss as too greedy and attempted to frame Gravano as the main force behind the murders of DiBernardo, Milito and DiBono. Gotti&#x27;s attempt at reconciliation failed, leaving Gravano disillusioned with the mob and doubtful on his chances of winning his case without Shargel, his former attorney. Gravano ultimately opted to turn state&#x27;s evidence, formally agreeing to testify on November 13, 1991. He was the highest-ranking member of a New York crime family to turn informer until Joseph Massino in 2003.

Gotti and Locascio were tried in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York before District Judge I. Leo Glasser. Jury selection began in January 1992 with an anonymous jury and, for the first time in a Brooklyn federal case, fully sequestered during the trial due to Gotti&#x27;s reputation for jury tampering. The trial commenced with the prosecution&#x27;s opening statements on February 12; prosecutors Andrew Maloney and John Gleeson began their case by playing tapes showing Gotti discussing Gambino family business, including murders he approved, and confirming the animosity between Gotti and Castellano to establish the former&#x27;s motive to kill his boss. After calling an eyewitness of the Castellano hit who identified Carneglia as one of the men who shot Bilotti, they then brought Gravano to testify on March 2.

On the stand, Gravano confirmed Gotti&#x27;s place in the structure of the Gambino family and described in detail the conspiracy to assassinate Castellano, giving a full description of the hit and its aftermath. Gravano confessed to nineteen murders, implicating Gotti in four of them. Krieger, and Locascio&#x27;s attorney Anthony Cardinale, proved unable to shake Gravano during cross-examination. After additional testimony and tapes, the government rested its case on March 24.

Five of Krieger and Cardinale&#x27;s intended six witnesses were ruled irrelevant or extraneous, leaving only Gotti&#x27;s tax attorney Murray Appleman to testify on his behalf. The defense also attempted unsuccessfully to have a mistrial declared based on Maloney&#x27;s closing remarks. Gotti himself became increasingly hostile during the trial, and at one point, Glasser threatened to remove him from the courtroom. Among other outbursts, Gotti called Gravano a junkie while his attorneys sought to discuss his past steroid use, and equated the dismissal of a juror to the fixing of the 1919 World Series.

On April 2, 1992, after only fourteen hours of deliberation, the jury found Gotti guilty on all charges of the indictment (Locascio was found guilty on all but one). James Fox, Assistant Director in Charge of the FBI&#x27;s New York Field Office, announced at a press conference, &quot;The Teflon is gone. The don is covered with Velcro, and all the charges stuck.&quot; On June 23, 1992, Glasser sentenced both defendants to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole and a $250,000 fine.

== Post-conviction ==
=== Incarceration ===

Gotti was incarcerated at the United States Penitentiary at Marion, Illinois. He spent the majority of his sentence in effective solitary confinement, allowed out of his cell for only one hour a day. His final appeal was rejected by the United States Supreme Court in 1994.

On July 18, 1996, a fellow inmate named Walter Johnson punched Gotti in the prison recreation room, leaving him bruised and bleeding because, according to New York&#x27;s &quot;Daily News&quot;, Gotti had disrespected him with a racial slur. Gotti, desiring revenge, offered Aryan Brotherhood chieftains David Sahakian and Michael McElhiney somewhere between $40,000 and $400,000 to have Johnson killed. In August, McElhiney told two Brotherhood underlings to kill Johnson &quot;if given the opportunity,&quot; according to a federal indictment charging him and thirty-nine other gang members with murder, attempted murder and racketeering. Johnson, however, was transferred to the supermax prison in Florence, Colorado.

Despite his imprisonment and pressure from the Commission to step down, Gotti asserted his prerogative to retain his title as boss until his death or retirement, with his brother Peter and his son John Jr. relaying orders on his behalf. By 1998, when he was indicted on racketeering, John Jr. was believed to be the acting boss of the family. Against his father&#x27;s wishes, he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six years and five months&#x27; imprisonment in 1999. He maintains that he has since left the Gambino family. Peter subsequently became acting boss and is believed to have formally succeeded his brother shortly before Gotti&#x27;s death.

John Jr.&#x27;s indictment brought further stress to Gotti&#x27;s marriage. Victoria Gotti, up to that point unaware of her son&#x27;s involvement in the Mafia, blamed her husband for ruining her son&#x27;s life and threatened to leave him unless he allowed John Jr. to leave the mob.

=== Death and legacy ===

In 1998, Gotti was diagnosed with throat cancer and sent to the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri, for surgery. Though the tumor was removed, the cancer was discovered to have returned two years later and Gotti was transferred back to Springfield, where he spent the rest of his life.

Gotti&#x27;s condition rapidly declined and he died on June 10, 2002, at the age of 61. The Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn announced that Gotti&#x27;s family would not be permitted to have a Requiem Mass, but allowed a memorial Mass after the burial.

Gotti&#x27;s funeral was held in a non-church facility. After the funeral, an estimated 300 onlookers followed the procession, which passed Gotti&#x27;s Bergin Hunt and Fish Club, to the gravesite. Gotti&#x27;s body was interred in a crypt next to his son, Frank. Gotti&#x27;s brother Peter was unable to attend because of his incarceration.

In an apparent repudiation of Gotti&#x27;s leadership and legacy, the other New York City families sent no representatives to the funeral. Numerous prosecutions triggered by Gotti&#x27;s tactics left the Gambino family in shambles; by the turn of the century, half of the family&#x27;s made men were in prison.

== In popular culture ==
Since his conviction, Gotti has been portrayed in six television films, three documentary series, three theatrical films and been a subject of lyrics in music.

=== Film and TV ===
* &quot;Getting Gotti&quot; – 1994 CBS TV movie, portrayed by Anthony John Denison
* &quot;Gotti&quot; – 1996 HBO TV movie, portrayed by Armand Assante
* &quot;Witness to the Mob&quot; – 1998 NBC miniseries, portrayed by Tom Sizemore
* A 1999 episode of the documentary series &quot;The FBI Files&quot; narrated the story of the investigation and conviction of Gotti.
*&quot;The Big Heist&quot; – 2001 Canadian-American TV movie which aired on A&amp;E, portrayed by Steven Randazzo
* &quot;Boss of Bosses&quot; – 2001 TNT TV movie adapted from the book of the same name, portrayed by Sonny Marinelli
* &quot;Sinatra Club&quot; – 2010 theatrical film, portrayed by Danny Nucci
* &quot;The Wannabe&quot; – 2015 film, portrayed by Joseph Siravo
* The documentary series &quot;Mugshots&quot; aired an episode, &quot;John Gotti: End of the Sicilians&quot;, in 2017. Filmed in Sicily and Brooklyn, the episode featured court wiretaps and undercover footage of Gotti&#x27;s mob.
* &quot;Gotti&quot; – 2018 theatrical film, portrayed by John Travolta
* &quot;Victoria Gotti: My Father&#x27;s Daughter&quot; is a 2019 television movie based on the book by Victoria Gotti. John Gotti is played by Maurice Benard.
* &quot;Get Gotti&quot; – 2023 Netflix documentary series.

Joey Zaza is a fictional character and an antagonist appearing in the 1990 film &quot;The Godfather Part III&quot;. Both Zaza&#x27;s character and personality are partly based on John Gotti.

=== Music ===
* &quot;Road to the Riches&quot;, a 1988 single by Kool G Rap &amp; DJ Polo, makes a direct reference to John Gotti.
* In Fat Joe&#x27;s 1993 debut single &quot;Flow Joe&quot;, he raps, &quot;Now in &#x27;93 they should free John Gotti&quot;.
* In his 1994 debut album “Ready to Die,” the Notorious B.I.G. makes a reference to Gotti on the track named “Everyday Struggle.”
* &quot;Gotti&quot;, a 1994 song by New Jersey rock band The Smithereens on their album &quot;A Date with The Smithereens&quot;. John Gotti is the subject of the song.
* Gotti is the key subject of the song &quot;King of New York&quot;, by New York rap-rock group Fun Lovin&#x27; Criminals, released in 1996. The song reached number 28 in the UK singles chart and featured on the band&#x27;s debut album &quot;Come Find Yourself&quot;, which achieved platinum status in the UK.
* In the 1996 song &quot;D&#x27;Evils&quot;, Jay-Z states &quot;I never prayed to God, I prayed to Gotti&quot; to discuss his aspirations toward criminal success. Lupe Fiasco later referenced the lyric in his 2006 song &quot;Hurt Me Soul&quot;.
* Gotti is mentioned in the song &quot;Everybody Get Up&quot;, by British boy band Five, released in 1998.
* &quot;Who Da Neighbors&quot; is a 2011 song by Juicy J and Lex Luger, in which Juicy J compares his rise from the projects and his development of expensive tastes to that of John Gotti.
* The 2013 song &quot;Versace (Remix)&quot;, by Migos and Drake, references John Gotti as a notorious drug dealer.
* “Married To The Game”, a song by Future and DJ Esco on their 2016 mixtape “Project E.T.” refers to Gotti “I beat a couple cases, I feel like John Gotti”.
* &quot;Teflon Don&quot;, a 2021 song by rapper Rx Papi references Gotti throughout the song.
* Megan Thee Stallion refers to herself as the &quot;Teflon Don&quot; in her 2024 single &quot;Hiss&quot;
* In Future&#x27;s third release of 2024, &quot;MIXTAPE PLUTO,&quot; Future references John Gotti&#x27;s elusive criminal behaviour &quot;beat the first case like John Gotti&quot;. The title of the song nods at John Gotti more, being called &quot;TEFLON DON&quot;.
* Gotti is mentioned in the song &quot;Shiksa Goddess&quot; from the musical The Last 5 Years by Jason Robert Brown

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* Blum, Howard. &quot;Gangland : How The FBI Broke the Mob&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1993. 
* Capeci, Jerry and Gene Mustain. &quot;Mob Star: The Story of John Gotti&quot;. New York: Penguin, 1988. 
* Capeci, Jerry and Gene Mustain. &quot;Gotti: Rise and Fall&quot;. New York: Onyx, 1996. 
* Davis, John H. &quot;Mafia Dynasty: The Rise and Fall of the Gambino Crime Family&quot;. New York: HarperCollins, 1993. 
* Maas, Peter. &quot;Underboss: Sammy the Bull Gravano&#x27;s Story of Life in the Mafia&quot;. New York, N.Y.: HarperPaperbacks, 1997. .
* Raab, Selwyn. &quot;Five Families: The Rise, Decline, and Resurgence of America&#x27;s Most Powerful Mafia Empires&quot;. London: Robson Books, 2006. 

== External links ==
* John Gotti – Biography.com
* John Gotti: How We Made the Charges Stick – Federal Bureau of Investigation
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="0" end="21" title="John Gotti" label="John Joseph Gotti Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="84" end="91" title="American Mafia" label="mafioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="102" end="106" title="Crime boss" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="114" end="134" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="138" end="151" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q304489" start="217" end="232" title="Paul Castellano" label="Paul Castellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="354" end="369" title="crime syndicate" label="crime syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="537" end="544" title="mentorship" label="protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q367713" start="548" end="566" title="Aniello Dellacroce" label="Aniello Dellacroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883466" start="586" end="595" title="underboss" label="underboss"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="614" end="632" title="Ozone Park, Queens" label="Ozone Park, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="648" end="651" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="659" end="669" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501400" start="792" end="796" title="Gene Gotti" label="Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="1160" end="1174" title="John Gotti" label="The Dapper Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="1297" end="1315" title="John Gotti" label="The [[Teflon]] Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="1379" end="1388" title="acquittal" label="acquittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315498" start="1456" end="1470" title="jury tampering" label="jury tampering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154525" start="1472" end="1488" title="juror misconduct" label="juror misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502604" start="1493" end="1513" title="witness intimidation" label="witness intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q923645" start="1681" end="1725" title="Sammy Gravano" label="Salvatore &amp;quot;Sammy the Bull&amp;quot; Gravano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640069" start="1789" end="1815" title="turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence" label="turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="1907" end="1914" title="wiretap" label="wiretap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163458" start="2007" end="2034" title="conspiracy to commit murder" label="conspiracy to commit murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="2036" end="2048" title="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="2050" end="2072" title="obstruction of justice" label="obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="2074" end="2085" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520201" start="2087" end="2103" title="illegal gambling" label="illegal gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="2105" end="2114" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="2119" end="2131" title="loansharking" label="loansharking"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="2145" end="2159" title="life imprisonment" label="life in prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727051" start="2198" end="2232" title="United States Penitentiary, Marion" label="United States Penitentiary, Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="2236" end="2244" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="2261" end="2274" title="throat cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495382" start="2300" end="2350" title="United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners" label="United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="2354" end="2375" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q572992" start="2390" end="2423" title="Anthony Casso" label="Anthony &amp;quot;Gaspipe&amp;quot; Casso"/>
<link wikidata="Q281284" start="2453" end="2474" title="Lucchese crime family" label="Lucchese crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="2606" end="2615" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2627" end="2640" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q72503" start="2898" end="2920" title="San Giuseppe Vesuviano" label="San Giuseppe Vesuviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123" start="2937" end="2955" title="province of Naples" label="province of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726783" start="3063" end="3071" title="made men" label="made men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="3079" end="3099" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501400" start="3101" end="3130" title="Gene Gotti" label="Eugene &amp;quot;Gene&amp;quot; Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q31842074" start="3135" end="3144" title="initiation ritual (mafia)" label="initiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376619" start="3197" end="3208" title="Peter Gotti" label="Peter Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431294" start="3265" end="3281" title="Richard V. Gotti" label="Richard V. Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996722" start="3308" end="3318" title="caporegime" label="caporegime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="3488" end="3501" title="East New York, Brooklyn" label="East New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="3503" end="3511" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545700" start="3733" end="3740" title="truancy" label="truancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491621" start="3800" end="3828" title="Franklin K. Lane High School" label="Franklin K. Lane High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="3870" end="3881" title="street gang" label="street gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="3914" end="3921" title="American Mafia" label="mafiosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q831584" start="3998" end="4010" title="cement mixer" label="cement mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762956" start="4280" end="4295" title="Angelo Ruggiero" label="Angelo Ruggiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001822" start="4300" end="4338" title="Wilfred Johnson" label="Wilfred &amp;quot;Willie Boy&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4511" end="4514" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926735" start="4641" end="4649" title="Victoria Gotti" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433029" start="4651" end="4659" title="John A. Gotti" label="John Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5043689" start="4972" end="4986" title="Carmine Fatico" label="Carmine Fatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557218" start="4996" end="5003" title="Soldato" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="5092" end="5096" title="crime boss" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q706235" start="5097" end="5113" title="Albert Anastasia" label="Albert Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q632327" start="5133" end="5148" title="truck hijacking" label="truck hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="5175" end="5212" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q892085" start="5329" end="5343" title="Bonanno crime family" label="Bonanno family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094605" start="5349" end="5363" title="Joseph Massino" label="Joseph Massino"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="5488" end="5494" title="mentorship" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883466" start="5504" end="5513" title="underboss" label="underboss"/>
<link wikidata="Q367713" start="5514" end="5549" title="Aniello Dellacroce" label="Aniello &amp;quot;Neil&amp;quot; Dellacroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="5570" end="5585" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="5774" end="5778" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="5862" end="5881" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="5941" end="5959" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890881" start="6009" end="6039" title="Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary" label="Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="6066" end="6072" title="parole" label="parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891675" start="6120" end="6145" title="Bergin Hunt and Fish Club" label="Bergin Hunt and Fish Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520201" start="6237" end="6253" title="illegal gambling" label="illegal gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="6308" end="6316" title="mob enforcer" label="enforcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="6329" end="6337" title="indictment" label="indicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="6341" end="6353" title="loansharking" label="loansharking"/>
<link wikidata="Q617411" start="6545" end="6562" title="Apalachin meeting" label="Apalachin meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296455" start="6740" end="6760" title="Ravenite Social Club" label="Ravenite Social Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q452127" start="7055" end="7068" title="Carlo Gambino" label="Carlo Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="7132" end="7135" title="Contract killing" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139165" start="7235" end="7250" title="James McBratney" label="James McBratney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="7313" end="7326" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="7611" end="7623" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q942923" start="7660" end="7668" title="Roy Cohn" label="Roy Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="7735" end="7747" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="7942" end="7973" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="8018" end="8033" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="8442" end="8456" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q304489" start="8497" end="8512" title="Paul Castellano" label="Paul Castellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="8655" end="8667" title="white-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="8724" end="8735" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382776" start="9774" end="9785" title="no-show job" label="no-show job"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="9848" end="9857" title="informant" label="informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="9892" end="9901" title="drug deal" label="drug deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875662" start="9945" end="9960" title="Lufthansa heist" label="Lufthansa heist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185441" start="10063" end="10074" title="getaway car" label="getaway van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230600" start="10104" end="10113" title="scrapyard" label="scrapyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610966" start="10630" end="10638" title="minibike" label="minibike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232813" start="10659" end="10670" title="John Favara" label="John Favara"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="11012" end="11023" title="Dismemberment" label="dismembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104809" start="11167" end="11176" title="chop shop" label="chop shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="11280" end="11286" title="Contract killing" label="hitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727837" start="11287" end="11304" title="Charles Carneglia" label="Charles Carneglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="11465" end="11472" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="11788" end="11795" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="11800" end="11807" title="robbery" label="robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="11892" end="11904" title="racketeering" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="11913" end="11936" title="United States Attorney" label="Assistant U.S. Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530061" start="12366" end="12384" title="street credibility" label="street credibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="12818" end="12824" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="12863" end="12866" title="Covert listening device" label="bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="13049" end="13053" title="RICO" label="RICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338001" start="13092" end="13101" title="Roy DeMeo" label="Roy DeMeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532650" start="13150" end="13167" title="Mafia Commission Trial" label="second indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574435" start="13184" end="13198" title="The Commission (mafia)" label="the Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="13240" end="13257" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q329593" start="13339" end="13353" title="Thomas Bilotti" label="Thomas Bilotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992899" start="13404" end="13418" title="Thomas Gambino" label="Thomas Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443128" start="13512" end="13525" title="Frank DeCicco" label="Frank DeCicco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706526" start="13530" end="13565" title="Joseph Armone" label="Joseph &amp;quot;Joe Piney&amp;quot; Armone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557218" start="13570" end="13577" title="soldato" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q923645" start="13579" end="13613" title="Sammy Gravano" label="Sammy &amp;quot;the Bull&amp;quot; Gravano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156877" start="13618" end="13651" title="Robert DiBernardo" label="Robert &amp;quot;DiB&amp;quot; DiBernardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382895" start="13920" end="13935" title="Vincent Mangano" label="Vincent Mangano"/>
<link wikidata="Q633068" start="14218" end="14231" title="Five Families" label="Five Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q450529" start="14238" end="14252" title="Frank Costello" label="Frank Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361508" start="14327" end="14339" title="Angelo Bruno" label="Angelo Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q281284" start="14575" end="14583" title="Lucchese crime family" label="Lucchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031887" start="14585" end="14592" title="Colombo crime family" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q892085" start="14597" end="14604" title="Bonanno crime family" label="Bonanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348502" start="14651" end="14666" title="Genovese crime family" label="Genovese family"/>
<link wikidata="Q939062" start="14710" end="14746" title="Vincent Gigante" label="Vincent &amp;quot;the Chin&amp;quot; Gigante"/>
<link wikidata="Q507830" start="14894" end="14905" title="consigliere" label="consigliere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444598" start="14912" end="14927" title="Joseph N. Gallo" label="Joseph N. Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14955" end="14961" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472138" start="15229" end="15233" title="wake (ceremony)" label="wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573714" start="15386" end="15404" title="Sparks Steak House" label="Sparks Steak House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883467" start="16590" end="16599" title="Underboss (book)" label="Underboss"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="16849" end="16861" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952970" start="17284" end="17319" title="Boško Radonjić" label="Boško &amp;quot;The Yugo&amp;quot; Radonjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493546" start="17337" end="17344" title="Westies" label="Westies"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="17348" end="17367" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="17523" end="17536" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="17731" end="17738" title="stalking" label="stalked"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="17808" end="17816" title="car bomb" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322763" start="17861" end="17873" title="James Failla" label="James Failla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618045" start="17906" end="17918" title="Victor Amuso" label="Victor Amuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q572992" start="17923" end="17936" title="Anthony Casso" label="Anthony Casso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852844" start="18003" end="18018" title="Anthony Corallo" label="Anthony Corallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072681" start="18394" end="18398" title="zips" label="zips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="18405" end="18433" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian &amp;quot;mafiosi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407565" start="18538" end="18554" title="Eugene Nickerson" label="Eugene Nickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="18701" end="18705" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502604" start="18733" end="18753" title="witness intimidation" label="witness intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132347" start="19141" end="19155" title="Jury selection" label="Jury selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640069" start="19327" end="19353" title="turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence" label="turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525234" start="19356" end="19371" title="Leonard DiMaria" label="Leonard DiMaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823226" start="19373" end="19385" title="Tony Rampino" label="Tony Rampino"/>
<link wikidata="Q967687" start="19387" end="19403" title="Nicholas Corozzo" label="Nicholas Corozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225232" start="19408" end="19422" title="John Carneglia" label="John Carneglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="19740" end="19747" title="defense (law)" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977335" start="19757" end="19769" title="Bruce Cutler" label="Bruce Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="20274" end="20286" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="20476" end="20483" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942652" start="20832" end="20841" title="hung jury" label="hung jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="20883" end="20892" title="acquittal" label="acquittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="21160" end="21182" title="obstruction of justice" label="obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487994" start="22042" end="22056" title="Frank LoCascio" label="Frank LoCascio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="22222" end="22230" title="mistrial (law)" label="mistrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321250" start="22712" end="22718" title="vanity" label="vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="22806" end="22820" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="23336" end="23345" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687747" start="23538" end="23549" title="Louis Manna" label="Louis Manna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926208" start="23816" end="23828" title="Victor Orena" label="Victor Orena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="24012" end="24022" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112082" start="24029" end="24054" title="DeCavalcante crime family" label="DeCavalcante crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773383" start="24128" end="24143" title="Anthony Rotondo" label="Anthony Rotondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563963" start="24267" end="24281" title="Giovanni Riggi" label="Giovanni Riggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829844" start="24566" end="24584" title="Michael DiLeonardo" label="Michael DiLeonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="24677" end="24685" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931996" start="24973" end="25012" title="Vincent Palermo" label="Vincent &amp;quot;Vinny Ocean&amp;quot; Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772214" start="25065" end="25077" title="Anthony Capo" label="Anthony Capo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228067" start="25145" end="25162" title="John D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="John D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467234" start="25381" end="25392" title="Labor unions in the United States" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887550" start="25542" end="25597" title="United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America" label="United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139293" start="27299" end="27312" title="James McElroy" label="James McElroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="27366" end="27376" title="conspiracy (crime)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="27637" end="27646" title="folk hero" label="folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="28006" end="28023" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q521095" start="28024" end="28041" title="Robert Morgenthau" label="Robert Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q130421174" start="28084" end="28100" title="Ronald Goldstock" label="Ronald Goldstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="28280" end="28288" title="mistrial" label="mistrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516712" start="28829" end="28862" title="Gaetano Vastola (gangster)" label="Gaetano &amp;quot;Corky&amp;quot; Vastola"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="28920" end="28927" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549577" start="29088" end="29102" title="Gerald Shargel" label="Gerald Shargel"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="29397" end="29413" title="General counsel" label="in-house counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710654" start="29469" end="29483" title="Albert Krieger" label="Albert Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="29487" end="29492" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q709936" start="29522" end="29536" title="Joseph Bonanno" label="Joseph Bonanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094605" start="30161" end="30175" title="Joseph Massino" label="Joseph Massino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215769" start="30223" end="30279" title="United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York" label="U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968019" start="30302" end="30316" title="I. Leo Glasser" label="I. Leo Glasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107179" start="30363" end="30377" title="anonymous jury" label="anonymous jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315489" start="30436" end="30447" title="Jury sequestration" label="sequestered"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485397" start="30630" end="30642" title="John Gleeson (judge)" label="John Gleeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="31414" end="31431" title="cross-examination" label="cross-examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="32036" end="32043" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="32089" end="32099" title="Black Sox Scandal" label="the fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q846529" start="32107" end="32124" title="1919 World Series" label="1919 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q207649" start="32457" end="32463" title="Velcro" label="Velcro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545137" start="32553" end="32570" title="life imprisonment in the United States" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727051" start="32702" end="32728" title="United States Penitentiary, Marion" label="United States Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q575399" start="32732" end="32748" title="Marion, Illinois" label="Marion, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="32801" end="32821" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="32909" end="32936" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="33124" end="33134" title="New York Daily News" label="Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q717903" start="33222" end="33239" title="Aryan Brotherhood" label="Aryan Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q75721" start="33629" end="33644" title="ADX Florence" label="supermax prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q289483" start="33648" end="33666" title="Florence, Colorado" label="Florence, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="34670" end="34683" title="Head and neck cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495382" start="34700" end="34750" title="United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners" label="United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="34754" end="34775" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="34801" end="34806" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867353" start="35056" end="35084" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn" label="Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="35153" end="35165" title="Requiem" label="Requiem Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794270" start="36083" end="36096" title="Getting Gotti" label="Getting Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q573423" start="36137" end="36157" title="Anthony John Denison" label="Anthony John Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197720" start="36166" end="36171" title="Gotti (1996 film)" label="Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q310511" start="36212" end="36226" title="Armand Assante" label="Armand Assante"/>
<link wikidata="Q749722" start="36235" end="36253" title="Witness to the Mob" label="Witness to the Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q349852" start="36296" end="36308" title="Tom Sizemore" label="Tom Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717661" start="36450" end="36463" title="The Big Heist" label="The Big Heist"/>
<link wikidata="Q250536" start="36565" end="36579" title="Boss of Bosses" label="Boss of Bosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="36593" end="36596" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492958" start="36659" end="36674" title="Sonny Marinelli" label="Sonny Marinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q89552" start="36739" end="36750" title="Danny Nucci" label="Danny Nucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q21428189" start="36759" end="36770" title="The Wannabe" label="The Wannabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810271" start="36803" end="36816" title="Joseph Siravo" label="Joseph Siravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270572" start="37055" end="37060" title="Gotti (2018 film)" label="Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="37104" end="37117" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792865" start="37262" end="37276" title="Maurice Benard" label="Maurice Benard"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="37309" end="37316" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202326" start="37424" end="37446" title="The Godfather Part III" label="The Godfather Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004336" start="38181" end="38206" title="Fun Lovin&amp;#x27; Criminals" label="Fun Lovin&amp;#x27; Criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q868449" start="38327" end="38345" title="Come Find Yourself" label="Come Find Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38420" end="38432" title="Reasonable Doubt (album)#Track listing" label="D&amp;#x27;Evils"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="38440" end="38445" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="38558" end="38569" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948717" start="38620" end="38632" title="Hurt Me Soul" label="Hurt Me Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735518" start="38679" end="38695" title="Everybody Get Up (Five song)" label="Everybody Get Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="38723" end="38727" title="Five (group)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q602779" start="38796" end="38803" title="Juicy J" label="Juicy J"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237326" start="38808" end="38817" title="Lex Luger (record producer)" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147070" start="38957" end="38972" title="Versace (song)" label="Versace (Remix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777045" start="38983" end="38988" title="Migos" label="Migos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="38993" end="38998" title="Drake (musician)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445057" start="39085" end="39091" title="Future (musician)" label="Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q59268408" start="39302" end="39321" title="Megan Thee Stallion" label="Megan Thee Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124363248" start="39389" end="39405" title="Hiss (song)" label="&amp;quot;Hiss&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954776" start="39835" end="39847" title="Howard Blum" label="Blum, Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="39909" end="39929" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183357" start="39940" end="39953" title="Jerry Capeci" label="Capeci, Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485899" start="40138" end="40151" title="John H. Davis (author)" label="Davis, John H"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="40237" end="40250" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q923960" start="40261" end="40272" title="Peter Maas" label="Maas, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448937" start="40399" end="40411" title="Selwyn Raab" label="Raab, Selwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q622329" start="40587" end="40600" title="The Biography Channel" label="Biography.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="40647" end="40678" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80150" wikidata="Q1268848" url="?curid=80150" title="Dynamic DNS">
<text>Dynamic DNS (DDNS) is a method of automatically updating a name server in the Domain Name System (DNS), often in real time, with the active DDNS configuration of its configured hostnames, addresses or other information.

The term is used to describe two different concepts. The first is &quot;dynamic DNS updating&quot; which refers to systems that are used to update traditional DNS records without manual editing. These mechanisms use TSIG to provide security. The second kind of dynamic DNS permits lightweight and immediate updates often using an update client, which do not use the standard for updating DNS records. These clients provide a persistent addressing method for devices that change their location, configuration or IP address frequently.

== Background ==
In the initial stages of the Internet (ARPANET), addressing of hosts on the network was achieved by static translation tables that mapped hostnames to IP addresses. The tables were maintained manually in form of the host file. The Domain Name System brought a method of distributing the same address information automatically online through recursive queries to remote databases configured for each network, or domain. Even this DNS facility still used static lookup tables at each participating node. IP addresses, once assigned to a particular host, rarely changed and the mechanism was initially sufficient. However, the rapid growth of the Internet and the proliferation of personal computers in the workplace and in homes created the substantial burden for administrators of keeping track of assigned IP addresses and managing their address space. The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) allowed enterprises and Internet service providers (ISPs) to assign addresses to computers automatically as they powered up. In addition, this helped conserve the address space available, since not all devices might be actively used at all times and addresses could be assigned as needed. This feature required that DNS servers be kept current automatically as well. The first implementations of &quot;dynamic DNS&quot; fulfilled this purpose: Host computers gained the feature to notify their respective DNS server of the address they had received from a DHCP server or through self-configuration. This protocol-based DNS update method was documented and standardized in IETF publication in 1997 and has become a standard part of the DNS protocol (see also nsupdate program).

The explosive growth and proliferation of the Internet into homes brought a growing shortage of available IP addresses. DHCP became an important tool for ISPs as well to manage their address spaces for connecting home and small-business end-users with a single IP address each by implementing network address translation (NAT) at the customer-premises router. The private network behind these routers uses address space set aside for these purposes, masqueraded by the NAT device. This, however, broke the end-to-end principle of Internet architecture and methods were required to allow private networks, with frequently changing external IP addresses, to discover their public address and insert it into the Domain Name System in order to participate in Internet communications properly. Today, numerous providers, called &quot;dynamic DNS service providers&quot;, offer such technology and services on the Internet.

=== Domain Name System ===
DNS is based on a distributed database that takes some time to update globally. When DNS was first introduced, the database was small and could be easily maintained by hand. As the system grew this task became difficult for any one site to handle, and a new management structure was introduced to spread out the updates among many domain name registrars. Registrars today offer end-user updating to their account information, typically using a web-based form, and the registrar then pushes out update information to other DNS servers.

Due to the distributed nature of the domain name systems and its registrars, updates to the global DNS may take hours to distribute. Thus DNS is only suitable for services that do not change their IP address very often, as is the case for most large services like Wikipedia. Smaller services, however, are generally much more likely to move from host to host over shorter periods of time. Servers being run on certain types of Internet service provider, cable modems in particular, are likely to change their IP address over very short periods of time, on the order of days or hours. Dynamic DNS is a system that addresses the problem of rapid updates.

== Types ==
The term DDNS is used in two ways, which, while technically similar, have very different purposes and user populations. The first is &quot;standards-based DDNS&quot;, which uses an extension of the DNS protocol to ask for an update; this is often used for company laptops to register their address. The second is &quot;proprietary DDNS&quot;, usually a web-based protocol, normally a single HTTP fetch with username and password which then updates some DNS records (by some unspecified method); this is commonly used for a domestic computer to register itself by a publicly known name in order to be found by a wider group, for example as a games server or webcam.

End users of Internet access receive an allocation of IP addresses, often only a single address, by their Internet service provider. The assigned addresses may either be fixed (i.e. static), or may change from time to time, a situation called &quot;dynamic&quot;. Dynamic addresses are generally given only to residential customers and small businesses, as most enterprises specifically require static addresses.

Dynamic IP addresses present a problem if the customer wants to provide a service to other users on the Internet, such as a web service. As the IP address may change frequently, corresponding domain names must be quickly re-mapped in the DNS, to maintain accessibility using a well-known URL.

Many providers offer commercial or free Dynamic DNS service for this scenario. The automatic reconfiguration is generally implemented in the user&#x27;s router or computer, which runs software to update the DDNS service. The communication between the user&#x27;s equipment and the provider is not standardized, although a few standard web-based methods of updating have emerged over time.

=== Standards-based DDNS ===
The standardized method of dynamically updating domain name server records is prescribed by , commonly known as dynamic DNS update. The method described by RFC 2136 is a network protocol for use with managed DNS servers, and it includes a security mechanism. RFC 2136 supports all DNS record types, but often it is used only as an extension of the DHCP system, and in which the authorized DHCP servers register the client records in the DNS. This form of support for RFC 2136 is provided by a plethora of client and server software, including those that are components of most current operating systems. Support for RFC 2136 is also an integral part of many directory services, including LDAP and Windows&#x27; Active Directory domains.

=== Applications ===
In Microsoft Windows networks, dynamic DNS is an integral part of Active Directory, because domain controllers register their network service types in DNS so that other computers in the domain (or forest) can access them.

Increasing efforts to secure Internet communications today involve encryption of all dynamic updates via the public Internet, as these public dynamic DNS services have been abused increasingly to design security breaches. Standards-based methods within the DNSSEC protocol suite, such as TSIG, have been developed to secure DNS updates, but are not widely in use. Microsoft developed alternative technology (GSS-TSIG) based on Kerberos authentication.

Some free DNS server software systems, such as dnsmasq, support a dynamic update procedure that directly involves a built-in DHCP server. This server automatically updates or adds the DNS records as it assigns addresses, relieving the administrator of the task of specifically configuring dynamic updates.

==== DDNS for Internet access devices ====
Dynamic DNS providers offer a software client program that automates the discovery and registration of the client system&#x27;s public IP addresses. The client program is executed on a computer or device in the private network. It connects to the DDNS provider&#x27;s systems with a unique login name; the provider uses the name to link the discovered public IP address of the home network with a hostname in the domain name system. Depending on the provider, the hostname is registered within a domain owned by the provider, or within the customer&#x27;s own domain name. These services can function by a number of mechanisms. Often they use an HTTP service request since even restrictive environments usually allow HTTP service. Most providers have an API similar to a first provider DynDNS (Dyn.com) so it&#x27;s often called DynDNS2.

Many home networking modem/routers include client applications in their firmware, compatible with a variety of DDNS providers.

==== DDNS for security appliance manufacturers ====
Dynamic DNS is an expected feature or even requirement for IP-based security appliances like DVRs and IP cameras. Many options are available for today&#x27;s manufacturer, and these include the use of existing DDNS services or the use of custom services hosted by the manufacturers themselves.

In almost all cases, a simple HTTP based update API is used as it allows for easy integration of a DDNS client into a device&#x27;s firmware. There are several pre-made tools that can help ease the burden of server and client development, like MintDNS, cURL and Inadyn. Most web-based DDNS services use a standard user name and password security schema. This requires that a user first create an account at the DDNS server website and then configure the device to send updates to the DDNS server whenever an IP address change is detected.

Some device manufacturers go a step further by only allowing their DDNS Service to be used by the devices they manufacture, and also eliminate the need for user names and passwords altogether. Generally this is accomplished by encrypting the device&#x27;s MAC address using an cryptographic algorithm kept secret on both the DDNS server and within the device&#x27;s firmware. The resulting decryption or decryption failure is used to secure or deny updates. Resources for the development of custom DDNS services are generally limited and involve a full software development cycle to design and field a secure and robust DDNS server.

== See also ==
* List of managed DNS providers
* Comparison of DNS server software
* Multicast DNS, an alternative mechanism for dynamic name resolution for use in internal networks
* Alternative DNS root
* Tor onion services also use a domain that doesn&#x27;t need a static IP

== References ==
== External links ==
* - Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1268848" start="0" end="11" title="Dynamic DNS" label="Dynamic DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268848" start="13" end="17" title="Dynamic DNS" label="DDNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41494" start="59" end="70" title="name server" label="name server"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="78" end="96" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q350772" start="437" end="441" title="TSIG" label="TSIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338897" start="732" end="742" title="Classful network" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="924" end="934" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149007" start="989" end="998" title="host file" label="host file"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="1004" end="1022" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="1184" end="1190" title="Domain name" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="1611" end="1624" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="1630" end="1665" title="Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol" label="Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1697" end="1722" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067586" start="2431" end="2439" title="nsupdate" label="nsupdate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089478" start="2535" end="2569" title="IPv4 address exhaustion" label="shortage of available IP addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="2744" end="2771" title="network address translation" label="network address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186" start="2815" end="2830" title="private network" label="private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527392" start="2957" end="2977" title="end-to-end principle" label="end-to-end principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q989016" start="3415" end="3435" title="distributed database" label="distributed database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073015" start="3728" end="3749" title="domain name registrar" label="domain name registrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="4360" end="4385" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q383978" start="4387" end="4398" title="cable modem" label="cable modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="5917" end="5920" title="Domain Name System" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="6126" end="6132" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="6740" end="6744" title="DHCP" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q756230" start="7050" end="7067" title="directory service" label="directory service"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="7080" end="7084" title="LDAP" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="7089" end="7119" title="Active Directory" label="Windows&amp;#x27; Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7154" end="7171" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="7217" end="7233" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757328" start="7243" end="7260" title="domain controller" label="domain controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411974" start="7277" end="7298" title="SRV record" label="network service types"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="7631" end="7637" title="DNSSEC" label="DNSSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q350772" start="7662" end="7666" title="TSIG" label="TSIG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7758" end="7769" title="TSIG#Alternatives to TSIG" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532658" start="7782" end="7790" title="Generic Security Service Algorithm for Secret Key Transaction" label="GSS-TSIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="7801" end="7809" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="7832" end="7836" title="Free software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613088" start="7874" end="7881" title="dnsmasq" label="dnsmasq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="7952" end="7956" title="DHCP" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="8216" end="8222" title="Client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="8823" end="8827" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755130" start="9037" end="9050" title="Residential gateway" label="modem/routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="9088" end="9096" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q865042" start="9289" end="9293" title="Digital video recorder" label="DVRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427360" start="9298" end="9307" title="IP camera" label="IP camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="9521" end="9525" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="9539" end="9542" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="9595" end="9601" title="Client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="9623" end="9631" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q286306" start="9744" end="9748" title="cURL" label="cURL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="9999" end="10009" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="10258" end="10268" title="encrypting" label="encrypting"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="10287" end="10298" title="MAC address" label="MAC address"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="10421" end="10431" title="decryption" label="decryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="10584" end="10610" title="software development cycle" label="software development cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627145" start="10682" end="10711" title="List of managed DNS providers" label="List of managed DNS providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295562" start="10714" end="10747" title="Comparison of DNS server software" label="Comparison of DNS server software"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149405" start="10750" end="10763" title="Multicast DNS" label="Multicast DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387227" start="10849" end="10869" title="Alternative DNS root" label="Alternative DNS root"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="10872" end="10890" title="Tor (network)" label="Tor onion services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80155" wikidata="Q11073" url="?curid=80155" title="List of astronomers">
<text>The following is a list of astronomers, astrophysicists and other notable people who have made contributions to the field of astronomy. They may have won major prizes or awards, developed or invented widely used techniques or technologies within astronomy, or are directors of major observatories or heads of space-based telescope projects.

==Notable astronomers==


In alphabetical order:

==A==
*Aryabhata (India, 476–550)
*Marc Aaronson (United States, 1950–1987)
*George Ogden Abell (United States, 1927–1983)
*Hiroshi Abe (Japan, 1958–)
*Antonio Abetti (Italy, 1846–1928)
*Giorgio Abetti (Italy, 1882–1982)
*Charles Greeley Abbot (United States, 1872–1973)
*Charles Hitchcock Adams (United States, 1868–1951)
*John Couch Adams (United Kingdom, 1819–1892)
*Walter Sydney Adams (United States, 1876–1956)
*Saul Adelman (United States, 1944–)
*Petrus Alphonsi (Spain, 1062–1110)
*Agrippa (Greece, fl. )
*Paul Oswald Ahnert (Germany, 1897–1989)
*Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs (Germany, 1912–1954)
*George Biddell Airy (United Kingdom, 1801–1892)
*Robert Aitken, (United States, 1864–1951)
*Makio Akiyama (Japan, 1950–)
*Al Battani (Iraq, 850–929)
*Albategnius &quot;(see Al-Batani)&quot;
*Vladimir Aleksandrovich Albitzky (Russia, 1891–1952)
*Abu Ma&#x27;shar al-Balkhi (Persia, 787–886)
*George Alcock (United Kingdom, 1913–2000)
*Harold Alden (United States, 1890–1964)
*Hannes Alfvén (Sweden, 1908–1995)
*Lawrence H. Aller (United States, 1913–2003)
*Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi (Persia, 903–986)
*Viktor Amazaspovich Ambartsumian, (Armenia, 1912–1996)
*John August Anderson (United States, 1876–1959)
*Wilhelm Anderson (Estonia, 1880–1940)
*Marie Henri Andoyer (France, 1862–1929)
*Andronicus of Cyrrhus (Greece, fl. 100 BC)
*Anders Jonas Ångström (Sweden, 1814–1874)
*Eugène Michel Antoniadi (Greece-France, 1870–1944)
*Masakatsu Aoki (Japan, 1957–)
*Petrus Apianus (Germany, 1495–1557)
*François Arago (France, 1786–1853)
*Masaru Arai (Japan, 1952–)
*Hiroshi Araki (Japan)
*Sylvain Arend (Belgium, 1902–1992)
*Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander (Germany, 1799–1875)
*Aristarchus of Samos (Greece, BC – BC)
*Christoph Arnold (Germany, 1650–1695)
*Halton Christian Arp (United States, 1927–2013)
*Arzachel (Spain, 1028–1087)
*Asada Goryu (Japan, 1734–1799)
*Atsuo Asami (Japan)
*Giuseppe Asclepi (Italy, 1706–1776)
*Joseph Ashbrook (United States, 1918–1980)
*Arthur Auwers (Germany, 1838–1915)
*Adrien Auzout (France, 1622–1691)
*David Axon (England, 1951–2012)

==B==
*Brahmagupta (India, 598–668 CE)
*Bhaskara I (India, 629 CE)
*Bhaskara II (India, 1114–1185)
*Walter Baade (Germany, 1893–1960)
*Harold D. Babcock (United States, 1882–1968)
*Horace W. Babcock (United States, 1912–2003)
*Oskar Backlund (Sweden, 1846–1916)
*John N. Bahcall (United States, 1934–2005)
*Yoshiaki Banno (Japan, 1952–1991)
*Benjamin Baillaud (France, 1848–1934)
*Jules Baillaud (France, 1876–1960)
*Jean-Baptiste Baille (France, 1841–1918)
*Jean Sylvain Bailly (France, 1736–1793)
*Francis Baily (United Kingdom, 1774–1844)
*John Bainbridge (United Kingdom, 1582–1643)
*John E. Baldwin (United Kingdom, 1931–2010)
*Sallie Baliunas (United States, 1953–)
*Zoltán Balog (Hungary/United States, 1972–)
*Benjamin Banneker (United States, 1731–1806)
*Pietro Baracchi (Italy, Australia, 1851–1926)
*Beatriz Barbuy (Brazil, 1950–)
*Edward Emerson Barnard (United States, 1857–1923)
*Julius Bauschinger (France, 1860–1934)
*Johann Bayer (Germany, 1572–1625)
*Antonín Bečvář (Czechoslovakia, 1901–1965)
*Wilhelm Beer (Germany, 1797–1850)
*Sergei Ivanovich Belyavsky (Russia, 1883–1953)
*Charles L. Bennett (United States, 1956–)
*Jocelyn Bell Burnell (United Kingdom, 1943–)
*Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel (Germany, 1784–1846)
*Somnath Bharadwaj (India, 1964–)
*Wilhelm Freiherr von Biela (Austria, 1782–1856)
*Ludwig Biermann (Germany, 1907–1986)
*Wolf Bickel (Germany. 1942–)
*Guillaume Bigourdan (France, 1851–1932)
*James Binney (United Kingdom, 1950–)
*Biruni (Persia, 973–1048)
*Gennady S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan (Russia, 1941–)
*Adriaan Blaauw (Netherlands, 1914–2010)
*Nathaniel Bliss (United Kingdom, 1700–1764)
*Johann Elert Bode (Germany, 1747–1826)
*Alfred Bohrmann (Germany, 1904–2000)
*Bart Bok (Netherlands, 1906–1983)
*Charles Thomas Bolton (United States/Canada, 1943–2021)
*John Gatenby Bolton (United Kingdom/Australia, 1922–1993)
*William Cranch Bond (United States, 1789–1859)
*Alphonse Borrelly (France, 1842–1926)
*Rudjer Boscovich (Dalmatia, 1711–1787)
*Lewis Boss (United States, 1846–1912)
*Alexis Bouvard (France, 1767–1843)
*Rychard Bouwens (United States, 1972–)
*Edward L. G. Bowell (United States, 1943–)
*Ira Sprague Bowen (United States, 1898–1973)
*Louis Boyer (France, 1901–1999)
*Brian J. Boyle (Scotland and Australia, 1960–)
*Ronald N. Bracewell (Australia, United States, 1921–2007)
*James Bradley (United Kingdom, 1693–1762)
*William A. Bradfield (New Zealand, Australia, 1927–2014)
*Tycho Brahe (Denmark, 1546–1601)
*John Alfred Brashear (United States, 1840–1920)
*William Robert Brooks (United States, 1844–1922)
*Theodor Brorsen (Denmark, 1819–1895)
*Dirk Brouwer (Netherlands–United States, 1902–1966)
*Ernest William Brown (United Kingdom, 1866–1938)
*Michael (Mike) E. Brown (United States, 1965–)
*Hermann Alexander Brück (Germany, 1905–2000)
*Ismael Bullialdus (France, 1605–1694)
*Margaret Burbidge (United Kingdom–United States, 1919–2020)
*Robert Burnham, Jr. (United States, 1931–1993)
*Sherburne Wesley Burnham (United States, 1838–1921)
*Schelte J. Bus (United States, 1956–)
*Bimla Buti (India, 1933–)

==C==
*William Wallace Campbell (United States, 1862–1938)
*Annie Jump Cannon (United States, 1863–1941)
*Luigi Carnera (Italy, 1875–1962)
*Edwin Francis Carpenter (United States, 1898–1963)
*James Carpenter (United Kingdom, 1840–1899)
*Richard Christopher Carrington (United Kingdom, 1826–1875)
*Sir John Carroll (United Kingdom, 1899–1974)
*Anthony W. Case (United States, 1980–)
*César-François Cassini de Thury (France, 1714–1784)
*Dominique, comte de Cassini (France, 1748–1845)
*Giovanni Domenico Cassini (France, 1625–1712)
*Jacques Cassini (France, 1677–1756)
*Bonaventura Cavalieri (Italy, 1598–1647)
*Anders Celsius (Sweden, 1701–1744)
*Vincenzo Cerulli (Italy, 1859–1927)
*Jean Chacornac (France, 1823–1873)
*James Challis (United Kingdom, 1803–1882)
*Radha Gobinda Chandra (Bangladesh, India, 1878–1975)
*Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar (India, United States, 1910–1995)
*Carl Charlier (Sweden, 1862–1934)
*Auguste Charlois (France, 1864–1910)
*Lyudmila Ivanovna Chernykh (Russia/Ukraine, 1935–2017)
*Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh (Russia/Ukraine, 1931–2004)
*James Christy (United States, 1938–)
*Klim Churyumov (Ukraine, 1937–2016)
*Barry G. Clark (United States, 1938–)
*Edwin Foster Coddington (United States, 1870–1950)
*Jérôme Eugène Coggia (France, 1849–1919)
*Josep Comas i Solà (Spain, 1868–1937)
*Andrew Ainslie Common (United Kingdom, 1841–1903)
*Guy Consolmagno (United States, 1952–)
*Nicolaus Copernicus (Prussia/Poland), 1473–1543)
*Corsono Carsono (Spain)
*Janine Connes (France, 1934–)
*Pablo Cottenot (France)
*Heather Couper (United Kingdom, 1949–2020)
*Leopold Courvoisier (Switzerland, 1873–1955)
*Arthur Edwin Covington (Canada, 1914–2001)
*Philip Herbert Cowell (United Kingdom, 1870–1949)
*Thomas George Cowling (United Kingdom, 1906–1990)
*Andrew Claude de la Cherois Crommelin (United Kingdom, 1865–1939)
*Luíz Cruls (Brazil, 1848–1908)
*James Cuffey (United States, 1911–1999)
*Heber Doust Curtis (United States, 1872–1942)
*Florence Cushman (United States, 1860–1940)

==D==
*Alexander Dalgarno (United States, 1928–2015)
*Jacques Eugène d&#x27;Allonville (France, 1671–1732)
*Andre Louis Danjon (France, 1890–1967)
*Heinrich d&#x27;Arrest (Germany, 1822–1875)
*George Howard Darwin (United Kingdom, 1845–1912)
*Roger Davies (United Kingdom, 1954–)
*Leonardo da Vinci (Italy, 1452–1519)
*William Rutter Dawes (United Kingdom, 1799–1868)
*Bernhard Dawson (Argentina, 1890–1960)
*Leo de Ball (Germany, Austria, 1853–1916)
*Duília de Mello (Brazil, 1963–)
*Henri Debehogne (Belgium, 1928–2007)
*Annibale de Gasparis (Italy, 1819–1892)
*Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre (France, 1749–1822)
*Charles-Eugène Delaunay (France, 1816–1872)
*Eugène Joseph Delporte (Belgium, 1882–1955)
*Audrey C. Delsanti (France, 1976–)
*William Frederick Denning (United Kingdom, 1848–1931)
*Alíz Derekas (Hungary, 1977–)
*Willem de Sitter (Netherlands, 1872–1934)
*Henri-Alexandre Deslandres (France, 1853–1948)
*Alexander Nikolaevich Deutsch (Russia, 1900–1986)
*Gérard de Vaucouleurs (France/United States, 1918–1995)
*Robert Dicke (United States, 1916–1997)
*Terence Dickinson (Canada, 1943–)
*Thomas Digges (United Kingdom, 1546–1595)
*Herbert Dingle (United States, 1890–1978)
*Andrea Di Paola (Italy, 1970–)
*Ewine van Dishoeck (Netherlands, 1955–)
*Giovanni Battista Donati (Italy, 1826–1873)
*Frank Drake (United States, 1930–)
*Henry Draper (United States, 1837–1882)
*Mary Anna Draper (United States, 1839–1914)
*John Dreyer (Ireland, 1852–1926)
*Alexander D. Dubyago (Russia), 1903–1959)
*Dmitrij I. Dubyago (Russia), 1850–1918)
*Jean C. B. Dufay (France, 1896–1967)
*Raymond Smith Dugan (United States, 1878–1940)
*James Dunlop (Scotland, 1793–1848)
*Richard B. Dunn (United States, 1927–2005)
*Petar Đurković (Serbia, 1908–1981)
*Frank Watson Dyson (United Kingdom, 1868–1939)

==E==
*Arthur Eddington (United Kingdom, 1882–1944)
*Frank K. Edmondson (United States, 1912–2008)
*Olin J. Eggen (United States, 1919–1998)
*David J. Eicher (United States, 1961–)
*Albert Einstein (Germany, 1879–1955)
*Eise Eisinga (Netherlands, 1744–1828)
*Eric Walter Elst (Belgium, 1936–2022)
*Johann Franz Encke (Germany, 1791–1865)
*Kin Endate (Japan, 1960–)
*Eratosthenes (Alexandria, 276 BC – 194 BC)
*Emil Ernst (Germany, 1889–1942)
*Ernest Esclangon (France, 1876–1954)
*Fred Espenak (United States, 1953–)
*Larry W. Esposito (United States, 1951–)
*Eudoxus (Cnidus, – BC)
*Robert Evans (Australia, 1937–2022)

==F==
*David Fabricius (Netherlands, 1564–1617)
*Sandra M. Faber (United States, 1945–)
*Johannes Fabricius (Netherlands, 1587–1615)
*Fearon Fallows (United Kingdom, 1789–1831)
*Hervé Faye (France, 1814–1902)
*Charles Fehrenbach (France, 1914–2008)
*Farghani (Persia, 800–870)
*James Ferguson (United States, 1797–1867)
*Alex Filippenko (United States, 1958–)
*Erwin Finlay-Freundlich (Germany, 1885–1964)
*Axel Firsoff (United Kingdom, 1910–1981)
*Debra Fischer (United States)
*J. Richard Fisher (United States, 1943–)
*Camille Flammarion (France, 1842–1925)
*Gabrielle Renaudot Flammarion (France, 1867–1962)
*John Flamsteed (United Kingdom, 1646–1719)
*Honoré Flaugergues (France, 1755–1835)
*Williamina Fleming (United States, 1857–1911)
*Wilhelm Julius Foerster (Germany, 1832–1921)
*Alfred Fowler (United Kingdom, 1868–1940)
*William Alfred Fowler (United States, 1911–1995)
*Philip Fox (United States, 1878–1944)
*Andrew Fraknoi (United States, 1948–)
*Joseph von Fraunhofer (Germany, 1787–1826)
*Herbert Friedman (United States, 1916–2000)
*Dirk D. Frimout (Belgium, 1941–)
*Edwin Brant Frost (United States, 1866–1935)
*Shigehisa Fujikawa (Japan)
*Naoshi Fukushima (Japan, 1925–2003)
*Kiichirō Furukawa (Japan, 1929–2016)
*Toshimasa Furuta (Japan)

==G==
*Bryan Gaensler (Australia, 1973–)
*Gan De (China, fl. 4th century BC)
*Galileo Galilei (Italy, 1564–1642)
*Julio Garavito Armero (Colombia, 1865–1920)
*Gordon J. Garradd (Australia, 1959–)
*Ben Gascoigne (New Zealand, Australia, 1915–2010)
*Margaret Geller (United States, 1947)
*Gautama Siddha (China, fl. 8th century AD)
*Johann Gottfried Galle (Germany, 1812–1910)
*George Gamow (Russia, United States, 1904–1968)
*Carl Friedrich Gauss (Germany, 1777–1855)
*Tom Gehrels (Netherlands, United States, 1925–2011)
*Neil Gehrels (United States, 1952–2017)
*Andrea M. Ghez (United States, 1965–)
*Riccardo Giacconi (Italy, 1931–2018)
*Michel Giacobini (France, 1873–1938)
*Henry L. Giclas (United States, 1910–2007)
*David Gill (United Kingdom, 1843–1914)
*Fred Gillett (United States, 1937–2001)
*Karl Glazebrook (UK, 1965–)
*Ian Glass (Ireland/South Africa, 1939–)
*Thomas Gold (United States, 1920–2004)
*Leo Goldberg (United States, 1913–1987)
*Peter Goldreich (United States, 1939–)
*Hermann Goldschmidt (Germany, 1802–1866)
*François Gonnessiat (France, 1856–1934)
*John Goodricke (United Kingdom, 1764–1786)
*Alyssa A. Goodman (United States, 1962–)
*Abu Sa&#x27;id Gorgani (Persia, 9th century)
*Paul Götz (Germany, 1883–1962)
*Benjamin Apthorp Gould (United States, 1824–1896)
*Andrew Graham (Ireland, 1815–1907)
*Kathryn Aurora Gray (Canada, 2000–)
*Charles Green (England, 1735–1771)
*Jesse Greenstein (United States, 1909–2002)
*John Grunsfeld (United States, 1956–)
*Jay U. Gunter (United States, 1911–1994)
*Alexander A. Gurshtein (Russia, 1937–2020)
*Bengt Gustafsson (Sweden, 1943–)
*Guo Shoujing (China, 1231–1316)
*Alan Harvey Guth (United States, 1947–)

==H==
*Yusuke Hagihara (Japan, 1897–1979)
*Alan Hale (United States, 1958–)
*George Ellery Hale (United States, 1868–1938)
*Asaph Hall (United States, 1829–1907)
*Edmond Halley (England, 1656–1742)
*Erika Hamden (United States, ?–)
*Heidi Hammel (United States, 1960–)
*Mario Hamuy (Chile, 1960–?)
*Peter Andreas Hansen (Denmark, 1795–1874)
*Abulfazl Harawi (Persia, 10th century)
*Karl Ludwig Harding (Germany, 1765–1834)
*Thomas Hariot (United Kingdom, 1560–1621)
*Guillermo Haro (Mexico, 1913–1988)
*Robert George Harrington (United States, 1904–1987)
*Robert Sutton Harrington (United States, 1942–1993)
*Edward Robert Harrison (United Kingdom/United States, 1917–2007)
*William Kenneth Hartmann (United States, 1939–)
*Lisa Harvey-Smith (Australia, 1979–)
*Takeo Hatanaka (Japan, 1914–1963)
*Tim Hawarden (South Africa, 1943–2009)
*Stephen Hawking (United Kingdom, 1942–2018)
*Will Hay (United Kingdom, 1888–1949)
*Chushiro Hayashi (Japan, 1920–2010)
*Otto Hermann Leopold Heckmann (Germany, 1901–1983)
*Carl Heiles (United States, 1939–)
*Joseph Helffrich (Germany, 1872–1971)
*Eleanor Helin (United States, 1932–2009)
*Maximilian Hell (Austria-Hungary, 1720–1792)
*Karl Ludwig Hencke (Germany, 1793–1866)
*Thomas Henderson (Scotland, 1798–1844)
*Paul Henry (France, 1848–1905)
*Prosper Henry (France, 1849–1903)
*Abraham bar Hiyya (Spanish Jewish), (1070–1136)
*George Howard Herbig (United States, 1920–2013)
*Carl W. Hergenrother (United States, 1973–)
*Caroline Herschel (United Kingdom, 1750–1848)
*John Herschel (United Kingdom, 1792–1871)
*William Herschel (United Kingdom/Germany, 1738–1822)
*Ejnar Hertzsprung (Denmark, 1873–1967)
*Johannes Hevelius (Poland, 1611–1687)
*Antony Hewish (United Kingdom, 1924–2021)
*George William Hill (United States, 1838–1914)
*John Russell Hind (United Kingdom, 1823–1895)
*Hipparchus (Nicaea, BC–120 BC)
*Masanori Hirasawa (Japan)
*Kiyotsugu Hirayama (Japan, 1874–1943)
*Shin Hirayama (Japan, 1868–1945)
*Gustave-Adolphe Hirn (France, 1815–1890)
*Sebastian von Hoerner (Germany), 1919–2003)
*Cuno Hoffmeister (Germany, 1892–1968)
*Dorrit Hoffleit (United States, 1907–2007)
*Helen Sawyer Hogg (Canada, 1905–1993)
*Minoru Honda (Japan, 1917–1990)
*Kamil Hornoch (Czech Republic, 1972–)
*Jeremiah Horrocks (United Kingdom, –1641)
*Cornelis Johannes van Houten (Netherlands, 1920–2002)
*Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld (Netherlands, 1921–2015)
*Martin van den Hove (Netherlands, 1605–1639)
*Herbert Alonzo Howe (USA, 1858–1926)
*Fred Hoyle (United Kingdom, 1915–2001)
*Su-Shu Huang (China/USA, 1915-1977)
*Edwin Powell Hubble (United States, 1889–1953)
*William Huggins (United Kingdom, 1824–1910)
*Russell Alan Hulse (United States, 1950–)
*Hendrik Christoffel van de Hulst (Netherlands, 1918–2000)
*Milton Lasell Humason (United States, 1891–1972)
*Thomas John Hussey (England, 1792–1854)
*Christiaan Huygens (Netherlands, 1629–1695)
*Yuji Hyakutake (Japan, 1950–2002)
*Josef Allen Hynek (United States, 1910–1986)
*Hypatia (Egypt, (born 350–370; died 415 AD)
*Christopher Hansteen (Norway, 1784–1873)

==I==
*Icko Iben, Jr. (United States, 1931–)
*Kaoru Ikeya (Japan, 1943–)
*Chris Impey (United Kingdom/United States, 1956–)
*Robert Thorburn Ayton Innes (Scotland/South Africa, 1861–1933)
*Shigeru Inoda (Japan, 1955–2008)
*Jamal Nazrul Islam (Bangladesh, 1939–2013)
*Edward Israel (United States, 1859–1884)
*Iwahashi Zenbei (Japan, 1756–1811)
*Masayuki Iwamoto (Japan, 1954–)
*Shun-ei Izumikawa (Japan)

==J==
*Cyril V. Jackson (South Africa, 1903–1988)
*Karan Jani (India, 1988–)
*Pierre Jules César Janssen (France, 1824–1907)
*James Jeans (United Kingdom, 1877–1946)
*Benjamin Jekhowsky (Russia/France/Algeria, 1881–1953)
*Louise Freeland Jenkins (United States, 1888–1970)
*David C. Jewitt (United Kingdom, 1958–)
*Jiao Bingzhen (China, 1689–1726)
*John A. Johnson (United States, 1977–)
*Alfred Harrison Joy (United States, 1882–1973)
*Vinod Johri (India, 1935–2014)

==K==
*Ali Kuşçu (Turkey, 1403–1474)
*Tetsuo Kagawa (Japan, 1969–)
*Franz Kaiser (Germany, 1891–1962)
*Kiyotaka Kanai (Japan, 1951–)
*Hiroshi Kaneda (Japan, 1953–)
*Henry Kandrup (United States, 1955–2003)
*Jacobus Kapteyn (Netherlands, 1851–1922)
*Lyudmila Karachkina (Ukraine, 1948–)
*Ghiyath al-Kashi (Persia, 1380–1429)
*Jeffrey Owen Katz (United States, 1960–)
*Karlis Kaufmanis (Latvia/United States, 1910–2003
*Kōyō Kawanishi (Japan, 1959–)
*Nobuhiro Kawasato (Japan)
*James Edward Keeler (United States, 1857–1900)
*Paul Kempf (Germany, 1856–1920)
*Johannes Kepler (Germany, 1571–1630)
*Omar Khayyám (Persia, 1048–1131)
*Al-Khujandi (Persia, 10th century)
*Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī, (Persia, 780–850)
*Kidinnu (Babylon, 4th century BC; d. 330 BC?)
*Hisashi Kimura (Japan, 1870–1943)
*Maria Margarethe Kirch (Germany, 1670–1720)
*Daniel Kirkwood (United States, 1814–1895)
*Robert Kirshner (United States, 1949–)
*Minoru Kizawa (Japan, 1947–)
*Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm Klinkerfues (Germany, 1827–1884)
*Viktor Knorre (Russia, 1840–1919)
*Takao Kobayashi (Japan, 1961–)
*Toru Kobayashi (Japan)
*Luboš Kohoutek (1935–)
*Masahiro Koishikawa (Japan, 1952–2020)
*Nobuhisa Kojima (Japan, 1933–)
*Takuo Kojima (Japan, 1955–)
*Yoji Kondo (Japan, 1933–2017)
*Zdeněk Kopal (Czechoslovakia, United Kingdom, United States, 1914–1993)
*August Kopff (Germany, 1882–1960)
*Korado Korlević (Croatia, 1958–)
*Hiroki Kosai (Japan, 1933–)
*Charles T. Kowal (United States, 1940–2011)
*Robert Kraft (United States, 1927–2015)
*Ľubor Kresák (Czechoslovakia, 1927–1994)
*Heinrich Kreutz (Germany, 1854–1927)
*Kazuo Kubokawa (Japan, 1903–1943)
*Marc Kuchner (United States, 1972–)
*Gerard Kuiper (Netherlands, United States, 1905–1973)
*Donald Kurtz (1948–)
*Reiki Kushida (Japan)
*Yoshio Kushida (Japan, 1957–)
*György Kulin (Austria-Hungary, 1905–1989)

==L==
*Lagadha (India, 1st millennium BCE)
*Nicolas Louis de Lacaille (France, 1713–1762)
*Claes-Ingvar Lagerkvist (Sweden, 1944–)
*Joseph-Louis Lagrange (France, 1736–1813)
*Jérôme Lalande (France, 1732–1807)
*Johann Heinrich Lambert (France, Germany, 1728–1777)
*David J. Lane (Canada, 1983–)
*Andrew E. Lange (United States, 1957–2010)
*Samuel Pierpont Langley (United States, 1834–1906)
*Pierre-Simon Laplace (France, 1749–1827)
*Jacques Laskar (France, 1955–)
*William Lassell (United Kingdom, 1799–1880)
*Joseph Jean Pierre Laurent (France, fl. 1858)
*Henrietta Swan Leavitt (United States, 1868–1921)
*Typhoon Lee (United States and Taiwan, 1948–)
*Guillaume Le Gentil (France, 1725–1792)
*Georges Lemaître (Belgium, 1894–1966)
*Pierre Lemonnier (France, 1715–1799)
*Frederick C. Leonard (United States, 1896–1960)

*Armin Leuschner (US, 1868–1953)
*Geraint Lewis (Australia, 1969–)
*Urbain Le Verrier (France, 1811–1877)
*Li Fan (China, fl. 1st century AD)
*James Lind (UK, 1736–1812)
*Bertil Lindblad (Sweden, 1895–1965)
*Adolph Friedrich Lindemann (Germany/UK, 1846–1927)
*Chris Lintott (United Kingdom, 1980–)
*Joseph Johann Littrow (Austria, 1781–1840)
*Karl L. Littrow (Austria, 1811–1877)
*Liu Xin (China, fl. 1st century AD)
*Joseph Lockyer (United Kingdom, 1836–1920)
*Avi Loeb (Israel, USA 1962–)
*Maurice Loewy (Austria/France, 1833–1907)
*Christian Sørensen Longomontanus (Denmark, 1562–1647)
*Percival Lowell (United States, 1855–1916)
*Ángel López (Spain, 1955–)
*Álvaro López-García (Spain, 1941–2019)
*John William Lubbock (United Kingdom, 1803–1865)
*Knut Lundmark (Sweden, 1889–1958)
*Robert Luther (Germany, 1822–1900)
*Lupitus of Barcelona (Spain)
*Jane Luu (South Vietnam, United States 1965–)
*Willem Luyten (Dutch East Indies, Netherlands, 1899–1994)
*Donald Lynden-Bell (United Kingdom, 1935–2018)
*Andrew Lyne (UK, 1942–)
*Bernard Lyot (France, 1897–1952)

==M==
*Mahendra Suri (India, 14th century CE)
*Ma Yize (China, 910–1005)
*Adriaan van Maanen (United States, 1884–1946)
*George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield (United Kingdom, –1764)
*Johann Heinrich von Mädler (Germany, 1794-1874)
*Amy Mainzer (United States, 1974–)
*Steve Mandel (United States)
*Geoff Marcy (United States, 1954–)
*Simon Marius (Germany, 1573–1624)
*Brian G. Marsden (United States, 1937–2010)
*Albert Marth (Germany, 1828–1897)
*Nevil Maskelyne (United Kingdom, 1732–1811)
*Charles Mason (United Kingdom, United States, 1730–1787)
*John C. Mather (United States, 1946–)
*Janet Akyüz Mattei (Turkey/United States, 1943–2004)
*Edward Walter Maunder (United Kingdom, 1851–1928)
*Pierre Louis Maupertuis (France, 1698–1759)
*Alain Maury (France, 1958–)
*Antonia Maury (United States, 1866–1952)
*Matthew Fontaine Maury (United States, 1806–1873)
*Brian May (United Kingdom, 1947–)
*Cornell Mayer (United States, 1922–2005)
*Tobias Mayer (Germany, 1723–1762)
*Michel Mayor (Switzerland, 1942–)
*Christopher McKee (United States, 1942–)
*Robert S. McMillan (United States)
*William H. McCrea (United Kingdom, 1904–1999)
*Bruce A. McIntosh (Canada, 1929–2015)
*Robert H. McNaught (Australia, 1956–)
*Pierre Méchain (France, 1744–1804)
*Thebe Medupe (South Africa, 1973–)
*Karen Jean Meech (United States, 1956–)
*Aden Baker Meinel (United States, 1922–2011)
*Marjorie Pettit Meinel (United States, 1922–2008)
*Fulvio Melia (United States, 1956–)
*Philibert Jacques Melotte (United Kingdom, 1880–1961)
*Paul Willard Merrill (United States, 1887–1961)
*David Merritt (United States)
*Charles Messier (France, 1730–1817)
*Joel Hastings Metcalf (United States, 1866–1925)
*Andreas Gerasimos Michalitsianos (United States, 1947–1997)
*John Michell (United Kingdom, 1724–1793)
*Elia Millosevich (Italy, 1848–1919)
*Edward Arthur Milne (United Kingdom, 1896–1950)
*Rudolph Minkowski (Germany, 1895–1976)
*Marcel Gilles Jozef Minnaert (Belgium, Netherlands, 1893–1970)
*Maria Mitchell (United States, 1818–1889)
*Seidai Miyasaka (Japan, 1955–)
*Yoshikane Mizuno (Japan, 1954–)
*August Ferdinand Möbius (Germany, 1790–1868)
*Anthony Moffat (Canada)
*Johan Maurits Mohr (Netherlands, 1716–1775)
*Samuel Molyneux (United Kingdom, 1689–1728)
*Geminiano Montanari (Italy, 1633–1687)
*Patrick Moore (United Kingdom, 1923–2012)
*James Michael Moran (United States, 1943–)
*William Wilson Morgan (United States, 1906–1994)
*Hiroshi Mori (Japan, 1958–)
*Amédée Mouchez (France, 1821–1892)
*Antonín Mrkos (Czechoslovakia, 1918–1996)
*Jean Mueller (United States, 1950–)
*Masaru Mukai (Japan, 1949–)
*Christiaan Alexander Muller (Netherlands, 1923-2004)
*Gustav Müller (Germany, 1851–1925)
*Johannes Müller (Germany, 1436–1476)
*Harutaro Murakami (Japan, 1872–1947)
*Osamu Muramatsu (Japan, 1949–)
*bin Musa, Ahmad (Persia, 805–873)
*bin Musa, Hasan (Persia, 810–873)
*bin Musa, Muhammad (Persia, (800–873)
*Nils Mustelin (Finland, 1931–2004)

==N==
*Nilakantha Somayaji (India, 1444–1544)
*Valentin Naboth (Germany, Italy, 1523–1593)
*Naburimannu (Babylonia, sometime between 6th century BC and 2nd century BC)
*Takeshi Nagata (Japan, 1913–1991)
*Ahmad Nahavandi (Persia, 7th–8th century)
*Akimasa Nakamura (Japan, 1961–)
*Syuichi Nakano (Japan, 1947–)
*Jayant Narlikar (India, 1938–)
*Naubakht (Persia, d. 776)
*Al-fadl ibn Naubakht (Persia, 8th century)
*Otto Neugebauer (Germany, United States, 1899–1990)
*Grigoriy Nikolaevich Neujmin (Russia, 1886–1946)
*Simon Newcomb (United States, 1835–1909)
*Isaac Newton (United Kingdom, 1643–1727)
*Seth Barnes Nicholson (United States, 1891–1963)
*Albertus Antonie Nijland (Netherlands, 1868–1936)
*Tsuneo Niijima (Japan, 1955–)
*Peter Nilson (Sweden, 1937–1998)
*Hōei Nojiri (Japan, 1885–1977)
*Jaime Nomen (Spain, 1960–)
*Toshiro Nomura (Japan, 1954–)

==O==
*Knut Jørgen Røed Ødegaard (Norway, 1966–)
*Okuro Oikawa (Japan, 1896–1970)
*Tarmo Oja (Sweden, 1934–2024)
*Tomimaru Okuni (Japan, 1931–)
*Nicolaus Olahus (Hungarian, 1493–1568)
*Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers (Germany, 1758–1840)
*Gerard O&#x27;Neill (United States, 1927–1992)
*Jan Hendrik Oort (Netherlands, 1900–1992)
*Pieter Oosterhoff (Netherlands, 1904–1978)
*Ernst Öpik (Estonia, Ireland, 1893–1985)
*José Luis Ortiz Moreno (Spain, 1967–)
*Yoshiaki Oshima (Japan, 1952–)
*Donald Edward Osterbrock, United States, 1924–2007)
*Liisi Oterma (Finland, 1915–2001)
*Satoru Otomo (Japan, 1957–)
*Jean Abraham Chrétien Oudemans (Netherlands, 1827–1906)

==P==
*Rafael Pacheco (Spain, 1954–)
*Bohdan Paczyński (Poland, 1940–2007)
*Ľudmila Pajdušáková (Czechoslovakia, 1916–1979)
*Johann Palisa (Austria, 1848–1925)
*Johann Palitzsch (Germany, 1723–1788)
*Anton Pannekoek (Netherlands, 1873–1960)
*Eugene Parker (United States, 1927–2022)
*George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield (United Kingdom, –1764)
*William Parsons, Lord Rosse (Ireland, 1800–1867)
*André Patry (France, 1902–1960)
*Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin (United Kingdom, United States, 1900–1979)
*Ruby Payne-Scott (Australia, 1912–1981)
*Jean-Claude Pecker (France, 1923–2020)
*James Peebles (Canada, United States, 1935–)
*Sir Cuthbert Peek, 2nd Baronet (UK, 1855–1901)
*Manuel Peimbert (Mexico, 1941–)
*Leslie Copus Peltier (United States, 1900–1980)
*Roger Penrose (United Kingdom, 1931–)
*Arno Penzias (United States, Germany, 1933–2024)
*Luboš Perek (Czech Republic, 1919–2020)
*Saul Perlmutter (United States, 1959–)
*Charles Dillon Perrine (United States, Argentina, 1867–1951)
*Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin (France, 1845–1904)
*Christian Heinrich Friedrich Peters (Germany, United States, 1813–1890)
*George Henry Peters (United States, 1863–1947)
*Mark M. Phillips (United States, 1951–)
*Giuseppe Piazzi (Italy, 1746–1826)
*Edward Charles Pickering (United States, 1846–1919)
*William Henry Pickering (United States, 1858–1938)
*Phil Plait (United States, 1964–)
*Giovanni Antonio Amedeo Plana (Italy, 1781–1864)
*Petrus Plancius (Netherlands, 1552–1622)
*John Stanley Plaskett (Canada, 1865–1941)
*Norman Robert Pogson (United Kingdom, 1829–1891)
*Christian Pollas (France, 1947–)
*John Pond (England, 1767–1836)
*Jean-Louis Pons (France, 1761–1831)
*Carolyn Porco (United States, 1953–)
*Vladimír Porubčan (Czechoslovakia, 1940–)
*Charles Pritchard (United Kingdom, 1808–1893)
*Richard Proctor (England, 1837–1888)
*Milorad B. Protić (Serbia, 1911– 2001)
*Antoni Przybylski (Poland, Australia, 1913–1985)
*Ptolemy of Alexandria (Roman Egypt, –165)
*Pierre Puiseux (France, 1855–1928)
*Georg Purbach (Germany, 1423–1461)
*Pythagoras of Samos (Greece, 580 BC–500 BC)
*Paris Pişmiş (Armenia/Mexico, 1911–1999)

==Q==
*Adolphe Quetelet (Belgium, 1796–1874)
*Ali Qushji (Ottoman, 1403–1474)
*M. Shahid Qureshi (Pakistan)

==R==
*David Lincoln Rabinowitz (United States, 1960–)
*Grote Reber (United States, 1911–2002)
*Martin Rees (United Kingdom, 1942–)
*Hubert Reeves (Canada, 1932–)
*Regiomontanus (Johannes Müller) (Germany, 1436–1476)
*Julius Reichelt (Germany, 1637–1717)
*Erasmus Reinhold (Prussia, Germany, 1511–1553)
*Karl Reinmuth (Germany, 1892–1979)
*Pieter Johannes van Rhijn (Netherlands, 1886–1960)
*Giovanni Battista Riccioli (Italy, 1598–1671)
*Mercedes Richards (Jamaica, 1955–2016)
*Jean Richer (France, 1630–1696)
*Edward Riddle (England, 1788–1854)
*Adam Riess (United States, 1969–)
*Fernand Rigaux (Belgium, 1905–1962)
*George Willis Ritchey (United States, 1864–1945)
*David Rittenhouse (United States, 1732–1796)
*Hans-Walter Rix (Germany, 1964–)
*Arjen Roelofs (Netherlands, 1754–1824)
*Nancy G. Roman (United States, 1925–2018)
*Elizabeth Roemer (United States, 1929–2016)
*Gustavo E. Romero (Argentina, (1964–)
*Roger of Hereford (England, –1198)
*Ole Christensen Rømer (Denmark, 1644–1710)
*Otto A. Rosenberger (Germany, 1800–1890)
*Svein Rosseland (Norway, 1894–1985)
*Bruno Rossi (Italy, 1905–1993)
*Marta Graciela Rovira (Argentina)
*Vera Rubin (United States, 1928–2016)
*Henry Chamberlain Russell (Australia, 1836–1907)
*Henry Norris Russell (United States, 1877–1957)
*Martin Ryle (United Kingdom, 1918–1984)

==S==
*Sir Edward Sabine (Ireland, 1788–1883)
*Carl Sagan (United States, 1934–1996)
*Megh Nad Saha (India, 1893–1956)
*Edwin Ernest Salpeter (Austria, Australia, United States, 1924–2008)
*Allan Rex Sandage (United States, 1926–2010)
*Hendricus Gerardus van de Sande Bakhuyzen (Netherlands, 1838–1923)
*Wallace Leslie William Sargent (United Kingdom, United States, 1935–2012)
*Anneila Sargent (United Kingdom, United States, 1942–)
*Naoto Sato (Japan, 1953–)
*Alexandre Schaumasse (France, 1882–1958)
*Giovanni Schiaparelli (Italy, 1835–1910)
*Frank Schlesinger (United States, 1871–1943)
*Bernhard Schmidt (Estonia, Sweden, Germany, 1879–1935)
*Brian P. Schmidt (United States, 1967–)
*Maarten Schmidt (Netherlands, 1929–)
*Robert Schommer (United States, 1946–2001)
*Johann Hieronymus Schröter (Germany, 1745–1816)
*Lipót Schulhof (Hungary, 1847–1921)
*Heinrich Christian Schumacher (Germany, 1780–1850)
*Hans-Emil Schuster (Germany, 1934–)
*Samuel Heinrich Schwabe (Germany, 1789–1875)
*Karl Schwarzschild (Germany, 1873–1916)
*Martin Schwarzschild (Germany, United States, 1912–1997)
*Friedrich Karl Arnold Schwassmann (Germany, 1870–1964)
*James Vernon Scotti (United States, 1960–)
*Frederick Hanley Seares (United States, 1873–1964)
*George Mary Searle (United States, 1839–1918)
*Angelo Secchi (Italy, 1818–1878)
*Sadao Sei (Japan)
*Waltraut Seitter (Germany, 1930–2007)
*Tsutomu Seki (Japan, 1930–)
*Carl Keenan Seyfert (United States, 1911–1960)
*Grigory Abramovich Shajn (Russia, 1892–1956)
*Pelageya Fedorovna Shajn (Russia, 1894–1956)
*Harlow Shapley (United States, 1885–1972)
*Richard Sheepshanks (United Kingdom, 1794–1855)
*Shen Kuo (China, 1031–1035)
*Shi Shen (China, fl. 4th century BC)
*Shibukawa Shunkai (Japan, 1639–1715)
*Yoshisada Shimizu (Japan, 1943–)
*Shinzo Shinjo (Japan, 1873–1938)
*Qutb eddin Shirazi (Persia, 1236–1311)
*Iosif Samuilovich Shklovsky (Russia, 1916–1985)
*Vladimir Shkodrov (Bulgaria, 1930–2010)
*Carolyn Jean Spellmann Shoemaker (United States, 1929–2021)
*Eugene Merle Shoemaker (United States, 1928–1997)
*Seth Shostak (United States, 1943–)
*Andrew Siemion (United States, 1980–)
*Willem de Sitter (Netherlands, 1872–1934)
*Charlotte Moore Sitterly (United States, 1898–1990)
*Brian A. Skiff (United States)
*John Francis Skjellerup (Australia, South Africa, 1875–1952)
*Vesto Melvin Slipher (United States, 1875–1969)
*William Marshall Smart (United Kingdom, 1889–1975)
*Tamara Mikhaylovna Smirnova (Russia, 1935–2001)
*George Smoot (United States, 1945–)
*William Henry Smyth (United Kingdom, 1788–1865)
*Willebrord Snellius (Netherlands, 1580–1626)
*Mary Fairfax Somerville (United Kingdom, 1780–1872)
*Sir James South (United Kingdom, 1785–1867)
*Sir Harold Spencer Jones (United Kingdom, 1890–1960)
*Lyman Spitzer (United States, 1914–1997)
*Friederich Wilhelm Gustav Spörer (Germany, 1822–1895)
*Rainer Spurzem (Germany, 1956–)
*Anton Staus (Germany, 1872–1955)
*Joel Stebbins (United States, 1878–1966)
*Johan Stein (Netherlands, 1871–1951)
*Karl August von Steinheil, (Germany, 1801–1870)
*Édouard Stephan (France, 1837–1923)
*Denise Stephens (United States)
*Charles Bruce Stephenson (United States, 1929–2001))
*David J. Stevenson (New Zealand, 1948–)
*Edward James Stone (1831–1897)
*F. J. M. Stratton (United Kingdom, 1881–1960)
*Bengt Georg Daniel Strömgren (Denmark, 1908–1987)
*Friedrich Georg Wilhelm (von) Struve (Germany, Russia, 1793–1864)
*Karl Hermann Struve (Russia, Germany, 1854–1920)
*Gustav Wilhelm Ludwig Struve (Russia, 1858–1920)
*Otto Struve (Russia, United States, 1897–1963)
*Otto Wilhelm (von) Struve (Russia, 1819–1905)
*Su Song (China, 1020–1101)
*Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi (Persia, 903–986)
*Matsuo Sugano (Japan, 1939–)
*Atsushi Sugie (Japan)
*Nicholas Suntzeff (United States, 1952–)
*Rashid Alievich Sunyaev (Uzbekistan Russia Germany, 1943–)
*Shohei Suzuki (Japan)
*Lewis A. Swift (United States, 1820–1913)
*Frédéric Sy (France)

==T==
*Akihiko Tago (Japan, 1932–)
*Atsushi Takahashi (Japan, 1965–)
*Kesao Takamizawa (Japan, 1952–)
*Jill Tarter (United States, 1944–)
*Joseph Hooton Taylor Jr. (United States, 1941–)
*John Tebbutt (Australia, 1834–1916)
*Ernst Wilhelm Leberecht Tempel (Germany, 1821–1889)
*Thabit ibn Qurra (Iraq, 826–901)
*Thorvald Nicolai Thiele (Denmark, 1838–1910)
*Louis Thollon (France, 1829–1887)
*Norman G. Thomas (United States, 1930–2020)
*John Thome (United States, Argentina, 1843–1908)
*Kip Stephen Thorne (United States, 1940–)
*Friedrich Tietjen (Germany, 1834–1895)
*Beatrice Muriel Hill Tinsley (New Zealand, United States, 1941–1981)
*François Félix Tisserand (France, 1845–1896)
*Johann Daniel Titius (Germany, 1729–1796)
*Yasuo Tanaka (Japan, 1931–2018)
*Clyde Tombaugh (United States, 1906–1997)
*Kōichirō Tomita (Japan, 1925–2006)
*Richard Tousey (United States, 1908–1997)
*Charles Townes (United States, 1915–2015)
*Virginia Trimble (United States, 1943–)
*Chad Trujillo (United States, 1973–)
*Robert Julius Trumpler (United States, 1886–1956)
*R. Brent Tully (United States, 1943–)
*Herbert Hall Turner (England, 1861–1930)
*Nasir al-Din Tusi (Persia, 1201–1274)
*Horace Parnell Tuttle (United States, 1839–1923)
*Neil deGrasse Tyson (United States, 1958–)

==U==
*Seiji Ueda (Japan, 1952–)
*Ulugh Beg (Uzbekistan, 1394–1449)
*Antonio de Ulloa (Spain), 1716–1795)
*Anne Barbara Underhill (Canada, 1920–2003)
*Albrecht Unsöld (Germany, 1905–1995)
*Takeshi Urata (Japan, 1947–2012)
*Mu’ayyad al-Din al-’Urdi (Persia d. 1266)
*Fumiaki Uto (Japan)

==V==
*Yrjö Väisälä (Finland, 1891–1971)
*Benjamin Valz (France, 1787–1867)
*James Van Allen (United States, 1914–2006)
*George Van Biesbroeck (Belgium, United States, 1880–1974)
*Hendrik Christoffel van de Hulst (Netherlands, 1918–2000)
*Peter van de Kamp (United States, 1901–1995)
*Sidney van den Bergh (Canada, 1929–)
*Martin van den Hove (Netherlands, 1605–1639)
*Hendricus Gerardus van de Sande Bakhuyzen (Netherlands, 1838–1923)
*Hendrik van Gent (Netherlands, South Africa, 1900–1947)
*Cornelis Johannes van Houten (Netherlands, 1920–2002)
*Pieter Johannes van Rhijn (Netherlands, 1886–1960)
*Gérard de Vaucouleurs (France, United States, 1918–1995)
*Zdeňka Vávrová (Czechoslovakia, 1945–)
*Jean-Pierre Verdet (France, 1932–)
*Philippe Véron (France, 1939–2014)
*Frank Washington Very (United States, 1852–1927)
*Yvon Villarceau (France, 1813–1883)
*Julie Vinter Hansen (Denmark), 1890–1960)
*Hermann Carl Vogel (Germany, 1841–1907)
*Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve (Germany, Russia, 1793–1864)
*Otto Wilhelm von Struve (Russia, 1819–1905)
*Alexander N. Vyssotsky (Russia/United States, 1888–1973)
*Emma Vyssotsky (United States, 1894–1975)

==W==

*Arno Arthur Wachmann (Germany, 1902–1990)
*Abul Wáfa (Persia, 940–997/998)
*Walcher of Malvern (England d. 1135)
*George Wallerstein (1930–2021)
*William Wales (United Kingdom, –1798)
*Dennis Walsh (United Kingdom, 1933–2005)
*Qingde Wang (United States/China)
*Brian Warner (astronomer) (United Kingdom, 1939–)
*Brian D. Warner (United States, 1952–)
*Kazuro Watanabe (Japan, 1955–)
*James Craig Watson (United States, 1838–1880)
*Edmund Weaver (United Kingdom, 1663–1748)
*Kim Weaver (United States, 1969–)
*Thomas William Webb (United Kingdom, 1807–1885)
*Rachel Webster (Australia, 1951–)
*Alfred Lothar Wegener (Germany, 1880–1930)
*Gary A. Wegner (United States, 1944–)
*Wei Pu (China, 960–1279)
*Karl von Weizsäcker (Germany, 1912–2007)
*Godefroy Wendelin (Belgium, 1580–1667)
*Richard M. West (Denmark, 1941–)
*Gart Westerhout (Netherlands, United States, 1927–2012)
*Bengt Westerlund (Sweden, 1921–2008)
*J. G. Westphal (Germany, 1824–1859)
*Johann Heinrich Westphal (Germany, Italy, 1794–1831)
*George Wetherill (1925–2006)
*John Archibald Wheeler (United States, 1911–2008)
*Fred Lawrence Whipple (United States, 1906–2004)
*Albert Whitford (United States, 1905–2002)
*Mary Watson Whitney (United States, 1847–1921)
*Chandra Wickramasinghe (United Kingdom, 1939–)
*Paul Wild (Switzerland, 1925–2014)
*Olin C. Wilson (United States, 1909–1994)
*Ida E. Woods (United States, 1870–1940)
*Robert Wilson (United States, 1936–)
*Rogier Windhorst (United States, 1955–)
*Vincent Wing (UK, 1619–1668)
*Anna Winlock (United States, 1857–1904)
*Henry &quot;Trae&quot; Winter (United States, 1972)
*John Winthrop (Massachusetts Bay Colony, 1714–1779)
*Friedrich August Theodor Winnecke (Germany, 1835–1897)
*Carl Wirtanen (United States, 1910–1990)
*Jack Wisdom (United States, 1953–)
*Gustav Witt (Germany, 1866–1946)
*Maximilian Wolf (Germany, 1863–1932)
*Aleksander Wolszczan (Poland, 1946–)
*Edith Jones Woodward (United States), (1914–2002)
*Richard van der Riet Woolley (United Kingdom, 1906–1986)
*Frances Woodworth Wright (United States, 1897–1989)
*Thomas Wright (United Kingdom, 1711–1786)
*Gillian Wright (United Kingdom)
*Arthur Bambridge Wyse (United States, 1909–1942)

==Y==
*Issei Yamamoto (Japan, 1889–1959)
*Masayuki Yanai (Japan, 1959–)
*Yi Xing (China, 683–727)
*Anne Sewell Young (United States, 1871–1961)
*Charles Augustus Young (United States, 1834–1908)
*James Whitney Young (United States, 1941–)
*Judith Young (United States, 1952–2014)

==Z==
*Franz Xaver von Zach (Germany, 1753–1832)
*Abraham Zacuto (Spain/Portugal, 1450–1510)
*John Zarnecki (UK, 1949–)
*Yakov Borisovich Zel&#x27;dovich (USSR, 1914–1987)
*Zhang Daqing (China, 1969–)
*Zhang Heng (China, 78–139)
*Zhang Yuzhe (China, 1902–1986)
*Lyudmila Vasil&#x27;evna Zhuravleva (Russia/Ukraine, 1946–)
*Felix Ziegel (Soviet Union, 1920–1988)
*Zu Chongzhi (China, 429–500)
*Fritz Zwicky (Switzerland, United States, 1898–1974)

==Others who influenced astronomy and astrophysics==
The following is a list of people who are not astronomers but made a contribution to the field of astronomy and astrophysics.
*Hans Bethe (1906–2005), (physicist)
*Niels Bohr (1885–1962), (physicist)
*Andreas Cellarius (Netherlands, Germany, 1596–1665), (cartographer)
*Freeman Dyson (1923–2020), (physicist)
*Albert Einstein (1879–1955), (physicist)
*Karl Guthe Jansky (United States, 1905–1950), (radio astronomer)
*James Clerk Maxwell (United Kingdom, 1831–1879), (physicist)
*Thomas Young (United Kingdom, 1773–1829), (physicist)
*Abdus Salam (1926–1996), (physicist)
*Riazuddin (1936–2013), (physicist)

==See also==
*List of astronomical instrument makers
*List of women astronomers
*List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists

==References==
===Citations===
===General sources===
*Astronomical Society of the Pacific: Women in Astronomy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="27" end="37" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="40" end="55" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="125" end="134" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="399" end="408" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258893" start="427" end="440" title="Marc Aaronson" label="Marc Aaronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q142922" start="469" end="487" title="George Ogden Abell" label="George Ogden Abell"/>
<link wikidata="Q926432" start="516" end="527" title="Hiroshi Abe (astronomer)" label="Hiroshi Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q454243" start="544" end="558" title="Antonio Abetti" label="Antonio Abetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q945807" start="579" end="593" title="Giorgio Abetti" label="Giorgio Abetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q210126" start="614" end="635" title="Charles Greeley Abbot" label="Charles Greeley Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60809" start="664" end="687" title="Charles Hitchcock Adams" label="Charles Hitchcock Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q20015" start="716" end="732" title="John Couch Adams" label="John Couch Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q312806" start="762" end="781" title="Walter Sydney Adams" label="Walter Sydney Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178126" start="810" end="822" title="Saul Adelman" label="Saul Adelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080920" start="847" end="862" title="Petrus Alphonsi" label="Petrus Alphonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q396895" start="883" end="890" title="Agrippa (astronomer)" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q70253" start="907" end="925" title="Paul Oswald Ahnert" label="Paul Oswald Ahnert"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747" start="948" end="965" title="Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs" label="Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018" start="988" end="1007" title="George Biddell Airy" label="George Biddell Airy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375178" start="1037" end="1050" title="Robert Grant Aitken" label="Robert Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q924812" start="1080" end="1093" title="Makio Akiyama" label="Makio Akiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="1110" end="1120" title="Al Battani" label="Al Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1122" end="1126" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="1138" end="1149" title="Albategnius" label="Albategnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q439583" start="1179" end="1211" title="Vladimir Aleksandrovich Albitzky" label="Vladimir Aleksandrovich Albitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11373" start="1233" end="1259" title="Abu Ma&amp;#x27;shar al-Balkhi" label="Abu Ma&amp;#x27;shar al-Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361158" start="1279" end="1292" title="George Alcock" label="George Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352885" start="1322" end="1334" title="Harold Alden" label="Harold Alden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54945" start="1363" end="1376" title="Hannes Alfvén" label="Hannes Alfvén"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351860" start="1398" end="1415" title="Lawrence H. Aller" label="Lawrence H. Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="1444" end="1465" title="Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi" label="Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164396" start="1485" end="1517" title="Viktor Amazaspovich Ambartsumian" label="Viktor Amazaspovich Ambartsumian"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="1520" end="1527" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348277" start="1541" end="1561" title="John August Anderson" label="John August Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q477300" start="1590" end="1606" title="Wilhelm Anderson" label="Wilhelm Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="1608" end="1615" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q974219" start="1629" end="1648" title="Marie Henri Andoyer" label="Marie Henri Andoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087443" start="1670" end="1691" title="Andronicus of Cyrrhus" label="Andronicus of Cyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187258" start="1714" end="1735" title="Anders Jonas Ångström" label="Anders Jonas Ångström"/>
<link wikidata="Q312817" start="1757" end="1780" title="E. M. Antoniadi" label="Eugène Michel Antoniadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q384781" start="1809" end="1823" title="Masakatsu Aoki" label="Masakatsu Aoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q58662" start="1840" end="1854" title="Petrus Apianus" label="Petrus Apianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154353" start="1877" end="1891" title="François Arago" label="François Arago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369831" start="1913" end="1924" title="Masaru Arai" label="Masaru Arai"/>
<link wikidata="Q282606" start="1941" end="1954" title="Hiroshi Araki" label="Hiroshi Araki"/>
<link wikidata="Q472608" start="1964" end="1977" title="Sylvain Julien Victor Arend" label="Sylvain Arend"/>
<link wikidata="Q58685" start="2000" end="2028" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="2051" end="2071" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q66389" start="2091" end="2107" title="Christoph Arnold" label="Christoph Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q453729" start="2130" end="2150" title="Halton Arp" label="Halton Christian Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="2179" end="2187" title="Arzachel" label="Arzachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720222" start="2208" end="2219" title="Asada Goryu" label="Asada Goryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459420" start="2240" end="2251" title="Atsuo Asami" label="Atsuo Asami"/>
<link wikidata="Q263018" start="2261" end="2277" title="Giuseppe Asclepi" label="Giuseppe Asclepi"/>
<link wikidata="Q773715" start="2298" end="2313" title="Joseph Ashbrook" label="Joseph Ashbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q57349" start="2342" end="2355" title="Arthur Auwers" label="Arthur Auwers"/>
<link wikidata="Q376856" start="2378" end="2391" title="Adrien Auzout" label="Adrien Auzout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230937" start="2413" end="2423" title="David Axon" label="David Axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="2453" end="2464" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q470902" start="2486" end="2496" title="Bhaskara I" label="Bhaskara I"/>
<link wikidata="Q213385" start="2514" end="2525" title="Bhaskara II" label="Bhaskara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="2546" end="2558" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q543206" start="2581" end="2598" title="Harold D. Babcock" label="Harold D. Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q712375" start="2627" end="2644" title="Horace W. Babcock" label="Horace W. Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q358257" start="2673" end="2687" title="Oskar Backlund" label="Oskar Backlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q710842" start="2709" end="2724" title="John N. Bahcall" label="John N. Bahcall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633275" start="2753" end="2767" title="Yoshiaki Banno" label="Yoshiaki Banno"/>
<link wikidata="Q543240" start="2788" end="2805" title="Benjamin Baillaud" label="Benjamin Baillaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q538763" start="2827" end="2841" title="Jules Baillaud" label="Jules Baillaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164548" start="2863" end="2883" title="Baptistin Baille" label="Jean-Baptiste Baille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685301" start="2905" end="2924" title="Jean Sylvain Bailly" label="Jean Sylvain Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q358244" start="2946" end="2959" title="Francis Baily" label="Francis Baily"/>
<link wikidata="Q647081" start="2989" end="3004" title="John Bainbridge (astronomer)" label="John Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q952538" start="3034" end="3049" title="John E. Baldwin" label="John E. Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404989" start="3079" end="3094" title="Sallie Baliunas" label="Sallie Baliunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073636" start="3119" end="3131" title="Zoltán Balog (astronomer)" label="Zoltán Balog"/>
<link wikidata="Q557600" start="3164" end="3181" title="Benjamin Banneker" label="Benjamin Banneker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230863" start="3210" end="3225" title="Pietro Baracchi" label="Pietro Baracchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8245211" start="3257" end="3271" title="Beatriz Barbuy" label="Beatriz Barbuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="3289" end="3311" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="Edward Emerson Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q85103" start="3340" end="3358" title="Julius Bauschinger" label="Julius Bauschinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="3380" end="3392" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576640" start="3415" end="3429" title="Antonín Bečvář" label="Antonín Bečvář"/>
<link wikidata="Q60133" start="3459" end="3471" title="Wilhelm Beer" label="Wilhelm Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821" start="3494" end="3520" title="Sergei Ivanovich Belyavsky" label="Sergei Ivanovich Belyavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065219" start="3542" end="3560" title="Charles L. Bennett" label="Charles L. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="3585" end="3605" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="3631" end="3655" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489966" start="3678" end="3695" title="Somnath Bharadwaj" label="Somnath Bharadwaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q62336" start="3712" end="3738" title="Wilhelm Freiherr von Biela" label="Wilhelm Freiherr von Biela"/>
<link wikidata="Q62131" start="3761" end="3776" title="Ludwig Biermann" label="Ludwig Biermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q66826" start="3799" end="3810" title="Wolf Bickel" label="Wolf Bickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q363953" start="3829" end="3848" title="Guillaume Bigourdan" label="Guillaume Bigourdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520323" start="3870" end="3882" title="James Binney" label="James Binney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="3908" end="3914" title="Biruni" label="Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087247" start="3935" end="3962" title="Gennady S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan" label="Gennady S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q360028" start="3980" end="3994" title="Adriaan Blaauw" label="Adriaan Blaauw"/>
<link wikidata="Q945461" start="4021" end="4036" title="Nathaniel Bliss" label="Nathaniel Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q76966" start="4066" end="4083" title="Johann Elert Bode" label="Johann Elert Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q62324" start="4106" end="4121" title="Alfred Bohrmann" label="Alfred Bohrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q434224" start="4144" end="4152" title="Bart Bok" label="Bart Bok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960309" start="4179" end="4200" title="Charles Thomas Bolton" label="Charles Thomas Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q428216" start="4236" end="4255" title="John Gatenby Bolton" label="John Gatenby Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q314565" start="4295" end="4314" title="William Cranch Bond" label="William Cranch Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q312448" start="4343" end="4360" title="Alphonse Borrelly" label="Alphonse Borrelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q310757" start="4382" end="4398" title="Rudjer Boscovich" label="Rudjer Boscovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="4400" end="4408" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q710672" start="4422" end="4432" title="Lewis Boss" label="Lewis Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q318601" start="4461" end="4475" title="Alexis Bouvard" label="Alexis Bouvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384802" start="4497" end="4512" title="Rychard Bouwens" label="Rychard Bouwens"/>
<link wikidata="Q358274" start="4537" end="4556" title="Edward L. G. Bowell" label="Edward L. G. Bowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q520866" start="4581" end="4598" title="Ira Sprague Bowen" label="Ira Sprague Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460032" start="4627" end="4638" title="Louis Boyer (astronomer)" label="Louis Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964148" start="4660" end="4674" title="Brian J. Boyle" label="Brian J. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441496" start="4708" end="4727" title="Ronald N. Bracewell" label="Ronald N. Bracewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q312278" start="4767" end="4780" title="James Bradley" label="James Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q322706" start="4810" end="4830" title="William A. Bradfield" label="William A. Bradfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="4868" end="4879" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180896" start="4902" end="4922" title="John Brashear" label="John Alfred Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q447039" start="4951" end="4972" title="William Robert Brooks" label="William Robert Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q712812" start="5001" end="5016" title="Theodor Brorsen" label="Theodor Brorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q449935" start="5039" end="5051" title="Dirk Brouwer" label="Dirk Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q465729" start="5092" end="5112" title="Ernest William Brown" label="Ernest William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q298913" start="5142" end="5165" title="Michael E. Brown" label="Michael (Mike) E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740571" start="5190" end="5213" title="Hermann Alexander Brück" label="Hermann Alexander Brück"/>
<link wikidata="Q711273" start="5236" end="5253" title="Ismael Bullialdus" label="Ismael Bullialdus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235712" start="5275" end="5292" title="Margaret Burbidge" label="Margaret Burbidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q971844" start="5336" end="5355" title="Robert Burnham, Jr." label="Robert Burnham, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q543217" start="5384" end="5408" title="Sherburne Wesley Burnham" label="Sherburne Wesley Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q446449" start="5437" end="5451" title="Schelte J. Bus" label="Schelte J. Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146736" start="5476" end="5486" title="Bimla Buti" label="Bimla Buti"/>
<link wikidata="Q353818" start="5510" end="5534" title="William Wallace Campbell" label="William Wallace Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="5563" end="5580" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q542649" start="5609" end="5622" title="Luigi Carnera" label="Luigi Carnera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346425" start="5643" end="5666" title="Edwin Francis Carpenter" label="Edwin Francis Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603783" start="5695" end="5710" title="James Carpenter (astronomer)" label="James Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q453690" start="5740" end="5770" title="Richard Christopher Carrington" label="Richard Christopher Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225294" start="5804" end="5816" title="John Carroll (astronomer)" label="John Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250326" start="5846" end="5861" title="Anthony W. Case" label="Anthony W. Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q561280" start="5886" end="5917" title="César-François Cassini de Thury" label="César-François Cassini de Thury"/>
<link wikidata="Q499236" start="5939" end="5966" title="Dominique, comte de Cassini" label="Dominique, comte de Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q14279" start="5988" end="6013" title="Giovanni Domenico Cassini" label="Giovanni Domenico Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q315037" start="6035" end="6050" title="Jacques Cassini" label="Jacques Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q214544" start="6072" end="6093" title="Bonaventura Cavalieri" label="Bonaventura Cavalieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q81130" start="6114" end="6128" title="Anders Celsius" label="Anders Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q945443" start="6150" end="6166" title="Vincenzo Cerulli" label="Vincenzo Cerulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q314299" start="6187" end="6201" title="Jean Chacornac" label="Jean Chacornac"/>
<link wikidata="Q731321" start="6223" end="6236" title="James Challis" label="James Challis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280170" start="6266" end="6287" title="Radha Gobinda Chandra" label="Radha Gobinda Chandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="6289" end="6299" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="6320" end="6346" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q478599" start="6382" end="6395" title="Carl Charlier" label="Carl Charlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q314273" start="6417" end="6433" title="Auguste Charlois" label="Auguste Charlois"/>
<link wikidata="Q234878" start="6455" end="6481" title="Lyudmila Ivanovna Chernykh" label="Lyudmila Ivanovna Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6490" end="6497" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318611" start="6511" end="6539" title="Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh" label="Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6548" end="6555" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q315845" start="6569" end="6582" title="James Christy" label="James Christy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12170857" start="6607" end="6621" title="Klim Churyumov" label="Klim Churyumov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6623" end="6630" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q86296446" start="6644" end="6658" title="Barry G. Clark" label="Barry G. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q728456" start="6683" end="6706" title="Edwin Foster Coddington" label="Edwin Foster Coddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q124960" start="6735" end="6755" title="Jérôme Eugène Coggia" label="Jérôme Eugène Coggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833" start="6777" end="6795" title="Josep Comas i Solà" label="Josep Comas i Solà"/>
<link wikidata="Q503586" start="6816" end="6837" title="Andrew Ainslie Common" label="Andrew Ainslie Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622172" start="6867" end="6882" title="Guy Consolmagno" label="Guy Consolmagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="6907" end="6926" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="6928" end="6935" title="Royal Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748382" start="6957" end="6972" title="Corsono Carsono" label="Corsono Carsono"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180553" start="6982" end="6995" title="Janine Connes" label="Janine Connes"/>
<link wikidata="Q494296" start="7013" end="7027" title="Pablo Cottenot" label="Pablo Cottenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129074" start="7038" end="7052" title="Heather Couper" label="Heather Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612652" start="7082" end="7101" title="Leopold Courvoisier" label="Leopold Courvoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q709010" start="7128" end="7150" title="Arthur Edwin Covington" label="Arthur Edwin Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579968" start="7172" end="7193" title="Philip Herbert Cowell" label="Philip Herbert Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388645" start="7223" end="7244" title="Thomas George Cowling" label="Thomas George Cowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q504314" start="7274" end="7311" title="Andrew Claude de la Cherois Crommelin" label="Andrew Claude de la Cherois Crommelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155466" start="7341" end="7351" title="Luís Cruls" label="Luíz Cruls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132007" start="7373" end="7385" title="James Cuffey" label="James Cuffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="7414" end="7432" title="Heber Doust Curtis" label="Heber Doust Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996905" start="7461" end="7477" title="Florence Cushman" label="Florence Cushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q742511" start="7513" end="7531" title="Alexander Dalgarno" label="Alexander Dalgarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678153" start="7560" end="7592" title="Jacques D&amp;#x27;Allonville" label="Jacques Eugène d&amp;#x27;Allonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q305958" start="7614" end="7632" title="Andre Louis Danjon" label="Andre Louis Danjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155013" start="7654" end="7676" title="Heinrich d&amp;#x27;Arrest" label="Heinrich d&amp;#x27;Arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q325016" start="7699" end="7719" title="George Howard Darwin" label="George Howard Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358074" start="7749" end="7761" title="Roger Davies (astrophysicist)" label="Roger Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="7787" end="7804" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q728447" start="7825" end="7845" title="William Rutter Dawes" label="William Rutter Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894163" start="7875" end="7890" title="Bernhard Dawson" label="Bernhard Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65555" start="7915" end="7926" title="Leo de Ball" label="Leo de Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716757" start="7958" end="7973" title="Duília de Mello" label="Duília de Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q380828" start="7991" end="8006" title="Henri Debehogne" label="Henri Debehogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q110709" start="8029" end="8049" title="Annibale de Gasparis" label="Annibale de Gasparis"/>
<link wikidata="Q246517" start="8070" end="8099" title="Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre" label="Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q375351" start="8121" end="8144" title="Charles-Eugène Delaunay" label="Charles-Eugène Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009" start="8166" end="8188" title="Eugène Joseph Delporte" label="Eugène Joseph Delporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870836" start="8211" end="8229" title="Audrey C. Delsanti" label="Audrey C. Delsanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q594112" start="8247" end="8272" title="William Frederick Denning" label="William Frederick Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995948" start="8302" end="8314" title="Alíz Derekas" label="Alíz Derekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="8333" end="8349" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q520771" start="8376" end="8402" title="Henri-Alexandre Deslandres" label="Henri-Alexandre Deslandres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979829" start="8424" end="8453" title="Alexander Nikolaevich Deutsch" label="Alexander Nikolaevich Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q981340" start="8475" end="8496" title="Gérard de Vaucouleurs" label="Gérard de Vaucouleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="8532" end="8544" title="Robert Dicke" label="Robert Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701885" start="8573" end="8590" title="Terence Dickinson" label="Terence Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531345" start="8608" end="8621" title="Thomas Digges" label="Thomas Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q628065" start="8651" end="8665" title="Herbert Dingle" label="Herbert Dingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q493772" start="8694" end="8709" title="Andrea Di Paola" label="Andrea Di Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879957" start="8726" end="8744" title="Ewine van Dishoeck" label="Ewine van Dishoeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q455834" start="8767" end="8791" title="Giovanni Battista Donati" label="Giovanni Battista Donati"/>
<link wikidata="Q299149" start="8812" end="8823" title="Frank Drake" label="Frank Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q125515" start="8848" end="8860" title="Henry Draper" label="Henry Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177534" start="8889" end="8905" title="Mary Anna Draper" label="Mary Anna Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q265015" start="8934" end="8945" title="John Louis Emil Dreyer" label="John Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q665658" start="8968" end="8988" title="Alexander D. Dubyago" label="Alexander D. Dubyago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916846" start="9011" end="9029" title="Dmitrij I. Dubyago" label="Dmitrij I. Dubyago"/>
<link wikidata="Q74140" start="9052" end="9068" title="Jean Dufay" label="Jean C. B. Dufay"/>
<link wikidata="Q499218" start="9090" end="9109" title="Raymond Smith Dugan" label="Raymond Smith Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q375158" start="9138" end="9150" title="James Dunlop" label="James Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382163" start="9174" end="9189" title="Richard B. Dunn" label="Richard B. Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632050" start="9218" end="9232" title="Petar Đurković" label="Petar Đurković"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="9234" end="9240" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945309" start="9254" end="9272" title="Frank Watson Dyson" label="Frank Watson Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="9309" end="9325" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q337177" start="9355" end="9373" title="Frank K. Edmondson" label="Frank K. Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315984" start="9402" end="9415" title="Olin J. Eggen" label="Olin J. Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235417" start="9444" end="9459" title="David J. Eicher" label="David J. Eicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="9484" end="9499" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q983980" start="9522" end="9534" title="Eise Eisinga" label="Eise Eisinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q312755" start="9561" end="9577" title="Eric Walter Elst" label="Eric Walter Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57294" start="9600" end="9618" title="Johann Franz Encke" label="Johann Franz Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q541488" start="9641" end="9651" title="Kin Endate" label="Kin Endate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="9668" end="9680" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="9682" end="9692" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q67948" start="9712" end="9722" title="Emil Ernst" label="Emil Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q574628" start="9745" end="9761" title="Ernest Esclangon" label="Ernest Esclangon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801230" start="9783" end="9795" title="Fred Espenak" label="Fred Espenak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850665" start="9820" end="9837" title="Larry W. Esposito" label="Larry W. Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q185150" start="9862" end="9869" title="Eudoxus of Cnidus" label="Eudoxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q690575" start="9871" end="9877" title="Cnidus" label="Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944851" start="9886" end="9898" title="Robert Evans (astronomer)" label="Robert Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60204" start="9930" end="9945" title="David Fabricius" label="David Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q266972" start="9972" end="9987" title="Sandra M. Faber" label="Sandra M. Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q62534" start="10012" end="10030" title="Johannes Fabricius" label="Johannes Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439505" start="10057" end="10071" title="Fearon Fallows" label="Fearon Fallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q472118" start="10101" end="10111" title="Hervé Faye" label="Hervé Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q647250" start="10133" end="10151" title="Charles Fehrenbach (astronomer)" label="Charles Fehrenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q336550" start="10173" end="10181" title="Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Kathir al-Farghani" label="Farghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q445158" start="10201" end="10215" title="James Ferguson (American astronomer)" label="James Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758100" start="10244" end="10259" title="Alex Filippenko" label="Alex Filippenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q69275" start="10284" end="10307" title="Erwin Finlay-Freundlich" label="Erwin Finlay-Freundlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830262" start="10330" end="10342" title="Axel Firsoff" label="Axel Firsoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q456119" start="10372" end="10385" title="Debra Fischer" label="Debra Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156831" start="10403" end="10420" title="J. Richard Fisher" label="J. Richard Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q295524" start="10445" end="10463" title="Camille Flammarion" label="Camille Flammarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081452" start="10485" end="10514" title="Gabrielle Renaudot Flammarion" label="Gabrielle Renaudot Flammarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q242388" start="10536" end="10550" title="John Flamsteed" label="John Flamsteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q492736" start="10580" end="10598" title="Honoré Flaugergues" label="Honoré Flaugergues"/>
<link wikidata="Q284180" start="10620" end="10638" title="Williamina Fleming" label="Williamina Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q77029" start="10667" end="10690" title="Wilhelm Julius Foerster" label="Wilhelm Julius Foerster"/>
<link wikidata="Q520882" start="10713" end="10726" title="Alfred Fowler" label="Alfred Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="10756" end="10777" title="William Alfred Fowler" label="William Alfred Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183555" start="10806" end="10816" title="Philip Fox (astronomer)" label="Philip Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757000" start="10845" end="10859" title="Andrew Fraknoi" label="Andrew Fraknoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="10884" end="10905" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096312" start="10928" end="10944" title="Herbert Friedman" label="Herbert Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q52494" start="10973" end="10988" title="Dirk D. Frimout" label="Dirk D. Frimout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346264" start="11007" end="11024" title="Edwin Brant Frost" label="Edwin Brant Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278700" start="11053" end="11071" title="Shigehisa Fujikawa" label="Shigehisa Fujikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964732" start="11081" end="11097" title="Naoshi Fukushima" label="Naoshi Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q562833" start="11118" end="11135" title="Kiichirō Furukawa" label="Kiichirō Furukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q684701" start="11156" end="11172" title="Toshimasa Furuta" label="Toshimasa Furuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980108" start="11189" end="11203" title="Bryan Gaensler" label="Bryan Gaensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q403757" start="11224" end="11230" title="Gan De" label="Gan De"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="11260" end="11275" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132761" start="11296" end="11317" title="Julio Garavito Armero" label="Julio Garavito Armero"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="11319" end="11327" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384353" start="11341" end="11358" title="Gordon J. Garradd" label="Gordon J. Garradd"/>
<link wikidata="Q492476" start="11379" end="11392" title="Ben Gascoigne" label="Ben Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q266131" start="11430" end="11445" title="Margaret Geller" label="Margaret Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274047" start="11469" end="11483" title="Gautama Siddha" label="Gautama Siddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q76431" start="11513" end="11535" title="Johann Gottfried Galle" label="Johann Gottfried Galle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="11558" end="11570" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="11607" end="11627" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q312255" start="11650" end="11661" title="Tom Gehrels" label="Tom Gehrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548680" start="11703" end="11715" title="Neil Gehrels" label="Neil Gehrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q493956" start="11744" end="11758" title="Andrea M. Ghez" label="Andrea M. Ghez"/>
<link wikidata="Q186481" start="11783" end="11800" title="Riccardo Giacconi" label="Riccardo Giacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q945873" start="11821" end="11837" title="Michel Giacobini" label="Michel Giacobini"/>
<link wikidata="Q472708" start="11859" end="11874" title="Henry L. Giclas" label="Henry L. Giclas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319969" start="11903" end="11913" title="David Gill (astronomer)" label="David Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q94402340" start="11943" end="11955" title="Fred Gillett (astronomer)" label="Fred Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731257" start="11984" end="11999" title="Karl Glazebrook" label="Karl Glazebrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257451" start="12013" end="12022" title="Ian Glass" label="Ian Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12032" end="12044" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q93562" start="12054" end="12065" title="Thomas Gold" label="Thomas Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523788" start="12094" end="12106" title="Leo Goldberg" label="Leo Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351673" start="12135" end="12150" title="Peter Goldreich" label="Peter Goldreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77022" start="12175" end="12194" title="Hermann Goldschmidt" label="Hermann Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q953726" start="12217" end="12236" title="François Gonnessiat" label="François Gonnessiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q375172" start="12258" end="12272" title="John Goodricke" label="John Goodricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738751" start="12302" end="12319" title="Alyssa A. Goodman" label="Alyssa A. Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822093" start="12344" end="12366" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Gorgani" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Gorgani"/>
<link wikidata="Q61192" start="12390" end="12399" title="Paul Götz" label="Paul Götz"/>
<link wikidata="Q520915" start="12422" end="12444" title="Benjamin Apthorp Gould" label="Benjamin Apthorp Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q319998" start="12473" end="12486" title="Andrew Graham (astronomer)" label="Andrew Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098047" start="12509" end="12528" title="Kathryn Aurora Gray" label="Kathryn Aurora Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q224476" start="12546" end="12559" title="Charles Green (astronomer)" label="Charles Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345994" start="12582" end="12598" title="Jesse Greenstein" label="Jesse Greenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q362209" start="12627" end="12641" title="John Grunsfeld" label="John Grunsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192201" start="12666" end="12679" title="Jay U. Gunter" label="Jay U. Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718163" start="12708" end="12730" title="Alexander A. Gurshtein" label="Alexander A. Gurshtein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887802" start="12752" end="12768" title="Bengt Gustafsson (astronomer)" label="Bengt Gustafsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q733082" start="12786" end="12798" title="Guo Shoujing" label="Guo Shoujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="12819" end="12835" title="Alan Harvey Guth" label="Alan Harvey Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q969385" start="12867" end="12882" title="Yusuke Hagihara" label="Yusuke Hagihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q433945" start="12903" end="12912" title="Alan Hale (astronomer)" label="Alan Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="12937" end="12955" title="George Ellery Hale" label="George Ellery Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q106559" start="12984" end="12994" title="Asaph Hall" label="Asaph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="13023" end="13036" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q61019127" start="13059" end="13071" title="Erika Hamden" label="Erika Hamden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347768" start="13093" end="13105" title="Heidi Hammel" label="Heidi Hammel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764718" start="13130" end="13141" title="Mario Hamuy" label="Mario Hamuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="13143" end="13148" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q61749" start="13159" end="13179" title="Peter Andreas Hansen" label="Peter Andreas Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668243" start="13202" end="13217" title="Harawi, Abolfadl" label="Abulfazl Harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="13242" end="13261" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Karl Ludwig Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="13284" end="13297" title="Thomas Hariot" label="Thomas Hariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q710627" start="13327" end="13341" title="Guillermo Haro" label="Guillermo Haro"/>
<link wikidata="Q542761" start="13363" end="13387" title="Robert George Harrington" label="Robert George Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370033" start="13416" end="13440" title="Robert Sutton Harrington" label="Robert Sutton Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480253" start="13469" end="13491" title="Edward Robert Harrison" label="Edward Robert Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097274" start="13535" end="13559" title="William Kenneth Hartmann" label="William Kenneth Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558074" start="13584" end="13601" title="Lisa Harvey-Smith" label="Lisa Harvey-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496521" start="13622" end="13636" title="Takeo Hatanaka" label="Takeo Hatanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q111269472" start="13657" end="13669" title="Tim Hawarden" label="Tim Hawarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="13697" end="13712" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699902" start="13742" end="13750" title="Will Hay" label="Will Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q511395" start="13780" end="13796" title="Chushiro Hayashi" label="Chushiro Hayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62016" start="13817" end="13846" title="Otto Hermann Leopold Heckmann" label="Otto Hermann Leopold Heckmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040061" start="13869" end="13880" title="Carl E. Heiles" label="Carl Heiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q77460" start="13905" end="13921" title="Joseph Helffrich" label="Joseph Helffrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q58962" start="13944" end="13957" title="Eleanor Helin" label="Eleanor Helin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11893" start="13986" end="14001" title="Maximilian Hell" label="Maximilian Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="14003" end="14018" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q77055" start="14032" end="14050" title="Karl Ludwig Hencke" label="Karl Ludwig Hencke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334001" start="14073" end="14089" title="Thomas Henderson (astronomer)" label="Thomas Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q302840" start="14113" end="14123" title="Paul Henry and Prosper Henry" label="Paul Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q302840" start="14145" end="14158" title="Paul Henry and Prosper Henry" label="Prosper Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="14180" end="14197" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham bar Hiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q470827" start="14229" end="14249" title="George Howard Herbig" label="George Howard Herbig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040968" start="14278" end="14298" title="Carl W. Hergenrother" label="Carl W. Hergenrother"/>
<link wikidata="Q76948" start="14323" end="14340" title="Caroline Herschel" label="Caroline Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="14370" end="14383" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="14413" end="14429" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="14467" end="14484" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="14507" end="14524" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="14526" end="14532" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189990" start="14546" end="14559" title="Antony Hewish" label="Antony Hewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q370136" start="14589" end="14608" title="George William Hill" label="George William Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q310479" start="14637" end="14654" title="John Russell Hind" label="John Russell Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="14684" end="14694" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217125" start="14696" end="14702" title="İznik" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369992" start="14716" end="14733" title="Masanori Hirasawa" label="Masanori Hirasawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900" start="14743" end="14761" title="Kiyotsugu Hirayama" label="Kiyotsugu Hirayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497856" start="14782" end="14795" title="Shin Hirayama" label="Shin Hirayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356954" start="14816" end="14836" title="Gustave-Adolphe Hirn" label="Gustave-Adolphe Hirn"/>
<link wikidata="Q88445" start="14858" end="14879" title="Sebastian von Hoerner" label="Sebastian von Hoerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q77083" start="14903" end="14919" title="Cuno Hoffmeister" label="Cuno Hoffmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q451538" start="14942" end="14957" title="Dorrit Hoffleit" label="Dorrit Hoffleit"/>
<link wikidata="Q436020" start="14986" end="15003" title="Helen Sawyer Hogg" label="Helen Sawyer Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q544718" start="15025" end="15037" title="Minoru Honda" label="Minoru Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508752" start="15058" end="15071" title="Kamil Hornoch" label="Kamil Hornoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="15073" end="15087" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q354631" start="15097" end="15114" title="Jeremiah Horrocks" label="Jeremiah Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q336095" start="15140" end="15168" title="Cornelis Johannes van Houten" label="Cornelis Johannes van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q231642" start="15195" end="15223" title="Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld" label="Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309184" start="15250" end="15269" title="Martin van den Hove" label="Martin van den Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192569" start="15296" end="15315" title="Herbert Alonzo Howe" label="Herbert Alonzo Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="15334" end="15344" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176369" start="15374" end="15386" title="Su-Shu Huang" label="Su-Shu Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="15411" end="15430" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Powell Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="15459" end="15474" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q156286" start="15504" end="15522" title="Russell Alan Hulse" label="Russell Alan Hulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q437534" start="15547" end="15579" title="Hendrik C. van de Hulst" label="Hendrik Christoffel van de Hulst"/>
<link wikidata="Q60027" start="15606" end="15627" title="Milton Lasell Humason" label="Milton Lasell Humason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496488" start="15656" end="15674" title="Thomas John Hussey" label="Thomas John Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="15697" end="15715" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q542628" start="15742" end="15756" title="Yuji Hyakutake" label="Yuji Hyakutake"/>
<link wikidata="Q350468" start="15777" end="15794" title="J. Allen Hynek" label="Josef Allen Hynek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="15823" end="15830" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15832" end="15837" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q705048" start="15868" end="15888" title="Christopher Hansteen" label="Christopher Hansteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q521140" start="15917" end="15931" title="Icko Iben" label="Icko Iben, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q739441" start="15956" end="15967" title="Kaoru Ikeya" label="Kaoru Ikeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060704" start="15984" end="15995" title="Chris Impey" label="Chris Impey"/>
<link wikidata="Q363965" start="16035" end="16062" title="Robert Thorburn Ayton Innes" label="Robert Thorburn Ayton Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="16073" end="16085" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49422" start="16099" end="16112" title="Shigeru Inoda" label="Shigeru Inoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348657" start="16133" end="16151" title="Jamal Nazrul Islam" label="Jamal Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16153" end="16163" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343606" start="16177" end="16190" title="Edward Israel" label="Edward Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100305" start="16219" end="16234" title="Iwahashi Zenbei" label="Iwahashi Zenbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906798" start="16255" end="16271" title="Masayuki Iwamoto" label="Masayuki Iwamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q248104" start="16288" end="16305" title="Shun-ei Izumikawa" label="Shun-ei Izumikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q453750" start="16322" end="16338" title="Cyril V. Jackson" label="Cyril V. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="16340" end="16352" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q87835202" start="16366" end="16376" title="Karan Jani" label="Karan Jani"/>
<link wikidata="Q298581" start="16393" end="16419" title="Pierre Jules César Janssen" label="Pierre Jules César Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315545" start="16441" end="16452" title="James Jeans" label="James Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q722365" start="16482" end="16500" title="Benjamin Jekhowsky" label="Benjamin Jekhowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="16516" end="16523" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688747" start="16537" end="16560" title="Louise Freeland Jenkins" label="Louise Freeland Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q382992" start="16589" end="16604" title="David C. Jewitt" label="David C. Jewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341628" start="16630" end="16643" title="Jiao Bingzhen" label="Jiao Bingzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699175" start="16664" end="16679" title="John Johnson (astronomer)" label="John A. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337932" start="16704" end="16723" title="Alfred Harrison Joy" label="Alfred Harrison Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932729" start="16752" end="16763" title="Vinod Johri" label="Vinod Johri"/>
<link wikidata="Q423644" start="16791" end="16800" title="Ali Kuşçu" label="Ali Kuşçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="16802" end="16808" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q983497" start="16822" end="16835" title="Tetsuo Kagawa" label="Tetsuo Kagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64367" start="16852" end="16864" title="Franz Kaiser" label="Franz Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737990" start="16887" end="16901" title="Kiyotaka Kanai" label="Kiyotaka Kanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q507053" start="16918" end="16932" title="Hiroshi Kaneda" label="Hiroshi Kaneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724211" start="16949" end="16962" title="Henry Kandrup" label="Henry Kandrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q156892" start="16991" end="17006" title="Jacobus Kapteyn" label="Jacobus Kapteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q242809" start="17033" end="17052" title="Lyudmila Karachkina" label="Lyudmila Karachkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="17054" end="17061" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115466" start="17071" end="17087" title="Ghiyath al-Kashi" label="Ghiyath al-Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157335" start="17109" end="17126" title="Jeffrey Owen Katz" label="Jeffrey Owen Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372521" start="17151" end="17167" title="Karlis Kaufmanis" label="Karlis Kaufmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="17169" end="17175" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369493" start="17202" end="17216" title="Kōyō Kawanishi" label="Kōyō Kawanishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q971873" start="17233" end="17250" title="Nobuhiro Kawasato" label="Nobuhiro Kawasato"/>
<link wikidata="Q364403" start="17260" end="17279" title="James Edward Keeler" label="James Edward Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906057" start="17308" end="17318" title="Paul Kempf" label="Paul Kempf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="17341" end="17356" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="17379" end="17391" title="Omar Khayyám" label="Omar Khayyám"/>
<link wikidata="Q335123" start="17413" end="17424" title="Al-Khujandi" label="Al-Khujandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="17449" end="17479" title="Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī" label="Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q741999" start="17500" end="17507" title="Kidinnu" label="Kidinnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="17509" end="17516" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365567" start="17547" end="17561" title="Hisashi Kimura" label="Hisashi Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q77511" start="17582" end="17604" title="Maria Margarethe Kirch" label="Maria Margarethe Kirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q458736" start="17627" end="17642" title="Daniel Kirkwood" label="Daniel Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q961809" start="17671" end="17686" title="Robert Kirshner" label="Robert Kirshner"/>
<link wikidata="Q388908" start="17711" end="17724" title="Minoru Kizawa" label="Minoru Kizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q68175" start="17741" end="17776" title="Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm Klinkerfues" label="Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm Klinkerfues"/>
<link wikidata="Q62371" start="17799" end="17812" title="Viktor Knorre" label="Viktor Knorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q457312" start="17834" end="17849" title="Takao Kobayashi" label="Takao Kobayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547081" start="17866" end="17880" title="Toru Kobayashi" label="Toru Kobayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122" start="17890" end="17904" title="Luboš Kohoutek" label="Luboš Kohoutek"/>
<link wikidata="Q973533" start="17914" end="17933" title="Masahiro Koishikawa" label="Masahiro Koishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855752" start="17954" end="17969" title="Nobuhisa Kojima" label="Nobuhisa Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q957223" start="17986" end="17998" title="Takuo Kojima" label="Takuo Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054532" start="18015" end="18025" title="Yoji Kondo" label="Yoji Kondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168999" start="18046" end="18058" title="Zdeněk Kopal" label="Zdeněk Kopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57432" start="18119" end="18131" title="August Kopff" label="August Kopff"/>
<link wikidata="Q450340" start="18154" end="18169" title="Korado Korlević" label="Korado Korlević"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="18171" end="18178" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q519743" start="18188" end="18200" title="Hiroki Kosai" label="Hiroki Kosai"/>
<link wikidata="Q58963" start="18217" end="18233" title="Charles T. Kowal" label="Charles T. Kowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q591632" start="18262" end="18274" title="Robert Kraft (astronomer)" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q345025" start="18303" end="18315" title="Ľubor Kresák" label="Ľubor Kresák"/>
<link wikidata="Q66383" start="18345" end="18360" title="Heinrich Kreutz" label="Heinrich Kreutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981438" start="18383" end="18397" title="Kazuo Kubokawa" label="Kazuo Kubokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065300" start="18418" end="18430" title="Marc Kuchner" label="Marc Kuchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="18455" end="18468" title="Gerard Kuiper" label="Gerard Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294653" start="18510" end="18522" title="Donald Kurtz" label="Donald Kurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423811" start="18532" end="18545" title="Reiki Kushida" label="Reiki Kushida"/>
<link wikidata="Q976907" start="18555" end="18569" title="Yoshio Kushida" label="Yoshio Kushida"/>
<link wikidata="Q499240" start="18586" end="18598" title="György Kulin" label="György Kulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="18600" end="18615" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q404199" start="18636" end="18643" title="Lagadha" label="Lagadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="18673" end="18698" title="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille" label="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q470164" start="18720" end="18743" title="Claes-Ingvar Lagerkvist" label="Claes-Ingvar Lagerkvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="18761" end="18782" title="Joseph Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q168419" start="18804" end="18818" title="Jérôme Lalande" label="Jérôme Lalande"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="18840" end="18863" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235450" start="18894" end="18907" title="David J. Lane (astronomer)" label="David J. Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q456536" start="18925" end="18940" title="Andrew E. Lange" label="Andrew E. Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="18969" end="18992" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Samuel Pierpont Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="19021" end="19041" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q450572" start="19063" end="19077" title="Jacques Laskar" label="Jacques Laskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110869" start="19095" end="19110" title="William Lassell" label="William Lassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q278894" start="19140" end="19166" title="Joseph Jean Pierre Laurent" label="Joseph Jean Pierre Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="19187" end="19209" title="Henrietta Swan Leavitt" label="Henrietta Swan Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861243" start="19238" end="19249" title="Typhoon Lee" label="Typhoon Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="19269" end="19275" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q445076" start="19285" end="19304" title="Guillaume Le Gentil" label="Guillaume Le Gentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="19326" end="19342" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544764" start="19365" end="19381" title="Pierre Lemonnier (physicist)" label="Pierre Lemonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087103" start="19403" end="19423" title="Frederick C. Leonard" label="Frederick C. Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q688156" start="19453" end="19468" title="Armin Otto Leuschner" label="Armin Leuschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548804" start="19486" end="19499" title="Geraint F. Lewis" label="Geraint Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104154" start="19520" end="19537" title="Urbain Le Verrier" label="Urbain Le Verrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538755" start="19559" end="19565" title="Li Fan (Han Dynasty)" label="Li Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544534" start="19595" end="19605" title="James Lind (naturalist)" label="James Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q364505" start="19623" end="19638" title="Bertil Lindblad" label="Bertil Lindblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684341" start="19660" end="19686" title="Adolph Friedrich Lindemann" label="Adolph Friedrich Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19696" end="19698" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107251" start="19712" end="19725" title="Chris Lintott" label="Chris Lintott"/>
<link wikidata="Q302590" start="19751" end="19772" title="Joseph Johann Littrow" label="Joseph Johann Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q78929" start="19795" end="19810" title="Karl L. Littrow" label="Karl L. Littrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q453449" start="19833" end="19840" title="Liu Xin (scholar)" label="Liu Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959" start="19870" end="19884" title="Joseph Lockyer" label="Joseph Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821842" start="19914" end="19922" title="Avi Loeb" label="Avi Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="19924" end="19930" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q983371" start="19944" end="19957" title="Maurice Loewy" label="Maurice Loewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729315" start="19987" end="20019" title="Christian Sørensen Longomontanus" label="Christian Sørensen Longomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218575" start="20042" end="20057" title="Percival Lowell" label="Percival Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q251745" start="20086" end="20097" title="Ángel López (astronomer)" label="Ángel López"/>
<link wikidata="Q251034" start="20114" end="20133" title="Álvaro López-García" label="Álvaro López-García"/>
<link wikidata="Q568443" start="20154" end="20174" title="John William Lubbock" label="John William Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q949505" start="20204" end="20217" title="Knut Lundmark" label="Knut Lundmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q77050" start="20239" end="20252" title="Robert Luther" label="Robert Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108930" start="20275" end="20295" title="Lupitus of Barcelona" label="Lupitus of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q197941" start="20305" end="20313" title="Jane Luu" label="Jane Luu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="20315" end="20328" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q58961" start="20352" end="20365" title="Willem Luyten" label="Willem Luyten"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="20367" end="20384" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240090" start="20411" end="20429" title="Donald Lynden-Bell" label="Donald Lynden-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846604" start="20459" end="20470" title="Andrew Lyne" label="Andrew Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q433773" start="20484" end="20496" title="Bernard Lyot" label="Bernard Lyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733781" start="20525" end="20538" title="Mahendra Suri" label="Mahendra Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290443" start="20565" end="20572" title="Ma Yize" label="Ma Yize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013915" start="20592" end="20610" title="Adriaan van Maanen" label="Adriaan van Maanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335725" start="20639" end="20678" title="George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield" label="George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q61267" start="20704" end="20730" title="Johann Heinrich von Mädler" label="Johann Heinrich von Mädler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701478" start="20753" end="20764" title="Amy Mainzer" label="Amy Mainzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613250" start="20789" end="20801" title="Steve Mandel" label="Steve Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q736811" start="20819" end="20830" title="Geoff Marcy" label="Geoff Marcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76684" start="20855" end="20867" title="Simon Marius" label="Simon Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q430817" start="20890" end="20906" title="Brian G. Marsden" label="Brian G. Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57378" start="20935" end="20947" title="Albert Marth" label="Albert Marth"/>
<link wikidata="Q450757" start="20970" end="20985" title="Nevil Maskelyne" label="Nevil Maskelyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065484" start="21015" end="21028" title="Charles Mason" label="Charles Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q104651" start="21073" end="21087" title="John C. Mather" label="John C. Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153148" start="21112" end="21130" title="Janet Akyüz Mattei" label="Janet Akyüz Mattei"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="21132" end="21138" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177186" start="21166" end="21187" title="Edward Walter Maunder" label="Edward Walter Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q164374" start="21217" end="21240" title="Pierre Louis Maupertuis" label="Pierre Louis Maupertuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q254405" start="21262" end="21273" title="Alain Maury" label="Alain Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q289010" start="21291" end="21304" title="Antonia Maury" label="Antonia Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q114385" start="21333" end="21355" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="21384" end="21393" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171541" start="21419" end="21432" title="Cornell Mayer" label="Cornell Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="21461" end="21473" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123975" start="21496" end="21508" title="Michel Mayor" label="Michel Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112851" start="21531" end="21548" title="Christopher McKee" label="Christopher McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q602643" start="21573" end="21591" title="Robert S. McMillan (astronomer)" label="Robert S. McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385648" start="21609" end="21626" title="William H. McCrea" label="William H. McCrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091251" start="21656" end="21673" title="Bruce A. McIntosh" label="Bruce A. McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q710381" start="21695" end="21713" title="Robert H. McNaught" label="Robert H. McNaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q311022" start="21734" end="21748" title="Pierre Méchain" label="Pierre Méchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777608" start="21770" end="21782" title="Thebe Medupe" label="Thebe Medupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="21784" end="21796" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369738" start="21806" end="21822" title="Karen Jean Meech" label="Karen Jean Meech"/>
<link wikidata="Q355829" start="21847" end="21864" title="Aden Meinel" label="Aden Baker Meinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116786674" start="21893" end="21915" title="Marjorie Meinel" label="Marjorie Pettit Meinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508501" start="21944" end="21956" title="Fulvio Melia" label="Fulvio Melia"/>
<link wikidata="Q499222" start="21981" end="22006" title="Philibert Jacques Melotte" label="Philibert Jacques Melotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q710615" start="22036" end="22056" title="Paul Merrill" label="Paul Willard Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237524" start="22085" end="22098" title="David Merritt" label="David Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="22116" end="22131" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q360041" start="22153" end="22174" title="Joel Hastings Metcalf" label="Joel Hastings Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755430" start="22203" end="22235" title="Andreas Gerasimos Michalitsianos" label="Andreas Gerasimos Michalitsianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="22264" end="22276" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q558995" start="22306" end="22322" title="Elia Millosevich" label="Elia Millosevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q441192" start="22343" end="22362" title="Edward Arthur Milne" label="Edward Arthur Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q213664" start="22392" end="22409" title="Rudolph Minkowski" label="Rudolph Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q543383" start="22432" end="22460" title="Marcel Minnaert" label="Marcel Gilles Jozef Minnaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q239229" start="22496" end="22510" title="Maria Mitchell" label="Maria Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q339674" start="22539" end="22554" title="Seidai Miyasaka" label="Seidai Miyasaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q971812" start="22571" end="22587" title="Yoshikane Mizuno" label="Yoshikane Mizuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q57335" start="22604" end="22627" title="August Ferdinand Möbius" label="August Ferdinand Möbius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773121" start="22650" end="22664" title="Anthony Moffat" label="Anthony Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q68569" start="22675" end="22693" title="Johan Maurits Mohr" label="Johan Maurits Mohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q325984" start="22720" end="22735" title="Samuel Molyneux" label="Samuel Molyneux"/>
<link wikidata="Q311823" start="22765" end="22784" title="Geminiano Montanari" label="Geminiano Montanari"/>
<link wikidata="Q268024" start="22805" end="22818" title="Patrick Moore" label="Patrick Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755802" start="22848" end="22867" title="James Michael Moran" label="James Michael Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q543398" start="22892" end="22913" title="William Wilson Morgan" label="William Wilson Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q579740" start="22942" end="22954" title="Hiroshi Mori (astronomer)" label="Hiroshi Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636575" start="22971" end="22985" title="Amédée Mouchez" label="Amédée Mouchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q58960" start="23007" end="23020" title="Antonín Mrkos" label="Antonín Mrkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q453847" start="23050" end="23062" title="Jean Mueller" label="Jean Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357213" start="23087" end="23099" title="Masaru Mukai" label="Masaru Mukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120344" start="23116" end="23143" title="Christiaan Alexander Muller" label="Christiaan Alexander Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999140" start="23170" end="23183" title="Gustav Müller (astronomer)" label="Gustav Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="23206" end="23221" title="Regiomontanus" label="Johannes Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953494" start="23244" end="23261" title="Harutaro Murakami" label="Harutaro Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q539152" start="23282" end="23297" title="Osamu Muramatsu" label="Osamu Muramatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q423210" start="23314" end="23329" title="Ahmad bin Musa" label="bin Musa, Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q423210" start="23349" end="23364" title="Hasan bin Musa" label="bin Musa, Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423210" start="23384" end="23402" title="Muhammad bin Musa" label="bin Musa, Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202677" start="23423" end="23436" title="Nils Mustelin" label="Nils Mustelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548030" start="23466" end="23485" title="Nilakantha Somayaji" label="Nilakantha Somayaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910793" start="23506" end="23521" title="Valentin Naboth" label="Valentin Naboth"/>
<link wikidata="Q925672" start="23551" end="23562" title="Naburimannu" label="Naburimannu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="23564" end="23573" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678140" start="23628" end="23642" title="Takeshi Nagata" label="Takeshi Nagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115105" start="23663" end="23678" title="Ahmad Nahavandi" label="Ahmad Nahavandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q418427" start="23706" end="23722" title="Akimasa Nakamura" label="Akimasa Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564964" start="23739" end="23753" title="Syuichi Nakano" label="Syuichi Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q179201" start="23770" end="23785" title="Jayant Narlikar" label="Jayant Narlikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668442" start="23802" end="23810" title="Naubakht" label="Naubakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702360" start="23829" end="23849" title="Al-fadl ibn Naubakht" label="Al-fadl ibn Naubakht"/>
<link wikidata="Q111996" start="23873" end="23888" title="Otto Neugebauer" label="Otto Neugebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q445187" start="23926" end="23954" title="G. N. Neujmin" label="Grigoriy Nikolaevich Neujmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164401" start="23976" end="23989" title="Simon Newcomb" label="Simon Newcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="24018" end="24030" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q436047" start="24060" end="24081" title="Seth Barnes Nicholson" label="Seth Barnes Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096694" start="24110" end="24134" title="Albertus Antonie Nijland" label="Albertus Antonie Nijland"/>
<link wikidata="Q927346" start="24161" end="24175" title="Tsuneo Niijima" label="Tsuneo Niijima"/>
<link wikidata="Q563361" start="24192" end="24204" title="Peter Nilson" label="Peter Nilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027873" start="24226" end="24237" title="Hōei Nojiri" label="Hōei Nojiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384279" start="24258" end="24269" title="Jaime Nomen" label="Jaime Nomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369886" start="24286" end="24300" title="Toshiro Nomura" label="Toshiro Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423937" start="24324" end="24349" title="Knut Jørgen Røed Ødegaard" label="Knut Jørgen Røed Ødegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q586495" start="24367" end="24379" title="Okuro Oikawa" label="Okuro Oikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065464" start="24400" end="24409" title="Tarmo Oja" label="Tarmo Oja"/>
<link wikidata="Q390515" start="24431" end="24445" title="Tomimaru Okuni" label="Tomimaru Okuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q497524" start="24462" end="24477" title="Nicolaus Olahus" label="Nicolaus Olahus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="24479" end="24488" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="24502" end="24534" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q538399" start="24557" end="24576" title="Gerard K. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Gerard O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="24605" end="24621" title="Jan Hendrik Oort" label="Jan Hendrik Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447555" start="24648" end="24665" title="Pieter Oosterhoff" label="Pieter Oosterhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q318126" start="24692" end="24702" title="Ernst Öpik" label="Ernst Öpik"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="24704" end="24711" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q601340" start="24734" end="24756" title="José Luis Ortiz Moreno" label="José Luis Ortiz Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370332" start="24773" end="24788" title="Yoshiaki Oshima" label="Yoshiaki Oshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240217" start="24805" end="24829" title="Donald Edward Osterbrock" label="Donald Edward Osterbrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q232856" start="24858" end="24870" title="Liisi Oterma" label="Liisi Oterma"/>
<link wikidata="Q983813" start="24893" end="24905" title="Satoru Otomo" label="Satoru Otomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366605" start="24922" end="24952" title="Jean Abraham Chrétien Oudemans" label="Jean Abraham Chrétien Oudemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117467" start="24986" end="25000" title="Rafael Pacheco" label="Rafael Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q567782" start="25017" end="25033" title="Bohdan Paczyński" label="Bohdan Paczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q434592" start="25055" end="25074" title="Ľudmila Pajdušáková" label="Ľudmila Pajdušáková"/>
<link wikidata="Q78486" start="25104" end="25117" title="Johann Palisa" label="Johann Palisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q63581" start="25140" end="25156" title="Johann Palitzsch" label="Johann Palitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q347930" start="25179" end="25194" title="Anton Pannekoek" label="Anton Pannekoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q503360" start="25221" end="25234" title="Eugene Parker" label="Eugene Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q335725" start="25263" end="25302" title="George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield" label="George Parker, 2nd Earl of Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="25328" end="25355" title="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse" label="William Parsons, Lord Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q444413" start="25378" end="25389" title="André Patry" label="André Patry"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="25411" end="25435" title="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin" label="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768943" start="25480" end="25496" title="Ruby Payne-Scott" label="Ruby Payne-Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q263659" start="25521" end="25539" title="Jean-Claude Pecker" label="Jean-Claude Pecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="25561" end="25574" title="Jim Peebles" label="James Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18819392" start="25607" end="25637" title="Cuthbert Peek" label="Sir Cuthbert Peek, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993996" start="25655" end="25670" title="Manuel Peimbert" label="Manuel Peimbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366848" start="25688" end="25708" title="Leslie Peltier" label="Leslie Copus Peltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="25737" end="25750" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="25776" end="25788" title="Arno Penzias" label="Arno Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091473" start="25826" end="25837" title="Luboš Perek" label="Luboš Perek"/>
<link wikidata="Q106949" start="25867" end="25882" title="Saul Perlmutter" label="Saul Perlmutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q279202" start="25907" end="25929" title="Charles Dillon Perrine" label="Charles Dillon Perrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q374137" start="25969" end="25999" title="Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin" label="Henri Joseph Anastase Perrotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57960" start="26021" end="26056" title="Christian Heinrich Friedrich Peters" label="Christian Heinrich Friedrich Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q497540" start="26094" end="26113" title="George Henry Peters" label="George Henry Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768679" start="26142" end="26158" title="Mark M. Phillips" label="Mark M. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="26183" end="26198" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q156896" start="26219" end="26243" title="Edward Charles Pickering" label="Edward Charles Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q310222" start="26272" end="26295" title="William Henry Pickering" label="William Henry Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701388" start="26324" end="26334" title="Phil Plait" label="Phil Plait"/>
<link wikidata="Q373799" start="26359" end="26388" title="Giovanni Antonio Amedeo Plana" label="Giovanni Antonio Amedeo Plana"/>
<link wikidata="Q333534" start="26409" end="26424" title="Petrus Plancius" label="Petrus Plancius"/>
<link wikidata="Q739455" start="26451" end="26472" title="John Stanley Plaskett" label="John Stanley Plaskett"/>
<link wikidata="Q337194" start="26494" end="26514" title="Norman Robert Pogson" label="Norman Robert Pogson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494288" start="26544" end="26560" title="Christian Pollas" label="Christian Pollas"/>
<link wikidata="Q742464" start="26578" end="26587" title="John Pond" label="John Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q453723" start="26610" end="26625" title="Jean-Louis Pons" label="Jean-Louis Pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q257420" start="26647" end="26660" title="Carolyn Porco" label="Carolyn Porco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938832" start="26685" end="26702" title="Vladimír Porubčan" label="Vladimír Porubčan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626475" start="26728" end="26745" title="Charles Pritchard" label="Charles Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394761" start="26775" end="26790" title="Richard Proctor" label="Richard Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q668764" start="26813" end="26830" title="Milorad B. Protić" label="Milorad B. Protić"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="26832" end="26838" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51884056" start="26853" end="26870" title="Antoni Przybylski" label="Antoni Przybylski"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="26903" end="26910" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="26926" end="26937" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q984602" start="26946" end="26960" title="Pierre Puiseux" label="Pierre Puiseux"/>
<link wikidata="Q84289" start="26982" end="26995" title="Georg Purbach" label="Georg Purbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="27018" end="27028" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q437021" start="27063" end="27075" title="Paris Pişmiş" label="Paris Pişmiş"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012" start="27112" end="27128" title="Adolphe Quetelet" label="Adolphe Quetelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q423644" start="27151" end="27161" title="Ali Qushji" label="Ali Qushji"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="27163" end="27170" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713156" start="27184" end="27201" title="M. Shahid Qureshi" label="M. Shahid Qureshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q453758" start="27221" end="27245" title="David L. Rabinowitz" label="David Lincoln Rabinowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q380212" start="27270" end="27281" title="Grote Reber" label="Grote Reber"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="27310" end="27321" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356355" start="27347" end="27360" title="Hubert Reeves" label="Hubert Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="27378" end="27391" title="Regiomontanus" label="Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189867" start="27432" end="27447" title="Julius Reichelt" label="Julius Reichelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q544169" start="27470" end="27486" title="Erasmus Reinhold" label="Erasmus Reinhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="27488" end="27495" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77026" start="27518" end="27531" title="Karl Reinmuth" label="Karl Reinmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541050" start="27554" end="27579" title="Pieter Johannes van Rhijn" label="Pieter Johannes van Rhijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q196472" start="27606" end="27632" title="Giovanni Battista Riccioli" label="Giovanni Battista Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q26239535" start="27653" end="27670" title="Mercedes Richards" label="Mercedes Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q720451" start="27693" end="27704" title="Jean Richer" label="Jean Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783628" start="27726" end="27739" title="Edward Riddle" label="Edward Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106454" start="27762" end="27772" title="Adam Riess" label="Adam Riess"/>
<link wikidata="Q720698" start="27797" end="27811" title="Fernand Rigaux" label="Fernand Rigaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q559015" start="27834" end="27855" title="George Willis Ritchey" label="George Willis Ritchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q902703" start="27884" end="27901" title="David Rittenhouse" label="David Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q109227" start="27930" end="27945" title="Hans-Walter Rix" label="Hans-Walter Rix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052357" start="27964" end="27977" title="Arjen Roelofs" label="Arjen Roelofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335602" start="28004" end="28018" title="Nancy G. Roman" label="Nancy G. Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q240866" start="28047" end="28063" title="Elizabeth Roemer" label="Elizabeth Roemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61762155" start="28092" end="28109" title="Gustavo E. Romero" label="Gustavo E. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359222" start="28131" end="28148" title="Roger of Hereford" label="Roger of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q160187" start="28167" end="28188" title="Ole Rømer" label="Ole Christensen Rømer"/>
<link wikidata="Q66202" start="28211" end="28230" title="Otto A. Rosenberger" label="Otto A. Rosenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117697" start="28253" end="28268" title="Svein Rosseland" label="Svein Rosseland"/>
<link wikidata="Q993725" start="28290" end="28301" title="Bruno Rossi" label="Bruno Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371429" start="28322" end="28343" title="Marta Graciela Rovira" label="Marta Graciela Rovira"/>
<link wikidata="Q234888" start="28357" end="28367" title="Vera Rubin" label="Vera Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355964" start="28396" end="28421" title="Henry Chamberlain Russell" label="Henry Chamberlain Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="28446" end="28466" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190766" start="28495" end="28506" title="Martin Ryle" label="Martin Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q311223" start="28547" end="28560" title="Edward Sabine" label="Edward Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="28583" end="28593" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="28622" end="28635" title="Megh Nad Saha" label="Megh Nad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q78925" start="28656" end="28677" title="Edwin Ernest Salpeter" label="Edwin Ernest Salpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q358253" start="28726" end="28743" title="Allan Rex Sandage" label="Allan Rex Sandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050930" start="28772" end="28813" title="H. G. van de Sande Bakhuyzen" label="Hendricus Gerardus van de Sande Bakhuyzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795596" start="28840" end="28870" title="Wallace Leslie William Sargent" label="Wallace Leslie William Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768944" start="28915" end="28930" title="Anneila Sargent" label="Anneila Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q112591" start="28971" end="28981" title="Naoto Sato" label="Naoto Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q492696" start="28998" end="29018" title="Alexandre Schaumasse" label="Alexandre Schaumasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14281" start="29040" end="29061" title="Giovanni Schiaparelli" label="Giovanni Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q918310" start="29082" end="29099" title="Frank Schlesinger" label="Frank Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q520703" start="29128" end="29144" title="Bernhard Schmidt" label="Bernhard Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="29146" end="29153" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201452" start="29184" end="29200" title="Brian P. Schmidt" label="Brian P. Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q547240" start="29225" end="29240" title="Maarten Schmidt" label="Maarten Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349627" start="29263" end="29278" title="Robert Schommer" label="Robert Schommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77232" start="29307" end="29333" title="Johann Hieronymus Schröter" label="Johann Hieronymus Schröter"/>
<link wikidata="Q570817" start="29356" end="29370" title="Lipót Schulhof" label="Lipót Schulhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q63140" start="29393" end="29422" title="Heinrich Christian Schumacher" label="Heinrich Christian Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q63061" start="29445" end="29463" title="Hans-Emil Schuster" label="Hans-Emil Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q77209" start="29482" end="29505" title="Samuel Heinrich Schwabe" label="Samuel Heinrich Schwabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57145" start="29528" end="29546" title="Karl Schwarzschild" label="Karl Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q60891" start="29569" end="29589" title="Martin Schwarzschild" label="Martin Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q57492" start="29627" end="29660" title="Friedrich Karl Arnold Schwassmann" label="Friedrich Karl Arnold Schwassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607182" start="29683" end="29702" title="James Vernon Scotti" label="James Vernon Scotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q954601" start="29727" end="29750" title="Frederick Hanley Seares" label="Frederick Hanley Seares"/>
<link wikidata="Q205490" start="29779" end="29797" title="George Mary Searle" label="George Mary Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="29826" end="29839" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250588" start="29860" end="29869" title="Sadao Sei" label="Sadao Sei"/>
<link wikidata="Q97141" start="29879" end="29895" title="Waltraut Seitter" label="Waltraut Seitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q453649" start="29918" end="29930" title="Tsutomu Seki" label="Tsutomu Seki"/>
<link wikidata="Q453675" start="29947" end="29966" title="Carl Keenan Seyfert" label="Carl Keenan Seyfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q720719" start="29995" end="30019" title="Grigory Abramovich Shajn" label="Grigory Abramovich Shajn"/>
<link wikidata="Q290437" start="30041" end="30065" title="Pelageya Fedorovna Shajn" label="Pelageya Fedorovna Shajn"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="30087" end="30101" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328993" start="30130" end="30149" title="Richard Sheepshanks" label="Richard Sheepshanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="30179" end="30187" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218900" start="30208" end="30216" title="Shi Shen" label="Shi Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q786877" start="30246" end="30263" title="Shibukawa Shunkai" label="Shibukawa Shunkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q971825" start="30284" end="30301" title="Yoshisada Shimizu" label="Yoshisada Shimizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081945" start="30318" end="30331" title="Shinzo Shinjo" label="Shinzo Shinjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q729903" start="30352" end="30370" title="Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi" label="Qutb eddin Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93909" start="30392" end="30419" title="Iosif Samuilovich Shklovsky" label="Iosif Samuilovich Shklovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q759207" start="30441" end="30458" title="Vladimir Shkodrov" label="Vladimir Shkodrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="30460" end="30468" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q231618" start="30482" end="30514" title="Carolyn Jean Spellmann Shoemaker" label="Carolyn Jean Spellmann Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216874" start="30543" end="30565" title="Eugene Merle Shoemaker" label="Eugene Merle Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762284" start="30594" end="30606" title="Seth Shostak" label="Seth Shostak"/>
<link wikidata="Q21771370" start="30631" end="30645" title="Andrew Siemion" label="Andrew Siemion"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="30670" end="30686" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q266261" start="30713" end="30737" title="Charlotte Moore Sitterly" label="Charlotte Moore Sitterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q738588" start="30766" end="30780" title="Brian A. Skiff" label="Brian A. Skiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q542729" start="30798" end="30821" title="John Francis Skjellerup" label="John Francis Skjellerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="30834" end="30846" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="30860" end="30880" title="Vesto Melvin Slipher" label="Vesto Melvin Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949094" start="30909" end="30931" title="William Marshall Smart" label="William Marshall Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q235708" start="30961" end="30988" title="Tamara Mikhaylovna Smirnova (astronomer)" label="Tamara Mikhaylovna Smirnova"/>
<link wikidata="Q179572" start="31010" end="31022" title="George Smoot" label="George Smoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334102" start="31047" end="31066" title="William Henry Smyth" label="William Henry Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q244152" start="31096" end="31115" title="Willebrord Snellius" label="Willebrord Snellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q268702" start="31142" end="31165" title="Mary Fairfax Somerville" label="Mary Fairfax Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877932" start="31199" end="31210" title="James South" label="James South"/>
<link wikidata="Q520309" start="31244" end="31264" title="Harold Spencer Jones" label="Harold Spencer Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q431503" start="31294" end="31307" title="Lyman Spitzer" label="Lyman Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60902" start="31336" end="31368" title="Friederich Wilhelm Gustav Spörer" label="Friederich Wilhelm Gustav Spörer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284837" start="31391" end="31405" title="Rainer Spurzem" label="Rainer Spurzem"/>
<link wikidata="Q68228" start="31424" end="31435" title="Anton Staus" label="Anton Staus"/>
<link wikidata="Q739475" start="31458" end="31471" title="Joel Stebbins" label="Joel Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305995" start="31500" end="31511" title="Johan Stein" label="Johan Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q707106" start="31538" end="31563" title="Carl August Steinheil" label="Karl August von Steinheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q274349" start="31587" end="31602" title="Édouard Stephan" label="Édouard Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188891" start="31624" end="31639" title="Denise Stephens" label="Denise Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598009" start="31657" end="31681" title="Charles Bruce Stephenson" label="Charles Bruce Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q629207" start="31711" end="31729" title="David J. Stevenson" label="David J. Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706206" start="31752" end="31770" title="Edward James Stone" label="Edward James Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090896" start="31784" end="31801" title="F. J. M. Stratton" label="F. J. M. Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q434113" start="31831" end="31859" title="Bengt Georg Daniel Strömgren" label="Bengt Georg Daniel Strömgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q57164" start="31882" end="31918" title="Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve" label="Friedrich Georg Wilhelm (von) Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q61836" start="31949" end="31968" title="Karl Hermann Struve" label="Karl Hermann Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q64451" start="31999" end="32027" title="Gustav Wilhelm Ludwig Struve" label="Gustav Wilhelm Ludwig Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q367635" start="32049" end="32060" title="Otto Struve" label="Otto Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q58847" start="32097" end="32122" title="Otto Wilhelm von Struve" label="Otto Wilhelm (von) Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265657" start="32144" end="32151" title="Su Song" label="Su Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="32172" end="32193" title="Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi" label="Abd Al-Rahman Al Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q964138" start="32213" end="32226" title="Matsuo Sugano" label="Matsuo Sugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q757807" start="32243" end="32256" title="Atsushi Sugie" label="Atsushi Sugie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984794" start="32266" end="32283" title="Nicholas Suntzeff" label="Nicholas Suntzeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q836911" start="32308" end="32331" title="Rashid Alievich Sunyaev" label="Rashid Alievich Sunyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="32333" end="32343" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357916" start="32368" end="32381" title="Shohei Suzuki" label="Shohei Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q314284" start="32391" end="32405" title="Lewis A. Swift" label="Lewis A. Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q570093" start="32434" end="32445" title="Frédéric Sy" label="Frédéric Sy"/>
<link wikidata="Q929411" start="32463" end="32475" title="Akihiko Tago" label="Akihiko Tago"/>
<link wikidata="Q757808" start="32492" end="32509" title="Atsushi Takahashi" label="Atsushi Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338777" start="32526" end="32542" title="Kesao Takamizawa" label="Kesao Takamizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q445596" start="32559" end="32570" title="Jill Tarter" label="Jill Tarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192685" start="32595" end="32619" title="Joseph Hooton Taylor Jr." label="Joseph Hooton Taylor Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q433765" start="32644" end="32656" title="John Tebbutt" label="John Tebbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57297" start="32681" end="32711" title="Ernst Wilhelm Leberecht Tempel" label="Ernst Wilhelm Leberecht Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q250568" start="32734" end="32750" title="Thabit ibn Qurra" label="Thabit ibn Qurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32752" end="32756" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242983" start="32768" end="32791" title="Thorvald Nicolai Thiele" label="Thorvald Nicolai Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687704" start="32814" end="32827" title="Louis Thollon" label="Louis Thollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q960014" start="32849" end="32865" title="Norman G. Thomas" label="Norman G. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656041" start="32894" end="32904" title="John M. Thome" label="John Thome"/>
<link wikidata="Q323320" start="32944" end="32962" title="Kip Stephen Thorne" label="Kip Stephen Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q77051" start="32987" end="33004" title="Friedrich Tietjen" label="Friedrich Tietjen"/>
<link wikidata="Q451660" start="33027" end="33055" title="Beatrice Muriel Hill Tinsley" label="Beatrice Muriel Hill Tinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29002" start="33097" end="33121" title="François Félix Tisserand" label="François Félix Tisserand"/>
<link wikidata="Q375195" start="33143" end="33163" title="Johann Daniel Titius" label="Johann Daniel Titius"/>
<link wikidata="Q325903" start="33186" end="33198" title="Yasuo Tanaka (astronomer)" label="Yasuo Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q190232" start="33219" end="33233" title="Clyde Tombaugh" label="Clyde Tombaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q991541" start="33262" end="33277" title="Kōichirō Tomita" label="Kōichirō Tomita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369434" start="33298" end="33312" title="Richard Tousey" label="Richard Tousey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184566" start="33341" end="33355" title="Charles Townes" label="Charles Townes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527796" start="33384" end="33400" title="Virginia Trimble" label="Virginia Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q499195" start="33425" end="33438" title="Chad Trujillo" label="Chad Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123963" start="33463" end="33485" title="Robert Julius Trumpler" label="Robert Julius Trumpler"/>
<link wikidata="Q535965" start="33514" end="33528" title="R. Brent Tully" label="R. Brent Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q715996" start="33553" end="33572" title="Herbert Hall Turner" label="Herbert Hall Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="33595" end="33612" title="Nasir al-Din Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q376115" start="33634" end="33655" title="Horace Parnell Tuttle" label="Horace Parnell Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q310903" start="33684" end="33703" title="Neil deGrasse Tyson" label="Neil deGrasse Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q737057" start="33735" end="33745" title="Seiji Ueda" label="Seiji Ueda"/>
<link wikidata="Q486088" start="33762" end="33771" title="Ulugh Beg" label="Ulugh Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="33773" end="33783" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q470306" start="33797" end="33813" title="Antonio de Ulloa" label="Antonio de Ulloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23939803" start="33835" end="33857" title="Anne Barbara Underhill" label="Anne Barbara Underhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q62722" start="33879" end="33894" title="Albrecht Unsöld" label="Albrecht Unsöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q450347" start="33917" end="33930" title="Takeshi Urata" label="Takeshi Urata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060358" start="33951" end="33975" title="Mo&amp;#x27;ayyeduddin Urdi" label="Mu’ayyad al-Din al-’Urdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q968647" start="33994" end="34005" title="Fumiaki Uto" label="Fumiaki Uto"/>
<link wikidata="Q320056" start="34022" end="34034" title="Yrjö Väisälä" label="Yrjö Väisälä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351828" start="34057" end="34070" title="Benjamin Valz" label="Benjamin Valz"/>
<link wikidata="Q271963" start="34092" end="34107" title="James Van Allen" label="James Van Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470782" start="34136" end="34157" title="George Van Biesbroeck" label="George Van Biesbroeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q437534" start="34195" end="34227" title="Hendrik C. van de Hulst" label="Hendrik Christoffel van de Hulst"/>
<link wikidata="Q430037" start="34254" end="34271" title="Peter van de Kamp" label="Peter van de Kamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354016" start="34300" end="34320" title="Sidney van den Bergh" label="Sidney van den Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309184" start="34338" end="34357" title="Martin van den Hove" label="Martin van den Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050930" start="34384" end="34425" title="H. G. van de Sande Bakhuyzen" label="Hendricus Gerardus van de Sande Bakhuyzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460040" start="34452" end="34468" title="Hendrik van Gent" label="Hendrik van Gent"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="34483" end="34495" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336095" start="34509" end="34537" title="Cornelis Johannes van Houten" label="Cornelis Johannes van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541050" start="34564" end="34589" title="Pieter Johannes van Rhijn" label="Pieter Johannes van Rhijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q981340" start="34616" end="34637" title="Gérard de Vaucouleurs" label="Gérard de Vaucouleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169131" start="34674" end="34688" title="Zdeňka Vávrová" label="Zdeňka Vávrová"/>
<link wikidata="Q26873921" start="34714" end="34732" title="Jean-Pierre Verdet" label="Jean-Pierre Verdet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184905" start="34750" end="34764" title="Philippe Véron" label="Philippe Véron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490246" start="34786" end="34807" title="Frank Washington Very" label="Frank Washington Very"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036587" start="34836" end="34851" title="Yvon Villarceau" label="Yvon Villarceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q445414" start="34873" end="34892" title="Julie Vinter Hansen" label="Julie Vinter Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58812" start="34916" end="34934" title="Hermann Carl Vogel" label="Hermann Carl Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57164" start="34957" end="34991" title="Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve" label="Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q58847" start="35022" end="35045" title="Otto Wilhelm von Struve" label="Otto Wilhelm von Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351528" start="35067" end="35089" title="Alexander N. Vyssotsky" label="Alexander N. Vyssotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302959" start="35125" end="35139" title="Emma Vyssotsky" label="Emma Vyssotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q62314" start="35176" end="35196" title="Arno Arthur Wachmann" label="Arno Arthur Wachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q298439" start="35219" end="35228" title="Abū al-Wafā&amp;#x27; al-Būzjānī" label="Abul Wáfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710165" start="35252" end="35270" title="Walcher of Malvern" label="Walcher of Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508502" start="35290" end="35308" title="George Wallerstein" label="George Wallerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q432189" start="35322" end="35335" title="William Wales (astronomer)" label="William Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023210" start="35361" end="35373" title="Dennis Walsh" label="Dennis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267817" start="35403" end="35414" title="Qingde Wang" label="Qingde Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q60834357" start="35438" end="35463" title="Brian Warner (astronomer)" label="Brian Warner (astronomer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644446" start="35489" end="35504" title="Brian D. Warner" label="Brian D. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q561077" start="35529" end="35544" title="Kazuro Watanabe" label="Kazuro Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311220" start="35561" end="35579" title="James Craig Watson" label="James Craig Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994818" start="35608" end="35621" title="Edmund Weaver (astronomer)" label="Edmund Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409553" start="35651" end="35661" title="Kim Weaver" label="Kim Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q323549" start="35686" end="35705" title="Thomas William Webb" label="Thomas William Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22915122" start="35735" end="35749" title="Rachel Webster" label="Rachel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q76323" start="35770" end="35791" title="Alfred Lothar Wegener" label="Alfred Lothar Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524576" start="35814" end="35828" title="Gary A. Wegner" label="Gary A. Wegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045040" start="35853" end="35859" title="Wei Pu" label="Wei Pu"/>
<link wikidata="Q65350" start="35879" end="35898" title="Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker" label="Karl von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q735426" start="35921" end="35938" title="Godefroy Wendelin" label="Godefroy Wendelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375147" start="35961" end="35976" title="Richard M. West" label="Richard M. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450047" start="35995" end="36010" title="Gart Westerhout" label="Gart Westerhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q517894" start="36052" end="36068" title="Bengt Westerlund" label="Bengt Westerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q76378" start="36090" end="36104" title="J. G. Westphal" label="J. G. Westphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q87518" start="36127" end="36151" title="Johann Heinrich Westphal" label="Johann Heinrich Westphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917190" start="36181" end="36197" title="George Wetherill" label="George Wetherill"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="36211" end="36233" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q319225" start="36262" end="36283" title="Fred Lawrence Whipple" label="Fred Lawrence Whipple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703286" start="36312" end="36327" title="Albert Whitford (astronomer)" label="Albert Whitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q537158" start="36356" end="36375" title="Mary Watson Whitney" label="Mary Watson Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q765741" start="36404" end="36426" title="Chandra Wickramasinghe" label="Chandra Wickramasinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123536" start="36452" end="36461" title="Paul Wild (Swiss astronomer)" label="Paul Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383897" start="36488" end="36502" title="Olin C. Wilson" label="Olin C. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q64578685" start="36531" end="36543" title="Ida E. Woods" label="Ida E. Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q171034" start="36572" end="36585" title="Robert Woodrow Wilson" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359406" start="36610" end="36626" title="Rogier Windhorst" label="Rogier Windhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932111" start="36651" end="36663" title="Vincent Wing" label="Vincent Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767624" start="36681" end="36693" title="Anna Winlock" label="Anna Winlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24668587" start="36722" end="36751" title="Henry &amp;quot;Trae&amp;quot; Winter" label="Henry &amp;quot;Trae&amp;quot; Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182777" start="36775" end="36788" title="John Winthrop (educator)" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="36790" end="36814" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q60861" start="36828" end="36861" title="Friedrich August Theodor Winnecke" label="Friedrich August Theodor Winnecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q543485" start="36884" end="36897" title="Carl Wirtanen" label="Carl Wirtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677248" start="36926" end="36937" title="Jack Wisdom" label="Jack Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62178" start="36962" end="36973" title="Gustav Witt" label="Gustav Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76712" start="36996" end="37011" title="Maximilian Wolf" label="Maximilian Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q311958" start="37034" end="37054" title="Aleksander Wolszczan" label="Aleksander Wolszczan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64534233" start="37072" end="37092" title="Edith Jones Woodward" label="Edith Jones Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397435" start="37123" end="37151" title="Richard van der Riet Woolley" label="Richard van der Riet Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q64214311" start="37181" end="37205" title="Frances Woodworth Wright" label="Frances Woodworth Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q460791" start="37234" end="37247" title="Thomas Wright (astronomer)" label="Thomas Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q35859341" start="37277" end="37291" title="Gillian Wright (Astronomer)" label="Gillian Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q116757108" start="37310" end="37331" title="Arthur Bambridge Wyse" label="Arthur Bambridge Wyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376098" start="37367" end="37381" title="Issei Yamamoto" label="Issei Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q301809" start="37402" end="37416" title="Masayuki Yanai" label="Masayuki Yanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q710705" start="37433" end="37440" title="Yi Xing" label="Yi Xing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21591166" start="37459" end="37476" title="Anne Sewell Young" label="Anne Sewell Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q728434" start="37505" end="37527" title="Charles Augustus Young" label="Charles Augustus Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806762" start="37556" end="37575" title="James Whitney Young" label="James Whitney Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q25249301" start="37600" end="37612" title="Judith Young (astronomer)" label="Judith Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q60662" start="37648" end="37668" title="Franz Xaver von Zach" label="Franz Xaver von Zach"/>
<link wikidata="Q330740" start="37691" end="37705" title="Abraham Zacuto" label="Abraham Zacuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="37713" end="37721" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265300" start="37735" end="37748" title="John Zarnecki" label="John Zarnecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q366471" start="37762" end="37794" title="Yakov Borisovich Zel&amp;#x27;dovich" label="Yakov Borisovich Zel&amp;#x27;dovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="37796" end="37800" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q197173" start="37814" end="37826" title="Zhang Daqing" label="Zhang Daqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="37843" end="37853" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q716977" start="37871" end="37882" title="Zhang Yuzhe" label="Zhang Yuzhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58709" start="37903" end="37938" title="Lyudmila Vasil&amp;#x27;evna Zhuravleva" label="Lyudmila Vasil&amp;#x27;evna Zhuravleva"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="37947" end="37954" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376307" start="37964" end="37976" title="Felix Ziegel" label="Felix Ziegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="37978" end="37990" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q227444" start="38004" end="38015" title="Zu Chongzhi" label="Zu Chongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115462" start="38034" end="38046" title="Fritz Zwicky" label="Fritz Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="38268" end="38278" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="38305" end="38315" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q496645" start="38342" end="38359" title="Andreas Cellarius" label="Andreas Cellarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="38396" end="38408" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="38411" end="38424" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="38451" end="38466" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="38493" end="38510" title="Karl Guthe Jansky" label="Karl Guthe Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="38540" end="38556" title="Radio astronomy" label="radio astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="38559" end="38578" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="38621" end="38633" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q28189" start="38676" end="38687" title="Abdus Salam" label="Abdus Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322195" start="38714" end="38723" title="Riazuddin (physicist)" label="Riazuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606308" start="38764" end="38802" title="List of astronomical instrument makers" label="List of astronomical instrument makers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243688" start="38804" end="38829" title="List of women astronomers" label="List of women astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793459" start="38831" end="38878" title="List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists" label="List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80157" wikidata="Q1264647" url="?curid=80157" title="List of geologists">
<text>A geologist is a contributor to the science of geology. Geologists are also known as earth scientists or geoscientists.

The following is a list of notable geologists. Many have received such awards as the Penrose Medal or the Wollaston Medal, or have been inducted into the National Academy of Sciences or the Royal Society.

Geoscience specialties represented include geochemistry, geophysics, structural geology, tectonics, geomorphology, glaciology, hydrology, hydrogeology, oceanography, mineralogy, petrology, crystallography, paleontology, paleobotany, paleoclimatology, palynology, petroleum geology, planetary geology, sedimentology, soil science, stratigraphy, and volcanology. In this list, the person listed is a geologist unless another specialty is noted. Only geologists with biographical articles in Wikipedia are listed here.

==A==

* Vladimir Abazarov (1930–2003), Soviet geologist, discoverer of Samotlor oil field
* Aziz Ab&#x27;Saber (1924–2012), Brazilian geomorphologist, member Brazilian Academy of Sciences
* Otto Wilhelm Hermann von Abich (1806–1886), German mineralogist
* Louis Agassiz (1807–1873), Swiss-American geologist, work on ice ages, glaciers, Lake Agassiz
* Georgius Agricola (Georg Bauer) (1494–1555), German naturalist and &#x27;Father of Mineralogy&#x27;, author of De re metallica
* Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522–1605), Italian, Renaissance naturalist
* Claude Allègre (born 1937), French geochemist, member of the French Academy of Sciences
* Fernando Flávio Marques de Almeida (1916–2013), Brazilian geologist, member Brazilian Academy of Sciences
* Walter Alvarez (born 1940), American, co-author of the impact theory for the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event
* J. Willis Ambrose (1911–1974), first President of Geological Association of Canada
* Ernest Masson Anderson (1877–1960), Scottish structural geologist, influential in theory of faulting
* Roy Chapman Andrews (1884–1960), American explorer and naturalist; Mongolian dinosaurs
* Mary Anning (1799–1847), English pioneer fossil collector
* Adolphe d&#x27;Archiac (1802–1868), French paleontologist, member French Academy of Sciences
* Giovanni Arduino (1714–1795), Italian, first classification of geological time
* Richard Lee Armstrong (1937–1991), American/Canadian geochemist, won Logan Medal
* Rosemary Askin (born 1949), first New Zealand woman to undertake her own research program in Antarctica in 1970.
* Tanya Atwater (born 1942), California, American geophysicist, marine geologist, plate tectonics specialist

==B==

* Ralph Bagnold (1896–1990), British, studied deserts and the physics of sand
* Andrew Geddes Bain (1797–1864), South African, prepared first detailed geological map of South Africa
* Bashiru Ademola Raji, Nigerian geologist and pedogenesist
* Robert T. Bakker (born 1945), American dinosaur paleontologist; author, &quot;The Dinosaur Heresies&quot;
* Octávio Barbosa (1907–1997), Brazilian field geologist and prospector; Gold Medal, Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia
* Thomas Barger (1909–1986), American, pioneered oil exploration in Saudi Arabia, later CEO of Aramco
* Anthony R. Barringer (1925–2009), Canadian/American geophysicist and inventor
* Charles Barrois (1851–1939), French geologist and paleontologist
* Florence Bascom (1862–1945), American, first woman geologist at the US Geological Survey
*Éliane Basse (1899–1985), French geologist and research director at the National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS)
* Abhijit Basu, Indian born American geologist
* Robert Bell (1841–1917), considered Canada&#x27;s greatest explorer-scientist
* Walter A. Bell (1889–1969), Canadian paleobotanist and stratigrapher
* Helen Belyea (1913–1986), Canadian geologist best known for her research of the Devonian System.
* Reinout Willem van Bemmelen (1904–1983), Dutch, structural geology, economic geology and volcanology
* Etheldred Benett (1776–1845), English, pioneer paleontologist
* Pierre Berthier (1782–1861), French geologist, discovered the properties of bauxite
* Luca Bindi (born 1971), Italian geologist, discovered the first natural quasicrystal icosahedrite
* Eliot Blackwelder (1880–1969), American field geologist, president of the Geological Society of America
* George Stanfield Blake (1876–1940), British geologist
* William Blake (1774–1852), President of the Geological Society of London 1815–1816
* William Phipps Blake (1826–1910), American geologist
* Selwyn G. Blaylock (1879–1945), Canadian chemist and mining executive with Cominco
* Stewart Blusson (born 1939), Canadian, co-discoverer of Ekati Diamond Mine
* Alexei Alexeivich Bogdanov (1907–1971), Soviet geologist
* Bruce Bolt (1930–2005), American (born Australia), pioneer engineering seismologist in California
* José Bonaparte (1928–2020), Argentinian paleontologist, discovered many South American dinosaurs
* William Borlase (1696–1772), Cornish natural historian, studied the minerals of Cornwall
* Norman L. Bowen (1887–1956), Canadian, pioneer experimental petrologist
* Scipione Breislak (1748–1826), Italian mineralogist and geologist, pioneer of volcanic gas collection
* J Harlen Bretz (1882–1981), American, discovered origin of channeled scablands
* David Brewster (1781–1868), Scottish physicist, studied the optical properties of minerals.
* Wallace S. Broecker (1931–2019), American paleoclimatologist and chemical oceanographer
* Robert Broom (1866–1951), South African palaeontologist, discovered australopithecine hominid fossils
* Barnum Brown (1873–1963), American, dinosaur hunter and self-taught paleontologist
* Christian Leopold von Buch (1774–1853), German geologist and paleontologist
* Mary Buckland (1797–1857), English, paleontologist, marine biologist and scientific illustrator
* William Buckland (1784–1856), English, wrote the first full account of a fossil dinosaur
* Judith Bunbury (born 1967), British, geoarchaeologist
* B. Clark Burchfiel (1934-2024), MIT structural geologist, studied the Tibetan Plateau; member of National Academy of Sciences
* Perry Byerly (1897–1978), American geophysicist and seismologist

==C==

* Louis J. Cabri (born 1934), Canadian, geologist and mineralogist, Fellow, Royal Society of Canada
* Stephen E. Calvert (born 1935), Canadian professor, geologist, oceanographer; awarded Logan Medal
* Colin Campbell (born 1931), British petroleum geologist and Peak Oil theorist
* Neil Campbell (1914–1978), Canadian, Northwest Territories mineral exploration; Fellow, Royal Society of Canada
* Samuel Warren Carey (1911–2002), Australian, continental drift proponent and later developed Expanding Earth hypothesis
* Petr Černý (1934–2018), Czech/Canadian mineralogist, won Logan Medal; Fellow, Royal Society of Canada
* Alexandre-Emile Béguyer de Chancourtois (1820–1886), French, geologist and mineralogist
* George V. Chilingar, American, distinguished international petroleum geologist
* Václav Cílek (born 1955), Czech geologist and science popularizer
* John J. Clague (born 1946), Canadian, Quaternary and geological hazards expert
* Thomas H. Clark (1893–1996), Canadian, co-author of &quot;The Geological Evolution of North America&quot; (1960)
* William Branwhite Clarke (1798–1878), Australian (born England), discovered gold in New South Wales, 1841
* Peter Clift (born 1966), British marine geologist and monsoon researcher, best known for work in Asia
* Hans Cloos (1885–1951), prominent German structural geologist
* Lorence G. Collins, (born 1931), American, petrologist, discoveries on metasomatism
* Simon Conway Morris (born 1951), palaeontologist and writer, best known for study of Burgess Shale fossils
* William Conybeare (1787–1857), English, author of &quot;Outlines of the Geology of England and Wales&quot; (1822)
* Isabel Clifton Cookson (1893–1973), Australian paleobotanist and palynologist, namesake of genus &quot;Cooksonia&quot;
* Edward Drinker Cope (1840–1897), American, pioneer dinosaur paleontologist; Bone Wars competitor
* Charles Cotton (1885–1970), New Zealand, geologist and geomorphologist
* James Croll (1821–1890), Scottish scientist who developed the theory of climate change based on changes in the Earth&#x27;s orbit
* Georges Cuvier (1769–1832), French, proponent of catastrophism
* Lindsay Collins (1944–2015), Perth, West Australia

==D==


* G. Brent Dalrymple (born 1937), United States, author &quot;The Age of the Earth&quot; (1991), winner National Science Medal, 2005
* James Dwight Dana (1813–1895), American, author of &quot;System of Mineralogy&quot; (1837)
* Charles Darwin (1809–1882), British naturalist, author of &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, atoll formation
* George Mercer Dawson (1849–1901), Canadian, pioneer Yukon geologist, Fellow of the Royal Society
* John William Dawson (1820–1899), Canadian, pioneer Acadian geologist, Fellow of the Royal Society
* Henry De la Beche (1796–1855), English, first director of the Geological Survey of Great Britain
* Duncan R. Derry (1906–1987), Canadian economic geologist, awarded Logan Medal
* Nicolas Desmarest (1725–1815), French, pioneer volcanologist
* Thomas Dibblee (1911–2004), American, geological mapper and pioneer of San Andreas Fault movement study
* William R. Dickinson (1930–2015), Arizona, American, plate tectonics, Colorado Plateau; Member of National Academy of Sciences
* Robert S. Dietz (1914–1995), American, seafloor spreading pioneer, awarded Penrose Medal
* Déodat de Dolomieu (1750–1801), French geologist
*Ljudmila Dolar Mantuani (1906–1988), Slovenian petrologist, first female professor of petrography in Yugoslavia 
* Louis de Loczy (1897–1980), Hungarian-Brazilian geologist
* Ignacy Domeyko (1802–1889), Slavic-Chilean geologist and mineralogist, namesake of the mineral domeykite
* Robert John Wilson Douglas (1920–1979), Canadian petroleum geologist, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada
* Aleksis Dreimanis (1914–2011), Latvian-Canadian award-winning Quaternary geologist, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada
* Hugo Dummett (1940–2002), South African mineral-exploration geologist, co-discoverer of Ekati Diamond Mine
* Alexander du Toit (1878–1948), South African geologist, established correlations between Argentina, Paraguay, Brazil and South Africa
* Clarence Edward Dutton (1841–1912), American, author of &quot;Tertiary History of the Grand Canyon District&quot;

==E==
* Heinz Ebert (1907–1983), German-Brazilian, geologist, petrologist; awarded gold medal, Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia
* Fanny Carter Edson (1887–1952), American petroleum geologist
* Niles Eldredge (born 1943), American, paleontologist; theory of punctuated equilibrium
* Jean-Baptiste Élie de Beaumont (1798–1874), French, prepared first geological map of France
* Kay-Chrisitan Emeis, German geologist and academic
* W. G. Ernst (born 1931), American, Stanford petrologist and geochemist, member of National Academy of Sciences
* Pentti Eskola (1883–1964), Finnish geologist and professor who created the concept of metamorphic facies
* Robert Etheridge, Junior (1847–1920), Australian (born England) paleontologist, longtime curator of the Australian Museum
* Raul-Yuri Ervier (1909–1991), Soviet geologist, an eminent organizer and head of wide-ranging geological explorations that discovered of the largest oil and gas fields in Western Siberia
* Maurice Ewing (1906–1974), American, pioneering geophysicist and oceanographer

==F==

* Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond (1741–1819), French, pioneer volcanologist
* Mikhail A. Fedonkin (born 1946), Russian paleontologist, awarded Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal
* Walter Frederick Ferrier (1865–1950), Canadian, mineral collector, namesake of the mineral Ferrierite
* Judy Fierstein, American, volcanology and petrology researcher of the U.S. Geological Survey
* Frederick C. Finkle (1865–1949), American consulting engineer and geologist; Chief Engineer on 18 major dam projects
* Michael Fleischer (1908–1998), American chemist and mineralogist
* Charles E. Fipke (born 1946), Canadian, co-discoverer of Ekati Diamond Mine
* Richard Fortey (born 1946), English, trilobite paleontologist, author, Fellow of the Royal Society
* Yves O. Fortier (1914–2014), Canadian, High Arctic explorer, won Logan Medal
* Gillian Foulger (born 1952), British, professor of geophysics at Durham University; awarded Price Medal
* William Fyfe (1927–2013), Canadian geochemist, won Wollaston Medal

==G==

* Patrick Ganly (1809–1899), Irish surveyor and geologist, described the use of cross-bedding in stratification
* Robert Garrels (1916–1988), American geochemist, revolutionized aqueous geochemistry
* Archibald Geikie (1835–1924), Scottish, geologist, President of the Royal Society
* Mark S. Ghiorso (born 1954), American geochemist, thermodynamic modeling of magma
* Grove Karl Gilbert (1843–1918), American, influential Western geologist, won Wollaston Medal
* James E. Gill (1901–1980), Canadian, McGill University professor, explorer, Logan Medal winner
* Victor Goldschmidt (1888–1947), Norwegian (born Switzerland), a founder of modern geochemistry
* Stephen Jay Gould (1941–2002), American paleontologist and writer
* L. C. Graton (1880–1970), American, Harvard economic geologist, awarded Penrose Gold Medal
* Alexander Henry Green (1832–1896), English, surveyed Derbyshire and Yorkshire, Fellow of the Royal Society
* George Bellas Greenough (1778–1855), English, gentlemanly geologist, founding member and first President of the Geological Society
* John Walter Gregory (1864–1932), English, geology of Australia and East Africa, glacial geology, President of the Geological Society of London (1928–1930) 
* Robbie Gries (born 1943), American, first female president (2001–02) of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists (AAPG)
* Djalma Guimarães (1894–1973), Brazilian geochemist and mineralogist in Minas Gerais
* Henry C. Gunning (1901–1991), Canadian (born Northern Ireland), British Columbia geologist, Logan Medal winner

==H==


* Julius von Haast (1824–1887), New Zealand (born Germany), founded Canterbury Museum
* Sir James Hall, 4th Baronet (1761–1832), Scottish geologist, president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh
* James Hall (1811–1898), American geologist and paleontologist
* William Hamilton (1731–1803), Scottish, volcanologist, Copley Medal
* Alfred Harker (1859–1939), English, igneous petrologist and petrographer
* W. Brian Harland (1917–2003), English, polar geologist
* Geoffrey Hattersley-Smith (1923–2012), English and Canadian, polar geologist
* Donald E. Hattin (1928–2016), American geologist and paleontologist
* Thomas Hawkins (1810–1889), English fossil collector
* James Edwin Hawley (1897–1965), Canadian, studied mineralogy of ore deposits
* Erasmus Haworth (1855–1932), founder of the Kansas Geological Survey and the first state geologist of Kansas
* Frank Hawthorne (born 1946), Canadian mineralogist and crystallographer
* Richard L. Hay (1929–2006), American geologist
* Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden (1829–1887), American, pioneer Western geologist
* Robert Hazen (born 1948), American, mineralogist and astrobiologist
* Hollis Dow Hedberg (1903–1988), American geologist
* Bruce Heezen (1924–1977), American geologist who first mapped the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
* Sue Hendrickson (born 1949), American paleontologist; discoverer of &quot;Sue&quot;, the largest &quot;Tyrannosaurus rex&quot; ever found
* Harry Hammond Hess (1906–1969), American geologist and oceanographer
* Henry Hicks (1837–1899), FRS, President of the Geological Society
* Pattillo Higgins (1863–1955), American, known as the &quot;Prophet of Spindletop&quot;
* Wes Hildreth (born 1938), American, volcanologist and petrologist
* Eugene W. Hilgard (1833–1916), American (born Germany), soil scientist
* Robert T. Hill (1858–1941), American geologist, Cretaceous deposits of Central Texas
* Claude Hillaire-Marcel (born 1944), Canadian (born France), Quaternary geologist
* Ferdinand von Hochstetter (1829–1884), German-Austrian, produced first regional New Zealand geological maps and surveys. 
* Paul F. Hoffman (born 1941), American and Canadian, Snowball Earth theorist
* Arthur Holmes (1890–1965), English, author of &quot;Principles of Physical Geology&quot;
* Marjorie Hooker (1908–1976), American, acted as a mineral specialist for the United States Department of State from 1943 to 1947
* Jack Horner (born 1946), American dinosaur paleontologist
* Kenneth J. Hsu (born 1929), American (born China), author of &quot;The Mediterranean was a Desert&quot;
* M. King Hubbert (1903–1989), American, originator of &quot;Peak Oil&quot; theory
* James Hutton (1726–1797), Scottish geologist, &quot;father of modern geology&quot;

==I==

* Edward A. Irving (1927–2014), Canadian, used paleomagnetism to support continental drift theory

==J==

* Thomas Jaggar (1871–1953), American, volcanologist and founder of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
* James A. Jensen (1911–1998), American, distinguished dinosaur paleontologist and sculptor
* Dougal Jerram (born 1969), British geologist/earth scientist, television and media presenter and author
* David A. Johnston (1949–1980), American, volcanologist, killed in the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens
* Franc Joubin (1911–1997), Canadian (born United States), discovered Elliot Lake uranium district
* John Wesley Judd (1840–1916), British geologist, professor at the Royal School of Mines, London
* Wilhelmine Mimi Johnson (1890–1980), Norway&#x27;s first female geologist

==K==
* Michael John Keen (1935–1991), Atlantic Canada, marine geoscientist
* Dennis V. Kent (born 1946), American geomagnetist
* Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska (1925–2015), Polish paleontologist, led several paleontological expeditions to the Gobi desert
* Clarence King (1842–1901), American, first director of the U.S. Geological Survey
* James Kitching (1922–2003), South African, Karoo vertebrate palaeontologist
* Sir Albert Ernest Kitson (1868–1937), Australian (born England), economic geologist, mineral exploration in Africa
* Maria Klenova (1898–1976), Russian marine geologist and one of the founders of Russian marine science
* Andrew H. Knoll (born 1951), American, Harvard geologist and paleontologist
* Danie G. Krige (1919–2013), South African mining engineer, inventor of kriging
* M. S. Krishnan (1898–1970), Indian geologist, author of &quot;Geology of India and Burma&quot;
* Thomas Edvard Krogh (1936–2008), Canadian, geochronologist, revolutionized uranium-lead radiometric dating
* William C. Krumbein (1902–1979), American, sedimentologist
* Nikolai Kudryavtsev (1893–1971), Russian petroleum geologist

==L==

* Alfred Lacroix (1863–1948), French geologist
* Charles Lapworth (1842–1920), English geologist, defined the Ordovician Period
* Andrew Lawson (1861–1952), American (born Scotland), named San Andreas Fault
* Richard Leakey (1944–2022), Kenyan paleontologist
* Joseph LeConte (1823–1901), United States, first professor of geology, University of California
* Robert Legget (1904–1994), Canadian non-fiction writer, civil engineer, pedologist
* Inge Lehmann (1888–1993), Danish seismologist, discovered Lehmann discontinuity. The asteroid 5632 Ingelehmann was named in her honour.
* Luna Leopold (1915–2006), eminent American hydrologist
* Xavier Le Pichon (born 1937), French plate tectonics geophysicist
* Zofia Licharewa (1883–1980), Polish geologist and museum founder
* Waldemar Lindgren (1860–1939), distinguished Swedish-American economic geologist
* Li Shizhen (1518–1593), Ming Dynasty Chinese mineralogist, author of the &quot;Ben Cao Gang Mu&quot; (Compendium of Materia Medica)
* Martin Lister (c. 1638–1712), English, pioneer geologist
* William Edmond Logan (1798–1875), Canadian, founded Geological Survey of Canada
* Fred Longstaffe, Canadian, Provost of University of Western Ontario
* Rosaly Lopes (born 1957), Brazilian, planetary geology and volcanology
* Sir Charles Lyell (1797–1875), Scottish geologist, popularized principle of uniformitarianism

==M==


* William Maclure (1763–1840), published first geologic map of United States (1809)
* J. Ross Mackay (1915–2014), Canadian permafrost geologist
* Robert Mallet (1810–1881), Irish, &quot;father of seismology&quot;
* Joseph A. Mandarino (1929–2007), American mineralogist
* Othniel Charles Marsh (1831–1899), American, pioneer dinosaur paleontologist; Bone Wars competitor
* Teresa Maryańska (1937–2019), Polish, paleontologist specializing in dinosaurs
* Kirtley F. Mather (1888–1978), Harvard professor, Scopes Monkey Trial
* William Williams Mather (1804–1859), professor, &quot;de facto&quot; state geologist of Ohio
* Drummond Matthews (1931–1997), British marine geologist, geophysicist, plate tectonics pioneer
* Sir Douglas Mawson (1882–1958), Australian Antarctic explorer
* Sir Frederick McCoy (c. 1817–1899), British and Australian palaeontologist and museum director
* Edith Merritt McKee (1918–2006), American geologist
* Dan McKenzie (born 1942), British geophysicist, plate tectonics pioneer
* Digby McLaren (1919–2004), Canadian paleontologist, Fellow of the Royal Society
* Marcia McNutt (born 1952), American geophysicist and the 22nd president of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) of the United States, 15th director of the United States Geological Survey (USGS) (and first woman to hold the post)
* Oscar Edward Meinzer (1876–1948), American hydrologist, &quot;father of groundwater geology&quot;
* Luiz Alberto Dias Menezes (1950–2014), Brazilian geologist and mineralogist
* Giuseppe Mercalli (1850–1914), Italian seismologist and volcanologist, developed the Mercalli intensity scale for measuring earthquakes
* Hans Merensky (1871–1952), South African economic geologist, discovered major diamond, platinum, chrome and copper deposits, including the Merensky Reef
* John C. Merriam (1869–1945), American, vertebrate paleontologist, studied fossils from La Brea Tar Pits
* Waman Bapuji Metre (1906–1970), Indian, petroleum geologist
* Ellen Louise Mertz (1896–1987), was one of Denmark&#x27;s first female geologists and the country&#x27;s first engineering geologist. 
* Gerard V. Middleton (1931–2021), Canadian, sedimentologist, awarded Logan Medal
* Milutin Milanković (1879 - 1958), Serbian, geophysicist, climatologist
* Hugh Miller (1802–1856), Scottish, geologist, palaeontologist, author, &quot;The Old Red Sandstone&quot;
* John Milne (1850–1913), British seismologist and anthropologist, Order of the Rising Sun
* Andrija Mohorovičić (1857–1936), Croatian meteorologist and seismologist, discovered Mohorovicic Discontinuity
* Friedrich Mohs (1773–1839), German, devised Mohs&#x27; scale of mineral hardness
* James Monger, Canadian Cordillera geologist, won Logan Medal
* Eldridge Moores (1938–2018), American plate tectonics pioneer and petrologist who specialized in ophiolites 
* Marie Morisawa (1919–1994), American geomorphology pioneer. The Geological Society of America established the Marie Morisawa Award in her honor. 
* W. Jason Morgan (1935–2023), American plate tectonics pioneer, won National Medal of Science
* Edelmira Inés Mórtola (1894–1973), Argentine geologist for whom the Mórtola Mineralogy Museum was named.
* Eric W. Mountjoy (1931–2010), Canadian sedimentologist and petrologist, awarded Logan Medal
* Roderick Murchison (1792–1871), Scottish, author of &quot;The Silurian System&quot; (1839)
* Emiliano Mutti (born 1933), Italian petroleum geologist, won Twenhofel Medal

==N==
* Anthony J. Naldrett (1933–2020), Canadian (born England) nickel ore geologist
* E. R. Ward Neale (1923–2008), Atlantic Canada geologist
* John Strong Newberry (1822–1892), American, pioneer Western geologist and explorer
* Ernest (Ernie) H. Nickel (1925–2009), Canadian mineralogist
* Stephen Robert Nockolds (1909–1990), FRS and Murchison Medallist, petrologist
* Nils Gustaf Nordenskiöld (1792–1866), Finnish and Russian, mineralogist

==O==
* Henry Fairfield Osborn (1857–1935), American geologist and paleontologist
* Halszka Osmólska (1930–2008), Polish paleontologist specializing in dinosaurs
* John Ostrom (1928–2005), American, dinosaur paleontologist, discovered warm-blooded Deinonychus
* David Dale Owen (1807–1860), American, first state geologist of Indiana, Kentucky, and Arkansas

==P==

* Joseph Pardee (1871–1960), American, channeled scablands
* Clair Cameron Patterson (1922–1995), American, geochemist, fought lead poisoning
* R.A.F. Penrose, Jr. (1863–1931), American, mining geologist, Penrose Medal
* Francis J. Pettijohn (1904–1999), American, sedimentologist
* John Phillips (1800–1874), Yorkshire geologist
* John Arthur Phillips (1822–1887), FRS, Cornish geologist, metallurgist and mining engineer
* Vasiliy Podshibyakin (1928–1997), Soviet geologist, discoverer of Urengoy gas field
* Vladimir Porfiriev (1899–1982), Russian petroleum geologist
* Henry W. Posamentier (born 1948), American, petroleum geologist
* John Wesley Powell (1834–1902), American, ex-soldier who mapped the Colorado River, second director of the USGS
* Raymond A. Price (born 1933), Canadian, structural and tectonic geologist
* Raphael Pumpelly (1837–1923), American, geologist and explorer

==Q==

* Jin Qingmin (1939-1999), Chinese, discovered for the first time the “breccia field peridotite” in Bachu Wajir Tagar in the Tarim Basin

==R==

* Bangalore Puttaiya Radhakrishna (1918–2012), a founder and officer of the Geological Society of India
* John G. Ramsay (1931–2021), British structural geologist
* Frederick Leslie Ransome (1868–1935), American (born England), USGS economic geologist, National Academy of Sciences
* David M. Raup (1933–2015), American, paleontologist; author of &quot;Extinction: Bad Genes or Bad Luck?&quot;
* Mary Louise Rhodes (1916–1987) American petroleum geologist; Permian Basin field research
* Charles Richter (1900–1985), American seismologist, devised Richter magnitude scale for earthquakes
* Ferdinand von Richthofen (1833–1905), German geologist and geographer
* A.E. &quot;Ted&quot; Ringwood (1930–1993), Australian experimental geophysicist and geochemist, Wollaston Medal winner
* Andrés Manuel del Río (1764–1849), Spanish–Mexican mineralogist, discoverer of vanadium
* Alfred Rittmann (1893–1980), Swiss volcanologist, three-time president of the IAVCEI, Gustav Steinmann medal winner
* John Cole Roberts (born 1935), Welsh geoglogist, fracture patterning
* Ralph J. Roberts (1911–2007), American geologist, Nevada gold districts
* Meyer Rubin (1924–2020), American geologist, known for radiocarbon dating work with the USGS
* Stanley Keith Runcorn (1922–1995), British geophysicist and plate tectonics pioneer; Fellow of the Royal Society

==S==

* Donald F. Sangster, Canadian, lead-zinc economic geologist
* Emilia Săulea (1904–1998), Romanian geologist and paleontologist
* Celâl Şengör (born 1955), Turkish, member of The United States National Academy of Sciences and The Russian Academy of Sciences, Bigsby Medal, Gustav-Steinmann-Medaille and Arthur Holmes Medal winner
* Harrison Schmitt (born 1935), American, Apollo 17 astronaut, walked on the Moon
* Kevin M. Scott (born 1935), American, volcanology research in United States and China, Kirk Bryan Award
* George Julius Poulett Scrope (1797–1876), English, volcanology, Wollaston Medal
* Adam Sedgwick (1785–1873), English, proposed Devonian and Cambrian periods
* Karl von Seebach (1839–1880), German volcanologist
* Adolf Seilacher (1925-2014), German paleontologist, invented the concept and study of ichnofacies, coined the term &quot;Lagerstätten&quot;, and championed the photoautotrophic view of the Ediacaran biota. Craaford Prize, Paleontological Society Award, Gustav-Steinmann-Medaille, and Lapworth Award winner, among others.
* Seikei Sekiya (1855–1896), Japanese seismologist, created the model showing the motion of an earth-particle during an earthquake
* Nicholas Shackleton (1937–2006), British geologist and climatologist
* Shen Kuo (1031–1095), Chinese scientist, magnetic compass pioneer, geomorphology theory
* Richard H. Sibson (born 1945), New Zealand geologist, defined the relationship between seismogenic processes and fault zone rheology.
* Eugene Merle Shoemaker (1928–1997), American, meteoriticist, co-discovered Comet Shoemaker-Levy
* Haraldur Sigurdsson, (born 1939), Icelandic, provided proof for a meteorite impact at the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs
* Leon Silver (born 1925), American, National Academy, NASA medal for contribution to Apollo program&#x27;s lunar explorations
* George Gaylord Simpson (1902–1984), American, paleontologist
* Kamini Singha (born 1977), professor at the Colorado School of Mines
* William Smith (1769–1839), father of English Geology
* Su Song (1020–1101), Chinese naturalist, author of treatise on metallurgy and mineralogy
* Paul Spudis (1952–2018), American planetary geologist
* Josiah Edward Spurr (1870–1950), American, geologist, author and Alaskan explorer
* Laurence Dudley Stamp (1898–1966), British, petroleum geologist and geographer
* Charles Steen (1919–2006), American, discovered uranium near Moab, Utah
* Max Steineke (1898–1952), American, discovered Abqaiq oilfield with 12 billion barrels of recoverable oil in Saudi Arabia
* Charles R. Stelck (1917–2016), Canadian, petroleum geologist, emeritus professor, Logan Medal winner
* Nicolas Steno (1638–1686), Danish, pioneer in early-modern geology, especially in stratigraphy
* Iain Stewart (born 1964), British, presenter of several television series on geology
* Clifford H. Stockwell (1897–1987), Canadian structural geologist, Geological Survey of Canada, Logan Medal winner
* David Strangway (1934–2016), Canadian, geophysicist and university administrator, Logan Medal award
* K. Hugo Strunz (1910–2006), German mineralogist, co-creator of the Nickel–Strunz classification.
* Eduard Suess (1831–1914), Austrian (born England), named Gondwanaland
* Peter Szatmari, Hungarian-Brazilian geologist, Gold Medal award, Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia

==T==
* Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955), French paleontologist and philosopher, co-discovered Peking Man
* Karl von Terzaghi (1883–1963), geologist and civil engineer, &quot;father of soil mechanics&quot;
* Marie Tharp (1920–2006), co-discoverer of the Mid-Oceanic Ridge
* Lonnie Thompson (born 1948), American, glaciologist and ice-core climatologist
* Sigurdur Thorarinsson (1912–1983), Icelandic, pioneered the field of tephrochronology
* Raymond Thorsteinsson (1921–2012), Canadian, Arctic geologist
* Bahal Tambunan (born 1974), Indonesian geoscientist who studies geothermal energy
* Phillip Tobias (1925–2012), South African palaeoanthropologist, homo habilis pioneer
* Otto Martin Torell (1828–1900), chief of the Geological Survey of Sweden
* Francis John Turner (1904–1985), New Zealand, igneous and metamorphic petrologist
* Joseph Tyrrell (1858–1957), Canadian paleontologist, namesake of Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology

==U==

* Warren Upham (1850–1934), American, studied glacial Lake Agassiz
* David Ure (1749–1798), Scottish, known as &quot;the father of Scottish palaeontology&quot;

==V==

* Charles-Louis-Joseph-Xavier de la Vallée-Poussin (1827–1903), Belgian geologist and mineralogist
* Jan Veizer (born 1941), Canadian isotope geochemist
* Felix Andries Vening Meinesz (1887–1966), Dutch geophysicist and gravimetric geodesist
* Rogier Verbeek (1845–1926), Dutch geologist and nature scientist
* Vladimir Vernadsky (1863–1945), pioneer Russian geochemist and biogeochemist
* Fred Vine (born 1939), British marine geologist, geophysicist, plate tectonics pioneer

==W==

* Lawrence Wager (1904–1965), British geologist and explorer, discovered the Skaergaard intrusion
* Charles Doolittle Walcott (1850–1927), American paleontologist, discovered Burgess Shale fossils
* George P. L. Walker (1926–2005), British volcanologist
* Roger G. Walker (born 1939), Canadian sedimentologist, emeritus professor
* Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen (1809–1876), German, magnetic observations and study of Mount Etna
* Janet Watson, (1923–1985), Precambrian specialist, first female president of the Geological Society of London
* Alfred Wegener (1880–1930), German meteorologist, continental drift pioneer
* Harold Wellman (1909–1999), New Zealand geologist of plate tectonics
* Abraham Werner (c. 1749–1817), German, proponent of Neptunism
* Israel Charles White (1848–1927), American, coal geology; Permian paleontology
* Josiah Whitney (1819–1896), chief of the California Geological Survey; Mount Whitney
* Harold Williams (1934–2010), Atlantic Canada geologist
* Howel Williams (1898–1980), American (born England) volcanologist
* John Williamson (1907–1958), discovered the Williamson diamond mine, Tanzania
* J. Tuzo Wilson (1908–1993), Canadian geophysicist and plate tectonics geologist
* Newton Horace Winchell (1839–1914), American, geology of Minnesota
* Isaac J. Winograd, American geologist
* Jay Backus Woodworth (1865–1925), American geologist and president of the Seismological Society of America 
* William Henry Wright (1876–1951), Canadian prospector and newspaper publisher, discovered Kirkland Lake gold district

==Y==

* Eiju Yatsu (1920–2016), Japanese, geomorphologist
* Ivan Yefremov (1907–1972), Soviet paleontologist and originator of taphonomy
*Sorojon Yusufova (1910–1966), Tajik geologist, first person to publish a textbook in the Tajik language

==Z==

* Peter Ziegler (1928–2013), Swiss petroleum geologist, researched on plate reconstructions and paleogeographies
* Mary Lou Zoback (born 1952), American geophysicist who led the world stress map project of the International Lithosphere Program

==See also==
* List of geophysicists
* List of mineralogists
* List of paleontologists
* List of Russian geologists

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="2" end="11" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="47" end="54" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="85" end="100" title="earth scientist" label="earth scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215962" start="148" end="155" title="Notability in the English Wikipedia" label="notable"/>
<link wikidata="Q29965477" start="206" end="219" title="Penrose Medal" label="Penrose Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="227" end="242" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="275" end="303" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="311" end="324" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="370" end="382" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="384" end="394" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q334823" start="396" end="414" title="structural geology" label="structural geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="416" end="425" title="tectonics" label="tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="427" end="440" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52120" start="442" end="452" title="glaciology" label="glaciology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="454" end="463" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179509" start="465" end="477" title="hydrogeology" label="hydrogeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="479" end="491" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="493" end="503" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="505" end="514" title="petrology" label="petrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="516" end="531" title="crystallography" label="crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="533" end="545" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="547" end="558" title="paleobotany" label="paleobotany"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="560" end="576" title="paleoclimatology" label="paleoclimatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="578" end="588" title="palynology" label="palynology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048416" start="590" end="607" title="petroleum geology" label="petroleum geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q751439" start="609" end="626" title="planetary geology" label="planetary geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205768" start="628" end="641" title="sedimentology" label="sedimentology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161265" start="643" end="655" title="soil science" label="soil science"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="657" end="669" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102904" start="675" end="686" title="volcanology" label="volcanology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054216" start="853" end="870" title="Vladimir Abazarov" label="Vladimir Abazarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="891" end="900" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264872" start="916" end="934" title="Samotlor oil field" label="Samotlor oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q793843" start="937" end="955" title="Aziz Ab&amp;#x27;Saber" label="Aziz Ab&amp;#x27;Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="979" end="994" title="geomorphologist" label="geomorphologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497232" start="1003" end="1032" title="Brazilian Academy of Sciences" label="Brazilian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q62860" start="1035" end="1065" title="Otto Wilhelm Hermann von Abich" label="Otto Wilhelm Hermann von Abich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="1086" end="1098" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q122972" start="1101" end="1114" title="Louis Agassiz" label="Louis Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="1162" end="1169" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="1172" end="1179" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="1182" end="1194" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="1197" end="1214" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georgius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="1280" end="1290" title="Mineralogy" label="Mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193676" start="1308" end="1323" title="De re metallica" label="De re metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q321358" start="1326" end="1343" title="Ulisse Aldrovandi" label="Ulisse Aldrovandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1366" end="1377" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096420" start="1391" end="1405" title="Claude Allègre" label="Claude Allègre"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="1426" end="1436" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="1452" end="1478" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444722" start="1481" end="1515" title="Fernando Flávio Marques de Almeida" label="Fernando Flávio Marques de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497232" start="1557" end="1586" title="Brazilian Academy of Sciences" label="Brazilian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q555781" start="1589" end="1603" title="Walter Alvarez" label="Walter Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="1666" end="1703" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107485" start="1706" end="1723" title="J. Willis Ambrose" label="J. Willis Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535301" start="1756" end="1788" title="Geological Association of Canada" label="Geological Association of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393534" start="1791" end="1813" title="Ernest Masson Anderson" label="Ernest Masson Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="1883" end="1891" title="Fault (geology)" label="faulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q266266" start="1894" end="1913" title="Roy Chapman Andrews" label="Roy Chapman Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q230491" start="1983" end="1994" title="Mary Anning" label="Mary Anning"/>
<link wikidata="Q365925" start="2043" end="2065" title="Adolphe d&amp;#x27;Archiac" label="Adolphe d&amp;#x27;Archiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2086" end="2100" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="2109" end="2135" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734064" start="2138" end="2154" title="Giovanni Arduino (geologist)" label="Giovanni Arduino"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="2201" end="2216" title="geological time" label="geological time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327310" start="2219" end="2240" title="Richard Lee Armstrong" label="Richard Lee Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="2272" end="2282" title="Geochemistry" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="2288" end="2299" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240299" start="2302" end="2316" title="Rosemary Askin" label="Rosemary Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2336" end="2347" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q544449" start="2417" end="2430" title="Tanya Atwater" label="Tanya Atwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="2465" end="2477" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="2497" end="2512" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q386572" start="2534" end="2547" title="Ralph Bagnold" label="Ralph Bagnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q504836" start="2612" end="2630" title="Andrew Geddes Bain" label="Andrew Geddes Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2701" end="2713" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22276708" start="2716" end="2736" title="Bashiru Ademola Raji" label="Bashiru Ademola Raji"/>
<link wikidata="Q282070" start="2761" end="2772" title="pedogenesis" label="pedogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q352107" start="2776" end="2792" title="Robert T. Bakker" label="Robert T. Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2824" end="2838" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730223" start="2854" end="2875" title="The Dinosaur Heresies" label="The Dinosaur Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077129" start="2884" end="2899" title="Octávio Barbosa" label="Octávio Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372607" start="2967" end="2999" title="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia" label="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787381" start="3002" end="3015" title="Thomas Barger" label="Thomas Barger"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3068" end="3080" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q679322" start="3095" end="3101" title="Aramco" label="Aramco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773323" start="3104" end="3124" title="Anthony R. Barringer" label="Anthony R. Barringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="3156" end="3168" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q477262" start="3184" end="3199" title="Charles Barrois" label="Charles Barrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="3220" end="3229" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="3234" end="3248" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q453196" start="3251" end="3266" title="Florence Bascom" label="Florence Bascom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="3319" end="3339" title="US Geological Survey" label="US Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q54602376" start="3341" end="3353" title="Éliane Basse" label="Éliane Basse"/>
<link wikidata="Q280413" start="3413" end="3452" title="French National Centre for Scientific Research" label="National Center for Scientific Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q115803751" start="3462" end="3474" title="Abhijit Basu" label="Abhijit Basu"/>
<link wikidata="Q914915" start="3509" end="3520" title="Robert Bell (Canadian geologist)" label="Robert Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964122" start="3589" end="3603" title="Walter A. Bell" label="Walter A. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="3626" end="3639" title="paleobotanist" label="paleobotanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="3644" end="3657" title="stratigrapher" label="stratigrapher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994926" start="3660" end="3672" title="Helen Belyea" label="Helen Belyea"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="3695" end="3704" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="3740" end="3755" title="Devonian System" label="Devonian System"/>
<link wikidata="Q973183" start="3759" end="3786" title="Reinout Willem van Bemmelen" label="Reinout Willem van Bemmelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403264" start="3862" end="3878" title="Etheldred Benett" label="Etheldred Benett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="3909" end="3923" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q776164" start="3926" end="3941" title="Pierre Berthier" label="Pierre Berthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="4002" end="4009" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285041" start="4012" end="4022" title="Luca Bindi" label="Luca Bindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656448" start="4097" end="4109" title="icosahedrite" label="icosahedrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16785350" start="4112" end="4129" title="Eliot Blackwelder" label="Eliot Blackwelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="4186" end="4215" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974388" start="4218" end="4240" title="George Stanfield Blake" label="George Stanfield Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126927" start="4274" end="4287" title="William Blake (economist)" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580241" start="4359" end="4379" title="William Phipps Blake" label="William Phipps Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448921" start="4414" end="4432" title="Selwyn G. Blaylock" label="Selwyn G. Blaylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q688725" start="4489" end="4496" title="Teck Cominco" label="Cominco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615731" start="4499" end="4514" title="Stewart Blusson" label="Stewart Blusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322305" start="4555" end="4573" title="Ekati Diamond Mine" label="Ekati Diamond Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16435376" start="4576" end="4602" title="Alexei Alexeivich Bogdanov" label="Alexei Alexeivich Bogdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q991546" start="4635" end="4645" title="Bruce Bolt" label="Bruce Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="4706" end="4718" title="seismologist" label="seismologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q149802" start="4735" end="4749" title="José Bonaparte" label="José Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="4775" end="4789" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q450914" start="4834" end="4849" title="William Borlase" label="William Borlase"/>
<link wikidata="Q506093" start="4925" end="4940" title="Norman L. Bowen" label="Norman L. Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="4985" end="4996" title="petrologist" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q324343" start="4999" end="5016" title="Scipione Breislak" label="Scipione Breislak"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="5077" end="5089" title="volcanic gas" label="volcanic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q946010" start="5103" end="5117" title="J Harlen Bretz" label="J Harlen Bretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062302" start="5162" end="5181" title="channeled scablands" label="channeled scablands"/>
<link wikidata="Q168468" start="5184" end="5198" title="David Brewster" label="David Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q911079" start="5278" end="5297" title="Wallace S. Broecker" label="Wallace S. Broecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="5320" end="5338" title="paleoclimatologist" label="paleoclimatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076133" start="5343" end="5365" title="chemical oceanography" label="chemical oceanographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q359576" start="5368" end="5380" title="Robert Broom" label="Robert Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="5408" end="5423" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q511893" start="5436" end="5453" title="australopithecine" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23139" start="5472" end="5484" title="Barnum Brown" label="Barnum Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="5508" end="5516" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="5540" end="5554" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55021352" start="5557" end="5583" title="Christian Leopold von Buch" label="Christian Leopold von Buch"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="5604" end="5613" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="5618" end="5632" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296150" start="5635" end="5648" title="Mary Buckland" label="Mary Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="5671" end="5685" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="5687" end="5703" title="marine biologist" label="marine biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q857780" start="5708" end="5730" title="scientific illustrator" label="scientific illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q312389" start="5733" end="5749" title="William Buckland" label="William Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="5813" end="5821" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099244" start="5824" end="5838" title="Judith Bunbury" label="Judith Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q795194" start="5880" end="5898" title="B. Clark Burchfiel" label="B. Clark Burchfiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5912" end="5915" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="5950" end="5965" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="5977" end="6005" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720266" start="6008" end="6020" title="Perry Byerly" label="Perry Byerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687453" start="6083" end="6097" title="Louis J. Cabri" label="Louis J. Cabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="6157" end="6180" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609119" start="6183" end="6201" title="Stephen E. Calvert" label="Stephen E. Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="6269" end="6280" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108531" start="6283" end="6297" title="Colin Campbell (geologist)" label="Colin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="6319" end="6338" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q209916" start="6343" end="6351" title="Peak Oil" label="Peak Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988348" start="6363" end="6376" title="Neil Campbell (geologist)" label="Neil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="6400" end="6421" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="6422" end="6441" title="mineral exploration" label="mineral exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="6451" end="6474" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q195313" start="6477" end="6496" title="Samuel Warren Carey" label="Samuel Warren Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="6522" end="6539" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384267" start="6570" end="6585" title="Expanding Earth" label="Expanding Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178602" start="6599" end="6609" title="Petr Černý" label="Petr Černý"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="6656" end="6667" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="6677" end="6700" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q901872" start="6703" end="6742" title="Alexandre-Emile Béguyer de Chancourtois" label="Alexandre-Emile Béguyer de Chancourtois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545411" start="6793" end="6812" title="George V. Chilingar" label="George V. Chilingar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="6852" end="6871" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944104" start="6874" end="6886" title="Václav Cílek" label="Václav Cílek"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="6900" end="6905" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="6906" end="6915" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240986" start="6942" end="6956" title="John J. Clague" label="John J. Clague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668282" start="7023" end="7038" title="T. H. Clark" label="Thomas H. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005870" start="7138" end="7162" title="William Branwhite Clarke" label="William Branwhite Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="7214" end="7218" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="7222" end="7237" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173309" start="7246" end="7257" title="Peter Clift" label="Peter Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q75914" start="7350" end="7360" title="Hans Cloos" label="Hans Cloos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870010" start="7414" end="7432" title="Lorence G. Collins" label="Lorence G. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="7457" end="7468" title="petrologist" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="7485" end="7497" title="metasomatism" label="metasomatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q286098" start="7500" end="7519" title="Simon Conway Morris" label="Simon Conway Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="7533" end="7548" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q852085" start="7585" end="7598" title="Burgess Shale" label="Burgess Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143830" start="7609" end="7626" title="William Conybeare (geologist)" label="William Conybeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077587" start="7725" end="7747" title="Isabel Clifton Cookson" label="Isabel Clifton Cookson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="7772" end="7785" title="paleobotanist" label="paleobotanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="7790" end="7802" title="palynologist" label="palynologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131986" start="7828" end="7837" title="Cooksonia (plant)" label="Cooksonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="7846" end="7865" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Edward Drinker Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="7897" end="7905" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="7906" end="7920" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152646" start="7922" end="7931" title="Bone Wars" label="Bone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075134" start="7945" end="7959" title="Charles Cotton (geologist)" label="Charles Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="8000" end="8015" title="geomorphologist" label="geomorphologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183189" start="8018" end="8029" title="James Croll" label="James Croll"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="8150" end="8164" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q826716" start="8199" end="8212" title="catastrophism" label="catastrophism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000528" start="8215" end="8230" title="Lindsay Collins (geologist)" label="Lindsay Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q909726" start="8277" end="8295" title="Brent Dalrymple" label="G. Brent Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205045" start="8337" end="8357" title="The Age of the Earth" label="The Age of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q315366" start="8410" end="8427" title="James Dwight Dana" label="James Dwight Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="8503" end="8517" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="8567" end="8591" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="8599" end="8604" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q934867" start="8617" end="8637" title="George Mercer Dawson" label="George Mercer Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="8669" end="8674" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="8686" end="8713" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702168" start="8716" end="8735" title="John William Dawson" label="John William Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="8767" end="8774" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="8786" end="8813" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q302176" start="8816" end="8833" title="Henry De la Beche" label="Henry De la Beche"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="8878" end="8912" title="Geological Survey of Great Britain" label="Geological Survey of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314578" start="8915" end="8930" title="Duncan R. Derry" label="Duncan R. Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="8953" end="8971" title="Economic geology" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="8981" end="8992" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203719" start="8995" end="9012" title="Nicolas Desmarest" label="Nicolas Desmarest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="9042" end="9055" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788966" start="9058" end="9072" title="Thomas Dibblee" label="Thomas Dibblee"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="9129" end="9146" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580293" start="9164" end="9184" title="William R. Dickinson" label="William R. Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="9217" end="9232" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="9234" end="9250" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="9262" end="9290" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q733667" start="9293" end="9308" title="Robert S. Dietz" label="Robert S. Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="9332" end="9350" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q29965477" start="9368" end="9381" title="Penrose Medal" label="Penrose Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380520" start="9384" end="9402" title="Déodat de Dolomieu" label="Déodat de Dolomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12795028" start="9434" end="9457" title="Ljudmila Dolar Mantuani" label="Ljudmila Dolar Mantuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="9481" end="9492" title="Petrology" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688449" start="9549" end="9563" title="Louis de Loczy" label="Louis de Loczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458245" start="9609" end="9623" title="Ignacy Domeyko" label="Ignacy Domeyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="9652" end="9661" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="9666" end="9678" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q424562" start="9704" end="9713" title="domeykite" label="domeykite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273729" start="9716" end="9742" title="R. J. W. Douglas" label="Robert John Wilson Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="9765" end="9784" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="9800" end="9823" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640856" start="9826" end="9843" title="Aleksis Dreimanis" label="Aleksis Dreimanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497331" start="9857" end="9873" title="Latvian Canadians" label="Latvian-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="9888" end="9898" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q94301" start="9924" end="9947" title="Royal Society of Canada" label="Royal Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933912" start="9950" end="9962" title="Hugo Dummett" label="Hugo Dummett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322305" start="10038" end="10056" title="Ekati Diamond Mine" label="Ekati Diamond Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363518" start="10059" end="10076" title="Alexander du Toit" label="Alexander du Toit"/>
<link wikidata="Q595919" start="10195" end="10217" title="Clarence Edward Dutton" label="Clarence Edward Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294327" start="10318" end="10329" title="Heinz Ebert" label="Heinz Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="10361" end="10370" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="10372" end="10383" title="petrologist" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372607" start="10405" end="10437" title="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia" label="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27689779" start="10440" end="10458" title="Fanny Carter Edson" label="Fanny Carter Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="10481" end="10500" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q451437" start="10503" end="10517" title="Niles Eldredge" label="Niles Eldredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="10541" end="10555" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q582558" start="10567" end="10589" title="punctuated equilibrium" label="punctuated equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55030753" start="10592" end="10622" title="Jean-Baptiste Élie de Beaumont" label="Jean-Baptiste Élie de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q130218167" start="10686" end="10705" title="Kay-Chrisitan Emeis" label="Kay-Chrisitan Emeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536695" start="10739" end="10750" title="W. G. Ernst" label="W. G. Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="10774" end="10782" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="10783" end="10794" title="petrologist" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="10799" end="10809" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="10821" end="10849" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q935655" start="10852" end="10865" title="Pentti Eskola" label="Pentti Eskola"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="10887" end="10896" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925062" start="10938" end="10956" title="metamorphic facies" label="metamorphic facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344116" start="10959" end="10983" title="Robert Etheridge, Junior" label="Robert Etheridge, Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="11023" end="11037" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q769416" start="11063" end="11080" title="Australian Museum" label="Australian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532344" start="11083" end="11099" title="Raul - Yuri Georgievich Ervier" label="Raul-Yuri Ervier"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="11120" end="11129" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561583" start="11272" end="11285" title="Maurice Ewing" label="Maurice Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="11320" end="11332" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="11337" end="11350" title="oceanographer" label="oceanographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q809417" start="11361" end="11392" title="Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond" label="Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="11422" end="11435" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930226" start="11438" end="11457" title="Mikhail A. Fedonkin" label="Mikhail A. Fedonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="11479" end="11493" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064147" start="11503" end="11534" title="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal" label="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964876" start="11537" end="11561" title="Walter Frederick Ferrier" label="Walter Frederick Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="11585" end="11592" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060450" start="11628" end="11638" title="Ferrierite" label="Ferrierite"/>
<link wikidata="Q59832203" start="11641" end="11655" title="Judy Fierstein" label="Judy Fierstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="11711" end="11733" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497468" start="11736" end="11755" title="Frederick C. Finkle" label="Frederick C. Finkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372172" start="11855" end="11872" title="Michael Fleischer (mineralogist)" label="Michael Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077091" start="11922" end="11938" title="Charles E. Fipke" label="Charles E. Fipke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322305" start="11979" end="11997" title="Ekati Diamond Mine" label="Ekati Diamond Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322782" start="12000" end="12014" title="Richard Fortey" label="Richard Fortey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="12037" end="12046" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="12047" end="12061" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="12071" end="12098" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573647" start="12101" end="12116" title="Yves Fortier (geologist)" label="Yves O. Fortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="12145" end="12151" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="12166" end="12177" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562226" start="12180" end="12195" title="Gillian Foulger" label="Gillian Foulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="12245" end="12262" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287186" start="12272" end="12283" title="Price Medal" label="Price Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466510" start="12286" end="12298" title="William Fyfe (geochemist)" label="William Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="12321" end="12331" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="12337" end="12352" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18733740" start="12363" end="12376" title="Patrick Ganly" label="Patrick Ganly"/>
<link wikidata="Q903899" start="12475" end="12489" title="Robert Garrels" label="Robert Garrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="12512" end="12522" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="12547" end="12559" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q633167" start="12562" end="12578" title="Archibald Geikie" label="Archibald Geikie"/>
<link wikidata="Q460978" start="12630" end="12643" title="Presidents of the Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q29050638" start="12646" end="12661" title="Mark S. Ghiorso" label="Mark S. Ghiorso"/>
<link wikidata="Q463448" start="12730" end="12748" title="Grove Karl Gilbert" label="Grove Karl Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="12807" end="12822" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133101" start="12825" end="12838" title="James E. Gill" label="James E. Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="12862" end="12879" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="12901" end="12912" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="12922" end="12940" title="Victor Goldschmidt" label="Victor Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="13004" end="13016" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="13019" end="13036" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="13059" end="13073" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686874" start="13087" end="13099" title="Louis Caryl Graton" label="L. C. Graton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="13123" end="13130" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="13131" end="13149" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069200" start="13159" end="13177" title="Penrose Gold Medal" label="Penrose Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719125" start="13180" end="13201" title="Alexander Henry Green" label="Alexander Henry Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="13233" end="13243" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="13248" end="13257" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="13259" end="13286" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q327370" start="13289" end="13312" title="George Bellas Greenough" label="George Bellas Greenough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="13401" end="13419" title="Geological Society" label="Geological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q678467" start="13422" end="13441" title="John Walter Gregory" label="John Walter Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q47544066" start="13580" end="13592" title="Robbie Gries" label="Robbie Gries"/>
<link wikidata="Q463396" start="13656" end="13700" title="American Association of Petroleum Geologists" label="American Association of Petroleum Geologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285206" start="13710" end="13726" title="Djalma Guimarães" label="Djalma Guimarães"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="13781" end="13793" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719010" start="13796" end="13812" title="Henry C. Gunning" label="Henry C. Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="13860" end="13876" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="13888" end="13899" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213922" start="13918" end="13934" title="Julius von Haast" label="Julius von Haast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033769" start="13984" end="14001" title="Canterbury Museum, Christchurch" label="Canterbury Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248034" start="14004" end="14031" title="Sir James Hall, 4th Baronet" label="Sir James Hall, 4th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="14082" end="14108" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q970914" start="14111" end="14121" title="James Hall (paleontologist)" label="James Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="14158" end="14172" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462" start="14175" end="14191" title="William Hamilton (diplomat)" label="William Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="14230" end="14242" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q627221" start="14245" end="14258" title="Alfred Harker" label="Alfred Harker"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="14305" end="14317" title="Petrography" label="petrographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947593" start="14320" end="14336" title="W. Brian Harland" label="W. Brian Harland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534651" start="14377" end="14402" title="Geoffrey Hattersley-Smith" label="Geoffrey Hattersley-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q22105135" start="14456" end="14472" title="Donald E. Hattin" label="Donald E. Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790500" start="14526" end="14540" title="Thomas Hawkins (geologist)" label="Thomas Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133394" start="14581" end="14599" title="James Edwin Hawley" label="James Edwin Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="14631" end="14641" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="14645" end="14656" title="ore deposit" label="ore deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384960" start="14660" end="14675" title="Erasmus Haworth" label="Erasmus Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364985" start="14704" end="14728" title="Kansas Geological Survey" label="Kansas Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487165" start="14771" end="14786" title="Frank Hawthorne" label="Frank Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="14809" end="14821" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="14826" end="14842" title="crystallography" label="crystallographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327185" start="14845" end="14859" title="Richard L. Hay (geologist)" label="Richard L. Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q951629" start="14894" end="14920" title="Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden" label="Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345349" start="14972" end="14984" title="Robert Hazen" label="Robert Hazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q509994" start="15042" end="15060" title="Hollis Dow Hedberg" label="Hollis Dow Hedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q360823" start="15095" end="15107" title="Bruce Heezen" label="Bruce Heezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="15161" end="15179" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q454737" start="15182" end="15197" title="Sue Hendrickson" label="Sue Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="15220" end="15234" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="15285" end="15302" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q470792" start="15322" end="15340" title="Harry Hammond Hess" label="Harry Hammond Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="15377" end="15390" title="oceanographer" label="oceanographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722978" start="15393" end="15404" title="Henry Hicks (geologist)" label="Henry Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="15418" end="15421" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="15440" end="15458" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148584" start="15461" end="15477" title="Pattillo Higgins" label="Pattillo Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="15531" end="15541" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q56115068" start="15550" end="15562" title="Wes Hildreth" label="Wes Hildreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373201" start="15618" end="15635" title="Eugene W. Hilgard" label="Eugene W. Hilgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350226" start="15691" end="15705" title="Robert T. Hill" label="Robert T. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977551" start="15778" end="15800" title="Claude Hillaire-Marcel" label="Claude Hillaire-Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q64294" start="15861" end="15886" title="Ferdinand von Hochstetter" label="Ferdinand von Hochstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q952930" start="15985" end="16000" title="Paul F. Hoffman" label="Paul F. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214689" start="16037" end="16051" title="Snowball Earth" label="Snowball Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q606039" start="16063" end="16076" title="Arthur Holmes" label="Arthur Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27702482" start="16154" end="16169" title="Marjorie Hooker" label="Marjorie Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="16231" end="16264" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q247264" start="16285" end="16296" title="Jack Horner (paleontologist)" label="Jack Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="16328" end="16342" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q707230" start="16345" end="16359" title="Kenneth J. Hsu" label="Kenneth J. Hsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q383883" start="16451" end="16466" title="M. King Hubbert" label="M. King Hubbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q209916" start="16510" end="16518" title="Peak Oil" label="Peak Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192927" start="16534" end="16546" title="James Hutton" label="James Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291473" start="16627" end="16643" title="Edward A. Irving" label="Edward A. Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="16672" end="16686" title="paleomagnetism" label="paleomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="16698" end="16715" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075631" start="16733" end="16746" title="Thomas Jaggar" label="Thomas Jaggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178850" start="16834" end="16849" title="James A. Jensen" label="James A. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="16896" end="16910" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301059" start="16926" end="16939" title="Dougal Jerram" label="Dougal Jerram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173509" start="17032" end="17049" title="David A. Johnston" label="David A. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="17102" end="17135" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478226" start="17138" end="17150" title="Franc Joubin" label="Franc Joubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729034" start="17206" end="17217" title="Elliot Lake" label="Elliot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q465779" start="17237" end="17253" title="John Wesley Judd" label="John Wesley Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508631" start="17303" end="17324" title="Royal School of Mines" label="Royal School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010662" start="17335" end="17358" title="Wilhelmine Mimi Johnson" label="Wilhelmine Mimi Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831654" start="17418" end="17435" title="Michael John Keen" label="Michael John Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="17449" end="17464" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q44568269" start="17488" end="17502" title="Dennis V. Kent" label="Dennis V. Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q218302" start="17540" end="17563" title="Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska" label="Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="17584" end="17598" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095462" start="17661" end="17674" title="Clarence King" label="Clarence King"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="17720" end="17742" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680672" start="17745" end="17759" title="James Kitching" label="James Kitching"/>
<link wikidata="Q916997" start="17788" end="17793" title="Karoo" label="Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="17805" end="17820" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710154" start="17827" end="17847" title="Albert Ernest Kitson" label="Albert Ernest Kitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="17888" end="17906" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383485" start="17940" end="17953" title="Maria Klenova" label="Maria Klenova"/>
<link wikidata="Q505705" start="18044" end="18059" title="Andrew H. Knoll" label="Andrew H. Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="18083" end="18090" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="18105" end="18119" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159834" start="18122" end="18136" title="Danie G. Krige" label="Danie G. Krige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="18164" end="18179" title="mining engineer" label="mining engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="18193" end="18200" title="kriging" label="kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455923" start="18203" end="18217" title="M. S. Krishnan (geologist)" label="M. S. Krishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789256" start="18300" end="18319" title="Thomas Edvard Krogh" label="Thomas Edvard Krogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213891" start="18343" end="18358" title="geochronologist" label="geochronologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="18388" end="18399" title="radiometric" label="radiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773305" start="18409" end="18428" title="William C. Krumbein" label="William C. Krumbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q205768" start="18452" end="18467" title="sedimentologist" label="sedimentologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94289" start="18470" end="18489" title="Nikolai Kudryavtsev" label="Nikolai Kudryavtsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="18511" end="18530" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q586570" start="18541" end="18555" title="Alfred Lacroix" label="Alfred Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q932471" start="18588" end="18604" title="Charles Lapworth" label="Charles Lapworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="18649" end="18659" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q504233" start="18669" end="18682" title="Andrew Lawson" label="Andrew Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="18728" end="18745" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q318960" start="18748" end="18762" title="Richard Leakey" label="Richard Leakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="18783" end="18797" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810237" start="18800" end="18814" title="Joseph LeConte" label="Joseph LeConte"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="18871" end="18895" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157059" start="18898" end="18911" title="Robert Legget" label="Robert Legget"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="18954" end="18968" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215501" start="18970" end="18980" title="pedology" label="pedologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q256839" start="18983" end="18995" title="Inge Lehmann" label="Inge Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="19016" end="19028" title="seismologist" label="seismologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q656836" start="19041" end="19062" title="Lehmann discontinuity" label="Lehmann discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458116" start="19077" end="19093" title="5632 Ingelehmann" label="5632 Ingelehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396214" start="19121" end="19133" title="Luna Leopold" label="Luna Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="19164" end="19175" title="hydrologist" label="hydrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366463" start="19178" end="19194" title="Xavier Le Pichon" label="Xavier Le Pichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="19215" end="19230" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="19231" end="19243" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391803" start="19246" end="19261" title="Zofia Licharewa" label="Zofia Licharewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174242" start="19313" end="19330" title="Waldemar Lindgren" label="Waldemar Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="19375" end="19393" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q698925" start="19396" end="19406" title="Li Shizhen" label="Li Shizhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="19441" end="19453" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q816658" start="19498" end="19526" title="Compendium of Materia Medica" label="Compendium of Materia Medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q513593" start="19530" end="19543" title="Martin Lister" label="Martin Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q937429" start="19589" end="19609" title="William Edmond Logan" label="William Edmond Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986634" start="19641" end="19668" title="Geological Survey of Canada" label="Geological Survey of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495794" start="19671" end="19686" title="Fred Longstaffe" label="Fred Longstaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="19709" end="19738" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442245" start="19741" end="19753" title="Rosaly Lopes" label="Rosaly Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="19814" end="19831" title="Sir Charles Lyell" label="Sir Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="19890" end="19907" title="Uniformitarianism (science)" label="uniformitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q349865" start="19919" end="19934" title="William Maclure" label="William Maclure"/>
<link wikidata="Q193842" start="19964" end="19976" title="geologic map" label="geologic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676388" start="20003" end="20017" title="J. Ross Mackay" label="J. Ross Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="20040" end="20050" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q983172" start="20063" end="20076" title="Robert Mallet" label="Robert Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="20113" end="20123" title="seismology" label="seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318970" start="20132" end="20151" title="Joseph A. Mandarino" label="Joseph A. Mandarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="20189" end="20210" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="20242" end="20250" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="20251" end="20265" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152646" start="20267" end="20276" title="Bone Wars" label="Bone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488075" start="20290" end="20306" title="Teresa Maryańska" label="Teresa Maryańska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="20328" end="20342" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="20359" end="20367" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416249" start="20371" end="20388" title="Kirtley F. Mather" label="Kirtley F. Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q642342" start="20421" end="20440" title="Scopes Trial" label="Scopes Monkey Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020406" start="20443" end="20466" title="William Williams Mather" label="William Williams Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261309" start="20538" end="20555" title="Drummond Matthews" label="Drummond Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="20595" end="20607" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="20609" end="20624" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q434281" start="20635" end="20653" title="Douglas Mawson" label="Sir Douglas Mawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="20678" end="20687" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q347883" start="20703" end="20718" title="Frederick McCoy" label="Frederick McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="20758" end="20773" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27699731" start="20796" end="20815" title="Edith Merritt McKee" label="Edith Merritt McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159121" start="20850" end="20862" title="Dan McKenzie (professor)" label="Dan McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="20884" end="20896" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="20898" end="20913" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027737" start="20924" end="20937" title="Digby McLaren" label="Digby McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="20960" end="20974" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="20976" end="21003" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683869" start="21006" end="21019" title="Marcia McNutt" label="Marcia McNutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="21042" end="21054" title="Geophysics" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="21085" end="21113" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="21127" end="21140" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="21163" end="21194" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873238" start="21239" end="21259" title="Oscar Edward Meinzer" label="Oscar Edward Meinzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="21282" end="21293" title="hydrologist" label="hydrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349193" start="21339" end="21364" title="Luiz Alberto Dias Menezes" label="Luiz Alberto Dias Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="21388" end="21397" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="21402" end="21414" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432951" start="21417" end="21434" title="Giuseppe Mercalli" label="Giuseppe Mercalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="21456" end="21468" title="seismologist" label="seismologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="21473" end="21486" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="21502" end="21526" title="Mercalli intensity scale" label="Mercalli intensity scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="21541" end="21552" title="earthquakes" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q77805" start="21555" end="21568" title="Hans Merensky" label="Hans Merensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="21596" end="21614" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921596" start="21694" end="21707" title="Merensky Reef" label="Merensky Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q523415" start="21710" end="21725" title="John C. Merriam" label="John C. Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="21760" end="21774" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147168" start="21797" end="21813" title="La Brea Tar Pits" label="La Brea Tar Pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12452410" start="21816" end="21834" title="Waman Bapuji Metre" label="Waman Bapuji Metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="21856" end="21875" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18964149" start="21878" end="21896" title="Ellen Louise Mertz" label="Ellen Louise Mertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q586474" start="21989" end="22010" title="engineering geologist" label="engineering geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550180" start="22015" end="22034" title="Gerard V. Middleton" label="Gerard V. Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="22083" end="22094" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q89054" start="22097" end="22115" title="Milutin Milanković" label="Milutin Milanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q376090" start="22170" end="22181" title="Hugh Miller" label="Hugh Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739759" start="22277" end="22287" title="John Milne" label="John Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="22342" end="22365" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q243445" start="22368" end="22387" title="Andrija Mohorovičić" label="Andrija Mohorovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="22410" end="22423" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="22428" end="22440" title="seismologist" label="seismologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194259" start="22453" end="22478" title="Mohorovicic Discontinuity" label="Mohorovicic Discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30572" start="22481" end="22495" title="Friedrich Mohs" label="Friedrich Mohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="22525" end="22561" title="Mohs&amp;#x27; scale of mineral hardness" label="Mohs&amp;#x27; scale of mineral hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139893" start="22564" end="22576" title="James Monger" label="James Monger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751984" start="22587" end="22597" title="Cordillera" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="22613" end="22624" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354180" start="22627" end="22642" title="Eldridge Moores" label="Eldridge Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="22665" end="22680" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="22724" end="22734" title="ophiolites" label="ophiolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013264" start="22738" end="22752" title="Marie Morisawa" label="Marie Morisawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="22775" end="22788" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="22802" end="22831" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351267" start="22886" end="22901" title="W. Jason Morgan" label="W. Jason Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="22924" end="22939" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="22953" end="22978" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q107171741" start="22981" end="23002" title="Edelmira Inés Mórtola" label="Edelmira Inés Mórtola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387688" start="23088" end="23104" title="Eric W. Mountjoy" label="Eric W. Mountjoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="23168" end="23179" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q361900" start="23182" end="23200" title="Roderick Murchison" label="Roderick Murchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371703" start="23275" end="23289" title="Emiliano Mutti" label="Emiliano Mutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="23311" end="23330" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010631" start="23336" end="23351" title="Twenhofel Medal" label="Twenhofel Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772812" start="23361" end="23380" title="Anthony J. Naldrett" label="Anthony J. Naldrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="23418" end="23424" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322113" start="23441" end="23457" title="E. R. Ward Neale" label="E. R. Ward Neale"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="23471" end="23486" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822582" start="23499" end="23519" title="John Strong Newberry" label="John Strong Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356348" start="23584" end="23608" title="Ernest Henry Nickel" label="Ernest (Ernie) H. Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610378" start="23646" end="23669" title="Stephen Robert Nockolds" label="Stephen Robert Nockolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="23683" end="23686" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634098" start="23691" end="23706" title="Murchison Medal" label="Murchison Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q593706" start="23726" end="23750" title="Nils Gustaf Nordenskiöld" label="Nils Gustaf Nordenskiöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="23785" end="23797" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q312069" start="23807" end="23829" title="Henry Fairfield Osborn" label="Henry Fairfield Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="23852" end="23861" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="23866" end="23880" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q290652" start="23883" end="23899" title="Halszka Osmólska" label="Halszka Osmólska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="23920" end="23934" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="23951" end="23959" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q373726" start="23963" end="23974" title="John Ostrom" label="John Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="24007" end="24021" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14405" start="24047" end="24058" title="Deinonychus" label="Deinonychus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232796" start="24061" end="24076" title="David Dale Owen" label="David Dale Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286062" start="24167" end="24180" title="Joseph Pardee" label="Joseph Pardee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062302" start="24204" end="24223" title="channeled scablands" label="channeled scablands"/>
<link wikidata="Q289502" start="24226" end="24249" title="Clair Patterson" label="Clair Cameron Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="24292" end="24306" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650800" start="24309" end="24328" title="R.A.F. Penrose, Jr." label="R.A.F. Penrose, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29965477" start="24370" end="24383" title="Penrose Medal" label="Penrose Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q509278" start="24386" end="24406" title="Francis J. Pettijohn" label="Francis J. Pettijohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701428" start="24448" end="24461" title="John Phillips (geologist)" label="John Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="24475" end="24484" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219500" start="24497" end="24517" title="John Arthur Phillips" label="John Arthur Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368456" start="24590" end="24610" title="Vasiliy Podshibyakin" label="Vasiliy Podshibyakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="24631" end="24640" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495129" start="24656" end="24673" title="Urengoy gas field" label="Urengoy gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938579" start="24676" end="24694" title="Vladimir Porfiriev" label="Vladimir Porfiriev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="24716" end="24735" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729710" start="24738" end="24758" title="Henry W. Posamentier" label="Henry W. Posamentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q348325" start="24804" end="24822" title="John Wesley Powell" label="John Wesley Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="24872" end="24886" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="24911" end="24915" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298537" start="24918" end="24934" title="Raymond A. Price" label="Raymond A. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q377078" start="24994" end="25010" title="Raphael Pumpelly" label="Raphael Pumpelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q110407114" start="25067" end="25078" title="Jin Qingmin" label="Jin Qingmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="25136" end="25143" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="25150" end="25160" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855068" start="25212" end="25243" title="Bangalore Puttaiya Radhakrishna" label="Bangalore Puttaiya Radhakrishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535312" start="25286" end="25313" title="Geological Society of India" label="Geological Society of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q506719" start="25316" end="25330" title="John G. Ramsay" label="John G. Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498268" start="25375" end="25399" title="Frederick Leslie Ransome" label="Frederick Leslie Ransome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="25438" end="25442" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="25443" end="25461" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="25463" end="25491" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q530461" start="25494" end="25507" title="David M. Raup" label="David M. Raup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="25531" end="25545" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673470" start="25606" end="25624" title="Mary Louise Rhodes" label="Mary Louise Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="25646" end="25665" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184014" start="25698" end="25713" title="Charles Richter" label="Charles Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="25758" end="25781" title="Richter magnitude scale" label="Richter magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q76791" start="25800" end="25824" title="Ferdinand von Richthofen" label="Ferdinand von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506678" start="25872" end="25901" title="Ted Ringwood" label="A.E. &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Ringwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="25968" end="25983" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q524465" start="25993" end="26014" title="Andrés Manuel del Río" label="Andrés Manuel del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="26044" end="26056" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="26072" end="26080" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q117325" start="26083" end="26098" title="Alfred Rittmann" label="Alfred Rittmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666371" start="26161" end="26167" title="International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth&amp;#x27;s Interior" label="IAVCEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667765" start="26201" end="26218" title="John Cole Roberts" label="John Cole Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287705" start="26272" end="26288" title="Ralph J. Roberts (geologist)" label="Ralph J. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="26322" end="26328" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q74477144" start="26346" end="26357" title="Meyer Rubin" label="Meyer Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="26401" end="26419" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="26434" end="26438" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235635" start="26441" end="26462" title="Keith Runcorn" label="Stanley Keith Runcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="26501" end="26516" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="26526" end="26553" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294336" start="26564" end="26582" title="Donald F. Sangster" label="Donald F. Sangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="26604" end="26622" title="economic geologist" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727622" start="26625" end="26638" title="Emilia Săulea" label="Emilia Săulea"/>
<link wikidata="Q692133" start="26692" end="26704" title="Celâl Şengör" label="Celâl Şengör"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="26894" end="26910" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="26934" end="26943" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q112551091" start="26976" end="26990" title="Kevin M. Scott" label="Kevin M. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415401" start="27063" end="27079" title="Kirk Bryan Award" label="Kirk Bryan Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q707126" start="27082" end="27110" title="George Julius Poulett Scrope" label="George Julius Poulett Scrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q350891" start="27164" end="27177" title="Adam Sedgwick" label="Adam Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="27209" end="27217" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="27222" end="27230" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190125" start="27241" end="27257" title="Karl von Seebach" label="Karl von Seebach"/>
<link wikidata="Q67804" start="27294" end="27309" title="Adolf Seilacher" label="Adolf Seilacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986365" start="27380" end="27391" title="ichnofacies" label="ichnofacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="27415" end="27427" title="Lagerstätten" label="Lagerstätten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960084" start="27454" end="27470" title="Photoautotroph" label="photoautotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="27483" end="27498" title="Ediacaran biota" label="Ediacaran biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q283854" start="27617" end="27630" title="Seikei Sekiya" label="Seikei Sekiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="27735" end="27745" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266583" start="27748" end="27767" title="Nicholas Shackleton" label="Nicholas Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="27803" end="27816" title="climatologist" label="climatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="27819" end="27827" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="27869" end="27876" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="27886" end="27899" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150604" start="27909" end="27926" title="Richard H. Sibson" label="Richard H. Sibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216874" start="28045" end="28067" title="Eugene Merle Shoemaker" label="Eugene Merle Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="28120" end="28140" title="Comet Shoemaker-Levy" label="Comet Shoemaker-Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q983485" start="28143" end="28162" title="Haraldur Sigurdsson" label="Haraldur Sigurdsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="28209" end="28225" title="meteorite impact" label="meteorite impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524893" start="28275" end="28286" title="Leon Silver" label="Leon Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="28328" end="28332" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="28359" end="28373" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q319603" start="28402" end="28424" title="George Gaylord Simpson" label="George Gaylord Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="28448" end="28462" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61158865" start="28465" end="28478" title="Kamini Singha" label="Kamini Singha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="28509" end="28533" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Colorado School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q313533" start="28536" end="28549" title="William Smith (geologist)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265657" start="28591" end="28598" title="Su Song" label="Su Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="28654" end="28664" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="28669" end="28679" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533790" start="28682" end="28693" title="Paul Spudis" label="Paul Spudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343648" start="28738" end="28757" title="Josiah Edward Spurr" label="Josiah Edward Spurr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211520" start="28822" end="28843" title="Laurence Dudley Stamp" label="Laurence Dudley Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082650" start="28903" end="28916" title="Charles Steen" label="Charles Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="28951" end="28958" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130134" start="28964" end="28974" title="Moab, Utah" label="Moab, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795274" start="28977" end="28989" title="Max Steineke" label="Max Steineke"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="29086" end="29098" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081888" start="29101" end="29118" title="Charles R. Stelck" label="Charles R. Stelck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="29142" end="29161" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="29183" end="29194" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151722" start="29204" end="29217" title="Nicolas Steno" label="Nicolas Steno"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="29286" end="29298" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980633" start="29301" end="29313" title="Iain Stewart (geologist)" label="Iain Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132958" start="29388" end="29409" title="Clifford H. Stockwell" label="Clifford H. Stockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986634" start="29454" end="29481" title="Geological Survey of Canada" label="Geological Survey of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="29483" end="29494" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240134" start="29504" end="29519" title="David Strangway" label="David Strangway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="29543" end="29555" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="29586" end="29597" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65551" start="29606" end="29620" title="Karl Hugo Strunz" label="K. Hugo Strunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q928461" start="29673" end="29701" title="Nickel–Strunz classification" label="Nickel–Strunz classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q156941" start="29705" end="29717" title="Eduard Suess" label="Eduard Suess"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="29762" end="29774" title="Gondwanaland" label="Gondwanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177217" start="29777" end="29791" title="Peter Szatmari (geologist)" label="Peter Szatmari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372607" start="29842" end="29874" title="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia" label="Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="29884" end="29910" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="29931" end="29945" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45931" start="29977" end="29987" title="Peking Man" label="Peking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q84371" start="29990" end="30007" title="Karl von Terzaghi" label="Karl von Terzaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q538786" start="30090" end="30101" title="Marie Tharp" label="Marie Tharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="30136" end="30153" title="Mid-Oceanic Ridge" label="Mid-Oceanic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q897871" start="30156" end="30171" title="Lonnie Thompson" label="Lonnie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52120" start="30195" end="30207" title="glaciologist" label="glaciologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="30221" end="30234" title="climatologist" label="climatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482070" start="30237" end="30258" title="Sigurdur Thorarinsson" label="Sigurdur Thorarinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415972" start="30306" end="30322" title="tephrochronology" label="tephrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299184" start="30325" end="30346" title="Raymond Thorsteinsson" label="Raymond Thorsteinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475772" start="30389" end="30403" title="Bahal Tambunan" label="Bahal Tambunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="30453" end="30470" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q982125" start="30473" end="30487" title="Phillip Tobias" label="Phillip Tobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206" start="30515" end="30535" title="palaeoanthropologist" label="palaeoanthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101373" start="30537" end="30549" title="homo habilis" label="homo habilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039914" start="30560" end="30578" title="Otto Martin Torell" label="Otto Martin Torell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441584" start="30635" end="30654" title="Francis John Turner" label="Francis John Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="30705" end="30716" title="petrologist" label="petrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359567" start="30719" end="30733" title="Joseph Tyrrell" label="Joseph Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="30756" end="30770" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472318" start="30784" end="30821" title="Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology" label="Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970563" start="30832" end="30844" title="Warren Upham" label="Warren Upham"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="30884" end="30896" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527616" start="30899" end="30908" title="David Ure" label="David Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065366" start="31000" end="31048" title="Charles-Louis-Joseph-Xavier de la Vallée-Poussin" label="Charles-Louis-Joseph-Xavier de la Vallée-Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="31070" end="31079" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="31084" end="31096" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682310" start="31099" end="31109" title="Jan Veizer" label="Jan Veizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="31140" end="31150" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q651059" start="31153" end="31181" title="Felix Andries Vening Meinesz" label="Felix Andries Vening Meinesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="31201" end="31213" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q116692897" start="31230" end="31239" title="geodesist" label="geodesist"/>
<link wikidata="Q747018" start="31242" end="31256" title="Rogier Verbeek" label="Rogier Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q316371" start="31309" end="31327" title="Vladimir Vernadsky" label="Vladimir Vernadsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="31357" end="31367" title="geochemist" label="geochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q864379" start="31372" end="31385" title="biogeochemist" label="biogeochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q948019" start="31388" end="31397" title="Fred Vine" label="Fred Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="31437" end="31449" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="31451" end="31466" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809248" start="31485" end="31499" title="Lawrence Wager" label="Lawrence Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970121" start="31560" end="31580" title="Skaergaard intrusion" label="Skaergaard intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362124" start="31583" end="31608" title="Charles Doolittle Walcott" label="Charles Doolittle Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="31631" end="31645" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q852085" start="31658" end="31671" title="Burgess Shale" label="Burgess Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q983587" start="31682" end="31701" title="George P. L. Walker" label="George P. L. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358221" start="31739" end="31754" title="Roger G. Walker" label="Roger G. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q63464" start="31815" end="31851" title="Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen" label="Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="31908" end="31918" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442026" start="31921" end="31933" title="Janet Watson" label="Janet Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="31948" end="31959" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="32002" end="32030" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q76323" start="32033" end="32047" title="Alfred Wegener" label="Alfred Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="32068" end="32081" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="32083" end="32100" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845577" start="32111" end="32125" title="Harold Wellman" label="Harold Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="32164" end="32179" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58751" start="32182" end="32196" title="Abraham Werner" label="Abraham Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136420" start="32234" end="32243" title="Neptunism" label="Neptunism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086823" start="32246" end="32266" title="Israel Charles White" label="Israel Charles White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493080" start="32327" end="32341" title="Josiah Whitney" label="Josiah Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020505" start="32368" end="32396" title="California Geological Survey" label="California Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="32398" end="32411" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662781" start="32414" end="32429" title="Harold Williams (geologist)" label="Harold Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="32443" end="32458" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921644" start="32471" end="32485" title="Howel Williams" label="Howel Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="32523" end="32536" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264402" start="32539" end="32554" title="John Williamson (geologist)" label="John Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314859" start="32583" end="32606" title="Williamson diamond mine" label="Williamson diamond mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q472056" start="32619" end="32633" title="J. Tuzo Wilson" label="J. Tuzo Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="32656" end="32668" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="32673" end="32688" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703323" start="32701" end="32723" title="Newton Horace Winchell" label="Newton Horace Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535378" start="32747" end="32767" title="geology of Minnesota" label="geology of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069635" start="32770" end="32787" title="Isaac J. Winograd" label="Isaac J. Winograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q45327379" start="32810" end="32830" title="Jay Backus Woodworth" label="Jay Backus Woodworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446981" start="32884" end="32916" title="Seismological Society of America" label="Seismological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012221" start="32920" end="32940" title="William Henry Wright" label="William Henry Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="32963" end="32973" title="Prospecting" label="prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362758" start="33010" end="33023" title="Kirkland Lake" label="Kirkland Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633020" start="33048" end="33058" title="Eiju Yatsu" label="Eiju Yatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="33082" end="33097" title="geomorphologist" label="geomorphologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q54828" start="33100" end="33113" title="Ivan Yefremov" label="Ivan Yefremov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="33134" end="33148" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="33167" end="33176" title="taphonomy" label="taphonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20610822" start="33178" end="33194" title="Sorojon Yusufova" label="Sorojon Yusufova"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="33214" end="33223" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q117695" start="33292" end="33305" title="Peter Ziegler" label="Peter Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178961" start="33325" end="33344" title="petroleum geologist" label="petroleum geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202203" start="33360" end="33380" title="plate reconstruction" label="plate reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151" start="33386" end="33402" title="paleogeography" label="paleogeographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906333" start="33405" end="33420" title="Mary Lou Zoback" label="Mary Lou Zoback"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="33443" end="33455" title="geophysicist" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="33514" end="33525" title="Lithosphere" label="Lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621652" start="33550" end="33571" title="List of geophysicists" label="List of geophysicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892898" start="33574" end="33595" title="List of mineralogists" label="List of mineralogists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303667" start="33598" end="33621" title="List of paleontologists" label="List of paleontologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596050" start="33624" end="33650" title="List of Russian geologists" label="List of Russian geologists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80168" wikidata="Q1029939" url="?curid=80168" title="Thesmophoria">
<text>The Thesmophoria () was an ancient Greek religious festival, held in honor of the goddess Demeter and her daughter Persephone. It was held annually, mostly around the time that seeds were sown in late autumn – though in some places it was associated with the harvest instead – and celebrated human and agricultural fertility. The festival was one of the most widely celebrated in the Greek world. It was restricted to adult women, and the rites practiced during the festival were kept secret. The most extensive sources on the festival are a comment in a scholion on Lucian, explaining the festival, and Aristophanes&#x27; play &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;, which parodies the festival.

==Festival==

The Thesmophoria was one of the most widespread ancient Greek festivals. The fact that it was celebrated across the Greek world suggests that it dates back to before the Greek settlement in Ionia in the eleventh century BCE. The best evidence for the Thesmophoria concern its practice in Athens, but there is also information from elsewhere in the Greek world, including Arcadia, Sicily and Eretria.

The festival was dedicated to Demeter and her daughter Persephone and was celebrated in order to promote fertility, both human and agricultural. It was celebrated only by women, and men were forbidden to see or hear about the rites. It is not certain whether all free women celebrated the Thesmophoria, or whether this was restricted to aristocratic women; whichever was the case, non-citizen and unmarried women appear not to have celebrated the festival. In fact, participation was expected of all Attic wives, and could serve as a form of proof of marriage.

In Athens, the Thesmophoria took place over three days, from the eleventh to the thirteenth of Pyanepsion. This corresponds to late October in the Gregorian calendar, and was the time of the Greek year when seeds were sown. The Thesmophoria may have taken place in this month in other cities, though in some places – for instance Delos and Thebes – the festival seems to have taken place in the summer, and been associated with the harvest, instead. In other places the festival lasted for longer – in Syracuse, Sicily, the Thesmophoria was a ten-day long event.

The main source about the rituals of the Thesmophoria comes from a scholion on Lucian&#x27;s &quot;Dialogues of the Courtesans&quot;. A second major source is Aristophanes&#x27; play &quot;Thesmophoriazusae&quot;; however, Aristophanes&#x27; portrayal of the festival mixes authentically Thesmophoric elements with elements from other Greek religious practice, especially the worship of Dionysus.

Herodotus mentions the Thesmophoria in the second book of &#x27;the Histories&#x27; and compares it to a similar Egyptian mystery ritual. He is vague about the practice and refuses to go into detail. However, he claims that the rite was introduced to the Pelasgian women in Greece by the daughters of Danaus, a mythical king of Libya. Herodotus further claims that knowledge of the Thesmophoria was nearly lost following ethnic cleansing of the Pelasgians by the Dorians in the Peloponnese. He credits the Arcadians for the survival of the practice because of their survival of the cleansing.

==Rituals==

According to the scholiast on Lucian, during the Thesmophoria pigs were sacrificed, and their remains were put into pits called &quot;megara&quot;. An inscription from Delos shows that part of the cost of the Thesmophoria there went towards paying for a ritual butcher to perform the sacrifices for the festival; literary evidence suggests that in other places, however, the sacrifices may have been made by the women themselves. Some time later, the rotten remains of these sacrifices were retrieved from the pits by &quot;bailers&quot; – women who were required to spend three days in a state of ritual purity before descending into the &quot;megara&quot;. These were placed on altars to Persephone and Demeter, along with cakes baked in the shape of snakes and phalluses. These remains were then scattered on fields when seeds were sown, in the belief that this would ensure a good harvest. According to Walter Burkert, this practice was &quot;the clearest example in Greek religion of agrarian magic&quot;.

It is not certain how long the remains of the pigs were left in the &quot;megara&quot;. The fact that they had decomposed by the time that they were retrieved shows that they had been left in the pits for some time. Possibly they were thrown in during one festival and retrieved the next year. However, if they were thrown in during the Thesmophoria and retrieved in time for the sowing of seeds that year, then they may have only been left for a few weeks before being taken out again.

===Anodos===
The first day of the Thesmophoria at Athens was known as &quot;anodos&quot; (&quot;ascent&quot;). This is usually thought to be because on this day the women celebrating the festival ascended to the shrine called the Thesmophorion. Preparations for the rest of the festival were made on this day: two women were elected to oversee the celebrations. Women also set up tents on this day; they would spend the rest of the festival staying in these rather than at home.

Matthew Dillon argues that the name &quot;anodos&quot; is more likely to relate to the ascent of Persephone from the underworld, which was celebrated at the festival. Dillon suggests that a sacrifice to celebrate this ascent was performed on the first day of the festival.

===Nesteia===
The second day of the festival was called the &quot;nesteia&quot;. This was a day of fasting, imitating Demeter&#x27;s mourning for the loss of her daughter. On this day, the women at the festival sat on the ground on seats made of plants which were believed to be anaphrodisiac. Angeliki Tzanetou says that ritual obscenity () was a feature of the second day of the festival; however, Dillon says that the ritual obscenity would have taken place on another day, rather than the subdued second day, and Radek Chlup argues that it took place on the third day of the festival.

===Kalligeneia===
The third day of the Thesmophoria was &quot;kalligeneia&quot;, or &quot;beautiful birth&quot;. On this day, women called upon the goddess Kalligeneia, praying for their own fertility. Plutarch notes that in Eretria the women did not call upon Kalligeneia during the Thesmophoria.

== See also ==

* Consualia
* Sukkot

==References==
==Works cited==
* 
* 
* Herodotus, &quot;Histories&quot;, Book 2.
*Pritchard, David M. “The Position of Attic Women in Democratic Athens.” &quot;Greece and Rome&quot;, vol. 61, no. 2, 2014, pp. 174–193., .

==Further reading==
* 
* Håland, Evy Johanne (2017). &quot;Greek Festivals, Modern and Ancient: A Comparison of Female and Male Values&quot;, 2 vols. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing (or. Norwegian 2007, translated by the author).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1029939" start="4" end="16" title="Thesmophoria" label="Thesmophoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="90" end="97" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="115" end="125" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="555" end="563" title="scholia" label="scholion"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="567" end="573" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="604" end="616" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q761731" start="634" end="651" title="Thesmophoriazusae" label="Thesmophoriazusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="893" end="898" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="991" end="997" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170054" start="1074" end="1081" title="Arcadia (regional unit)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1083" end="1089" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="1094" end="1101" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="1604" end="1609" title="Attica" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q758195" start="1761" end="1771" title="Pyanepsion" label="Pyanepsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="1813" end="1831" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="1996" end="2001" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="2006" end="2012" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="2168" end="2184" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="2309" end="2315" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="2389" end="2401" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q761731" start="2419" end="2436" title="Thesmophoriazusae" label="Thesmophoriazusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="2617" end="2625" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2628" end="2637" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="2692" end="2705" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="the Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q107822" start="2883" end="2892" title="Pelasgians" label="Pelasgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210883" start="2929" end="2935" title="Danaus" label="Danaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="3091" end="3098" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="3106" end="3117" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="3307" end="3317" title="Animal sacrifice" label="sacrificed"/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="4142" end="4156" title="Walter Burkert" label="Walter Burkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="4206" end="4220" title="Religion in ancient Greece" label="Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q486061" start="5768" end="5781" title="anaphrodisiac" label="anaphrodisiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356572" start="6396" end="6405" title="Consualia" label="Consualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="6408" end="6414" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80169" wikidata="Q132734" url="?curid=80169" title="Buckwheat">
<text>Buckwheat (&quot;Fagopyrum esculentum&quot;) or common buckwheat is a flowering plant in the knotweed family Polygonaceae cultivated for its grain-like seeds and as a cover crop. Buckwheat originated around the 6th millennium BCE in the region of what is now Yunnan Province in southwestern China. The name &quot;buckwheat&quot; is used for several other species, such as &quot;Fagopyrum tataricum&quot;, a domesticated food plant raised in Asia.

Despite its name, buckwheat is not closely related to wheat. Buckwheat is not a cereal, nor is it even a member of the grass family. It is related to sorrel, knotweed, and rhubarb. Buckwheat is considered a pseudocereal, because its seeds&#x27; high starch content allows them to be used in cooking like a cereal.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;buckwheat&quot; -- literally, &quot;beech wheat&quot; -- comes from its tetrahedral seeds, which resemble the much larger seeds of the beech nut from the beech tree, and the fact that it is used like wheat. The word may be a translation of Middle Dutch : &quot;beech&quot; (Modern Dutch ; see PIE *&quot;bhago&quot;-) and &quot;wheat&quot; (Mod. Dut. , antiquated ), or maybe a native formation on the same model as the Dutch word.

The genus name &quot;Fagopyrum&quot; is a calque of the Germanic &quot;beech-wheat&quot; form; from &quot;beech&quot; and : pyrós &quot;wheat&quot;.

The species name is from meaning &quot;edible&quot;.

== Description ==
Buckwheat is a herbaceous annual flowering plant growing to about , with red stems and pink and white flowers resembling those of knotweeds. The leaves are arrow-shaped and the fruits are achenes about 5–7 mm with 3 prominent sharp angles.

== Distribution ==
&quot;Fagopyrum esculentum&quot; is native to south-central China and Tibet, and has been introduced into suitable climates across Eurasia, Africa and the Americas.

== History ==

The wild ancestor of common buckwheat is &quot;F. esculentum&quot; ssp. &quot;ancestrale&quot;. &quot;F. homotropicum&quot; is interfertile with &quot;F. esculentum&quot; and the wild forms have a common distribution, in Yunnan, a southwestern province of China. The wild ancestor of tartary buckwheat is &quot;F. tataricum&quot; ssp. &quot;potanini&quot;.

Common buckwheat was domesticated and first cultivated in inland Southeast Asia, possibly around 6000 BCE, and from there spread to Central Asia and Tibet, and then to the Middle East and Europe, which it reached by the 15th century. Domestication most likely took place in the western Yunnan region of China.

The oldest remains found in China so far date to &quot;circa&quot; 2600 BCE, while buckwheat pollen found in Japan dates from as early as 4000 BCE. It is the world&#x27;s highest-elevation domesticate, being cultivated in Yunnan on the edge of the Tibetan Plateau or on the plateau itself. Buckwheat was one of the earliest crops introduced by Europeans to North America. Dispersal around the globe was complete by 2006, when a variety developed in Canada was widely planted in China. In India, buckwheat flour is known as &quot;kuttu ka atta&quot; and has long been culturally associated with many festivals like Shivratri, Navaratri and Janmashtami. On the day of these festivals, food items made only from buckwheat are consumed.

== Cultivation ==

Buckwheat is a short-season crop that grows well in low-fertility or acidic soils; too much fertilizer – especially nitrogen – reduces yields, and the soil must be well drained. In hot climates buckwheat can be grown only by sowing late in the season, so that it blooms in cooler weather. The presence of pollinators greatly increases yield. Nectar from flowering buckwheat produces a dark-colored honey.

The buckwheat plant has a branching root system with a primary taproot that reaches deeply into moist soil. It grows tall. Buckwheat has tetrahedral seeds and produces a flower that is usually white, although can also be pink or yellow. Buckwheat branches freely, as opposed to tillering or producing suckers, enabling more complete adaption to its environment than other cereal crops.

Buckwheat is raised for grain only where a brief time is available for growth, either because the buckwheat is an early or a second crop in the season, or because the total growing season is limited. It establishes quickly, which suppresses summer weeds, and can be a reliable cover crop in summer to fit a small slot of warm season. Buckwheat has a growing period of only 10–12 weeks and it can be grown in high latitude or northern areas. Buckwheat is sometimes used as a green manure, as a plant for erosion control or as wildlife cover and feed.

==Production==
In 2022, world production of buckwheat was 2.2 million tonnes, led by Russia with 55% of the world total, followed by China with 23% and Ukraine with 7%.

=== Biological control ===
&quot;F. esculentum&quot; is often studied and used as a pollen and nectar source to increase natural predator numbers to control crop pests. Berndt et al. 2002 found that the results were not &quot;entirely&quot; promising in one vineyard in New Zealand but the same team - Berndt et al. 2006, four years later and studying a number of vineyards up and down New Zealand - did find a significant increase in 22 parasitoids, especially &quot;Dolichogenidea tasmanica&quot;, as did Irvin et al. 1999 for &quot;D. t.&quot; in Canterbury orchards. Gurr et al. 1998 showed that floral nectaries - and not shelter in or alternate hosts on &quot;F. esculentum&quot; - were responsible for this increase, and Stephens et al. 1998 for &quot;Anacharis&quot; spp. on &quot;Micromus tasmaniae&quot;. Stephens et al. 1998 also first demonstrated a great increase of &quot;A.&quot; spp. on &quot;M. t.&quot; (which also commonly predates on &quot;F. e.&quot;). Cullen et al. 2013 found that vineyards around Waipara had not continued planting buckwheat, suggesting a need for further technique development so that buckwheat will integrate well with real-world vineyard practice. English-Loeb et al. 2003 found that it &quot;does&quot; sustain greater numbers of &quot;Anagrus&quot; parasitoids on &quot;Erythroneura&quot; leafhoppers, and Balzan and Wäckers 2013 found the same for &quot;Necremnus artynes&quot; and Ferracini et al. 2012 for &quot;Necremnus tutae&quot; on &quot;Tuta absoluta&quot;, and thereby act as pest controls in tomato, potato, and to a lesser degree other Solanaceous and non-Solanaceous horticulturals. Kalinova and Moudry 2003 found that further companion planting with other flowers &quot;at the wrong time of year&quot; may actually cause &quot;F. esculentum&quot; to be killed by frosts it would have otherwise survived, and Colley and Luna 2000 found that it may delay its flowering to not coincide with the natural enemy it was planted to feed. Foti et al. 2016 found significant short-chain carboxylic acid variation to be the most likely explanation for biocontrol performance variation between cultivars.

== Phytochemicals ==

Buckwheat contains diverse phytochemicals, including rutin, tannins, catechin-7-O-glucoside in groats, and fagopyrins, which are located mainly in the cotyledons of the buckwheat plant. It has almost no levels of inorganic arsenic.

===Aromatic compounds===
Salicylaldehyde (2-hydroxybenzaldehyde) was identified as a characteristic component of buckwheat aroma. 2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone, (E,E)-2,4-decadienal, phenylacetaldehyde, 2-methoxy-4-vinylphenol, (E)-2-nonenal, decanal and hexanal also contribute to its aroma. They all have odour activity value of more than 50, but the aroma of these substances in an isolated state does not resemble buckwheat.

==Nutrition==

With a 100-gram serving of dry buckwheat providing of food energy, or cooked, buckwheat is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, four B vitamins (riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, Vitamin B6) and several dietary minerals, with content especially high (47 to 65% DV) in niacin, magnesium, manganese and phosphorus (table). Buckwheat is 72% carbohydrates, 10% dietary fiber, 3% fat, 13% protein, and 10% water.

===Gluten-free===
As buckwheat contains no gluten, it may be eaten by people with gluten-related disorders, such as celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity or dermatitis herpetiformis. Nevertheless, buckwheat products may have gluten contamination.

===Potential adverse effects===
Cases of severe allergic reactions to buckwheat and buckwheat-containing products have been reported. Buckwheat contains fluorescent phototoxic fagopyrins. Seeds, flour, and teas are generally safe when consumed in normal amounts, but fagopyrism can appear in people with diets based on high consumption of buckwheat sprouts, and particularly flowers or fagopyrin-rich buckwheat extracts. Symptoms of fagopyrism in humans may include skin inflammation in sunlight-exposed areas, cold sensitivity, and tingling or numbness in the hands.

==Culinary use==


The fruit is an achene, similar to sunflower seed, with a single seed inside a hard outer hull. The starchy endosperm is white and makes up most or all of buckwheat flour. The seed coat is green or tan, which darkens buckwheat flour. The hull is dark brown or black, and some may be included in buckwheat flour as dark specks. The dark flour is known as &quot;blé noir&quot; (black wheat) in French, along with the name &quot;sarrasin&quot; (saracen). Similarly, in Italy, it is known as &quot;grano saraceno&quot; (saracen grain). The grain can be prepared by simple dehulling, milling into farina, to whole-grain flour or to white flour. The grain can be fractionated into starch, germ and hull for specialized uses.

Buckwheat groats are commonly used in western Asia and eastern Europe. The porridge was common, and is often considered the definitive peasant dish. It is made from roasted groats that are cooked with broth to a texture similar to rice or bulgur. The dish was taken to America by Jewish, Ukrainian, Russian, and Polish immigrants who called it &quot;kasha&quot;, as it is known today, who mixed it with pasta or used it as a filling for cabbage rolls (stuffed cabbage), knishes, and blintzes. Groats were the most widely used form of buckwheat worldwide during the 20th century, eaten primarily in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Poland, called &quot;grechka&quot; (Greek [grain]) in Belarusian, Ukrainian and Russian languages.

Buckwheat noodles have been eaten in Tibet and northern China for centuries, where the growing season is too short to raise wheat. A wooden press is used to press the dough into hot boiling water when making buckwheat noodles. Old presses found in Tibet and Shanxi share the same basic design features. The Japanese and Koreans may have learned the process of making buckwheat noodles from them.

Buckwheat noodles play a major role in the cuisines of Japan (&quot;soba&quot;) and Korea (&quot;naengmyeon&quot;, &quot;makguksu&quot; and &quot;memil guksu&quot;). &quot;Soba&quot; noodles are the subject of deep cultural importance in Japan. The difficulty of making noodles from flour with no gluten has resulted in a traditional art developed around their manufacture by hand. A jelly called &quot;memilmuk&quot; in Korea is made from buckwheat starch.

Noodles also appear in Italy, with &quot;pasta di grano saraceno&quot; in Apulia region of Southern Italy and &quot;pizzoccheri&quot; in the Valtellina region of Northern Italy.

Buckwheat pancakes are eaten in several countries. They are known as buckwheat &quot;blini&quot; in Russia, &quot;galettes bretonnes&quot; in France, &quot;ployes&quot; in Acadia, &quot;poffertjes&quot; in the Netherlands, &quot;boûketes&quot; in the Wallonia region of Belgium, &quot;kuttu ki puri&quot; in India and &quot;kachhyamba&quot; in Nepal. Similar pancakes were a common food in American pioneer days. They are light and airy when baked. The buckwheat flour gives the pancakes an earthy, mildly mushroom-like taste.

Yeasted patties called &quot;hrechanyky&quot; are made in Ukraine.

Buckwheat is a permitted sustenance during fasting in several traditions. In India, on Hindu fasting days (Navaratri, Ekadashi, Janmashtami, Maha Shivaratri, etc.), fasting people in northern states of India eat foods made of buckwheat flour. Eating cereals such as wheat or rice is prohibited during such fasting days. While strict Hindus do not even drink water during their fast, others give up cereals and salt and instead eat non-cereal foods such as buckwheat (&quot;kuttu&quot;). In the Russian Orthodox tradition, it is eaten on the St. Philip fast.

Buckwheat honey is dark, strong and aromatic. Because it does not complement other honeys, it is normally produced as a monofloral honey.

== Beverages ==
=== Tea ===
Buckwheat tea, known as &quot;kuqiao-cha&quot; (苦荞茶) in China, &quot;memil-cha&quot; () in Korea and &quot;soba-cha&quot; () in Japan, is a tea made from roasted buckwheat.

=== Beer ===
In recent years, buckwheat has been used as a substitute for other grains in gluten-free beer. Although it is not an actual cereal (being a pseudocereal), buckwheat can be used in the same way as barley to produce a malt that can form the basis of a mash that will brew a beer without gliadin or hordein (together gluten) and therefore can be suitable for coeliacs or others sensitive to certain glycoproteins.

=== Whisky ===
Buckwheat whisky is a type of distilled alcoholic beverage made entirely or principally from buckwheat. It is produced in the Brittany region of France and in the United States.

=== Shōchū ===
Buckwheat is a Japanese distilled beverage produced since the 16th Century. The taste is milder than barley shōchū.

== Upholstery filling ==

Buckwheat hulls are used as filling for a variety of upholstered goods, including pillows. The hulls are durable and do not insulate or reflect heat as much as synthetic filling. They are sometimes marketed as an alternative natural filling to feathers for those with allergies. However, medical studies to measure the health effects of pillows manufactured with unprocessed and uncleaned hulls concluded that such buckwheat pillows do contain higher levels of a potential allergen that may trigger asthma in susceptible individuals than do new synthetic-filled pillows.
==See also==

* 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="0" end="9" title="Buckwheat" label="Buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="48" end="64" title="Buckwheat" label="common buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="70" end="85" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156117" start="109" end="121" title="Polygonaceae" label="Polygonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001783" start="167" end="177" title="cover crop" label="cover crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="259" end="274" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="291" end="296" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12358" start="378" end="397" title="Fagopyrum tataricum" label="Fagopyrum tataricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="502" end="507" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="528" end="534" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="567" end="579" title="Poaceae" label="grass family"/>
<link wikidata="Q26297" start="598" end="604" title="sorrel" label="sorrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q271400" start="606" end="614" title="Polygonum" label="knotweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="620" end="627" title="rhubarb" label="rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q749997" start="655" end="667" title="pseudocereal" label="pseudocereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="698" end="704" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="866" end="877" title="tetrahedral" label="tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="948" end="958" title="beech" label="beech tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="1034" end="1046" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1087" end="1090" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="PIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2313" end="2327" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2380" end="2392" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="2397" end="2402" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2420" end="2431" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="2781" end="2787" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="2807" end="2822" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="3173" end="3182" title="Shivratri" label="Shivratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269" start="3184" end="3193" title="Navaratri" label="Navaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q430574" start="3198" end="3209" title="Janmashtami" label="Janmashtami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3428" end="3436" title="fertilizer#nitrogen fertilizer anchor" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="3617" end="3627" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="3781" end="3788" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419334" start="3996" end="4005" title="Tiller (botany)" label="tillering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001783" start="4382" end="4392" title="cover crop" label="cover crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q954381" start="4579" end="4591" title="green manure" label="green manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4608" end="4615" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4808" end="4815" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="5264" end="5274" title="parasitoid" label="parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962181" start="5294" end="5308" title="Dolichogenidea" label="Dolichogenidea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5309" end="5318" title="Dolichogenidea tasmanica" label="tasmanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="5376" end="5386" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="5426" end="5442" title="floral nectaries" label="floral nectaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q989946" start="5453" end="5460" title="shelter (building)" label="shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747160" start="5467" end="5481" title="alternate host" label="alternate host"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129" start="5585" end="5594" title="Anacharis" label="Anacharis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125396" start="5615" end="5633" title="Micromus tasmaniae" label="Micromus tasmaniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="5847" end="5854" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13429509" start="6107" end="6114" title="Anagrus" label="Anagrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10488925" start="6142" end="6154" title="Erythroneura" label="Erythroneura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985628" start="6227" end="6236" title="Necremnus" label="Necremnus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6237" end="6244" title="Necremnus artynes" label="artynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985628" start="6287" end="6296" title="Necremnus" label="Necremnus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6297" end="6302" title="Necremnus tutae" label="tutae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46858" start="6318" end="6331" title="Tuta absoluta" label="Tuta absoluta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="6375" end="6381" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="6383" end="6389" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="6512" end="6530" title="companion planting" label="companion planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="6778" end="6791" title="natural enemy" label="natural enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="6851" end="6878" title="short-chain carboxylic acid" label="short-chain carboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="6968" end="6976" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="7029" end="7042" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q407857" start="7055" end="7060" title="rutin" label="rutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="7062" end="7068" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051792" start="7071" end="7093" title="catechin-7-O-glucoside" label="catechin-7-O-glucoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608430" start="7109" end="7118" title="fagopyrin" label="fagopyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193026" start="7153" end="7162" title="cotyledon" label="cotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q414492" start="7260" end="7275" title="Salicylaldehyde" label="Salicylaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q250455" start="7365" end="7402" title="2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone" label="2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544759" start="7404" end="7424" title="(E,E)-2,4-decadienal" label="(E,E)-2,4-decadienal"/>
<link wikidata="Q424998" start="7426" end="7444" title="phenylacetaldehyde" label="phenylacetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596898" start="7446" end="7469" title="2-methoxy-4-vinylphenol" label="2-methoxy-4-vinylphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27131346" start="7471" end="7484" title="2-Nonenal" label="(E)-2-nonenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q903525" start="7486" end="7493" title="decanal" label="decanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q420698" start="7498" end="7505" title="hexanal" label="hexanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q698034" start="7550" end="7570" title="odour activity value" label="odour activity value"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="7742" end="7753" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="7813" end="7824" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7833" end="7840" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="7842" end="7855" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="7862" end="7872" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q130365" start="7874" end="7884" title="riboflavin" label="riboflavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="7886" end="7892" title="niacin" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179894" start="7894" end="7910" title="pantothenic acid" label="pantothenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205130" start="7912" end="7922" title="Vitamin B6" label="Vitamin B6"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="7936" end="7952" title="dietary minerals" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715691" start="8001" end="8007" title="Niacin (nutrient)" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="8009" end="8018" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="8020" end="8029" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="8034" end="8044" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="8071" end="8084" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="8108" end="8111" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188251" start="8185" end="8191" title="gluten" label="gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367782" start="8224" end="8248" title="gluten-related disorders" label="gluten-related disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="8258" end="8272" title="coeliac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q19772377" start="8274" end="8303" title="non-celiac gluten sensitivity" label="non-celiac gluten sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151507" start="8307" end="8331" title="dermatitis herpetiformis" label="dermatitis herpetiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="8446" end="8454" title="Allergy" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="8551" end="8562" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088972" start="8563" end="8573" title="phototoxic" label="phototoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608430" start="8574" end="8583" title="fagopyrin" label="fagopyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="8869" end="8881" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714" start="9002" end="9008" title="achene" label="achene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="9021" end="9035" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="9076" end="9080" title="Hull (botany)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="9094" end="9103" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="9151" end="9156" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="9428" end="9435" title="saracen" label="saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505415" start="9578" end="9584" title="farina (food)" label="farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436715" start="9716" end="9722" title="groats" label="groats"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="9781" end="9789" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="9841" end="9848" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="9871" end="9876" title="roast" label="roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="9907" end="9912" title="broth" label="broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q250432" start="9945" end="9951" title="bulgur" label="bulgur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="10018" end="10024" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="10025" end="10034" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379618" start="10056" end="10061" title="kasha" label="kasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="10109" end="10114" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499669" start="10143" end="10156" title="cabbage rolls" label="cabbage rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446322" start="10176" end="10181" title="knish" label="knish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715760" start="10189" end="10195" title="blintz" label="blintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="10304" end="10311" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="10313" end="10319" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="10321" end="10330" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="10340" end="10347" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="10349" end="10356" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="10362" end="10368" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379618" start="10383" end="10390" title="grechka" label="grechka"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="10472" end="10478" title="noodle" label="noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="10499" end="10504" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178024" start="10629" end="10634" title="dough" label="dough"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="10720" end="10726" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="10869" end="10875" title="noodle" label="noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q753910" start="10927" end="10931" title="soba" label="soba"/>
<link wikidata="Q715084" start="10956" end="10966" title="naengmyeon" label="naengmyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939550" start="10980" end="10988" title="makguksu" label="makguksu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815225" start="11262" end="11270" title="memilmuk" label="memilmuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="11309" end="11315" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="11392" end="11398" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20042" start="11434" end="11445" title="pizzoccheri" label="pizzoccheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q685105" start="11459" end="11469" title="Valtellina" label="Valtellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="11507" end="11514" title="pancake" label="pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q815898" start="11582" end="11587" title="blini" label="blini"/>
<link wikidata="Q43038747" start="11611" end="11629" title="kaletez" label="galettes bretonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205199" start="11653" end="11658" title="ploye" label="ploye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="11669" end="11675" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q283740" start="11683" end="11693" title="poffertjes" label="poffertjes"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="11748" end="11756" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="12180" end="12185" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269" start="12200" end="12209" title="Navaratri" label="Navaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196722" start="12211" end="12219" title="Ekadashi" label="Ekadashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430574" start="12221" end="12232" title="Krishna Janmashtami" label="Janmashtami"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="12234" end="12249" title="Maha Shivaratri" label="Maha Shivaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="12359" end="12364" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="12368" end="12372" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="12503" end="12507" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776580" start="12652" end="12667" title="Buckwheat honey" label="Buckwheat honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776580" start="12772" end="12788" title="monofloral honey" label="monofloral honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270489" start="12819" end="12832" title="Buckwheat tea" label="Buckwheat tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q656235" start="13083" end="13099" title="gluten-free beer" label="gluten-free beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="13202" end="13208" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="13222" end="13226" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276781" start="13256" end="13260" title="mashing" label="mash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="13278" end="13282" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q279074" start="13291" end="13298" title="gliadin" label="gliadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822824" start="13302" end="13309" title="hordein" label="hordein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188251" start="13320" end="13326" title="gluten" label="gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="13362" end="13370" title="coeliac disease" label="coeliacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187126" start="13402" end="13415" title="glycoproteins" label="glycoproteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="13463" end="13491" title="Distilled beverage" label="distilled alcoholic beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="13559" end="13567" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13578" end="13584" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13596" end="13609" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123578" start="13823" end="13834" title="upholstery" label="upholstered"/>
<link wikidata="Q99895" start="13852" end="13858" title="pillow" label="pillow"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="14269" end="14275" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80171" wikidata="Q1141300" url="?curid=80171" title="Celeus">
<text>Celeus ( ) or Keleus () was the king of Eleusis in Greek mythology, husband of Metaneira and father of several daughters, who are called Callidice, Demo, Cleisidice and Callithoe in the &quot;Homeric Hymn to Demeter&quot;, and Diogeneia, Pammerope and Saesara by Pausanias.

== Mythology ==
In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Celeus was one of the original priests of Demeter, one of the first people to learn the secret rites and mysteries of Demeter&#x27;s cult the Eleusinian Mysteries. Diocles, Eumolpos, Triptolemus and Polyxeinus were the others of the first priests.

While Demeter was searching for her daughter, having taken the form of an old woman called Doso, she received a hospitable welcome from Celeus, the king of Eleusis in Attica. He asked her to nurse Demophon, his youngest son by Metaneira. As a gift to Celeus, because of his hospitality, Demeter planned to make Demophon immortal by burning his mortal spirit away in the family hearth every night. She was unable to complete the ritual because Metaneira walked in on her one night and interfered with the process. Instead, Demeter chose to teach Triptolemus, the other son of Celeus (though he was ascribed different parentages as well), the art of agriculture and, from him, the rest of Greece learned to plant and reap crops. He flew across the land on a winged chariot while Demeter and Persephone cared for him, and helped him complete his mission of educating the whole of Greece on the art of agriculture.

Celeus was killed by Erichthonius in a war with Athens. His mourning daughters were afterwards transformed into doves by Demeter.

Robert Graves suggested that Celeus&#x27; name can mean ‘burner’ as well as ‘woodpecker’ or ‘sorcerer’.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Fasti&quot; translated by James G. Frazer. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Fasti.&quot; Sir James George Frazer. London; Cambridge, MA. William Heinemann Ltd.; Harvard University Press. 1933. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses.&quot; Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="0" end="6" title="Celeus" label="Celeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="14" end="20" title="Celeus" label="Keleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="40" end="47" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="51" end="66" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469456" start="79" end="88" title="Metanira" label="Metaneira"/>
<link wikidata="Q138761" start="137" end="146" title="Callidice" label="Callidice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="148" end="152" title="Demo (mythology)" label="Demo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="154" end="164" title="Cleisidice" label="Cleisidice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="178" title="Callithoe (mythology)" label="Callithoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="192" end="204" title="Homeric Hymn" label="Homeric Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="208" end="215" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223726" start="227" end="236" title="Diogeneia" label="Diogeneia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="238" end="247" title="Pammerope" label="Pammerope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16328138" start="252" end="259" title="Saesara" label="Saesara"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="263" end="272" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="298" end="303" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="465" end="485" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480354" start="487" end="494" title="Diocles (mythology)" label="Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="496" end="504" title="Eumolpos" label="Eumolpos"/>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="506" end="517" title="Triptolemus" label="Triptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446690" start="522" end="532" title="Polyxeinus" label="Polyxeinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="578" end="585" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="663" end="667" title="Demeter" label="Doso"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="739" end="745" title="Attica, Greece" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475776" start="769" end="777" title="Demophon of Eleusis" label="Demophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="1117" end="1128" title="Triptolemus" label="Triptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="1361" end="1371" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q644921" start="1505" end="1517" title="Erichthonius of Athens" label="Erichthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1532" end="1538" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="1615" end="1628" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1750" end="1761" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="2063" end="2083" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2551" end="2560" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2959" end="2979" title="Ovid" label="Publius Ovidius Naso"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80172" wikidata="Q269243" url="?curid=80172" title="Triptolemus">
<text>Triptolemus (), also known as Buzyges (), was a hero of Eleusis in Greek mythology, central to the Eleusinian Mysteries and is worshipped as the inventor and patron of agriculture. Triptolemus is credited with being the first to sow seed for cultivation after being taught by Demeter and is credited for the use of oxen and the plough. Xenophon claims that Peloponnesus was the first place Triptolemus shared Demeter&#x27;s agricultural gift while Pausanias claims the Rharium plane near Eleusis was the first place to be sown for crops.

Triptolemus is depicted as a young man with a branch or diadem placed in his hair, usually sitting on his chariot, adorned with serpents. His attributes include a plate of grain, a pair of wheat or barley ears and a scepter.

==Mythology==

=== Origin of Triptolemus&#x27; Agricultural Gifts ===
Triptolemus&#x27; first introduction to Demeter is during Demeter&#x27;s search for her daughter following the abduction of Persephone. While Demeter, in the guise of an old woman named Doso, was searching for her daughter Persephone (Kore), who had been abducted by Hades (Pluto), she received a hospitable welcome from Celeus, the King of Eleusis. He asked her to nurse Demophon—&quot;killer of men&quot;, a counterpart to Triptolemus— and Triptolemus, his sons by Metanira.

Demeter saw Triptolemus was sick and fed him her breast milk and placed him under the hot coals of a fire. Not only did this recover his strength but he grew instantly into manhood. As a gift to Celeus, in gratitude for his hospitality, Demeter secretly planned to make Demophon immortal by placing him in the flames of the hearth to strip him of his mortal flesh. With each day Demophon grew but she was unable to complete the ritual because she was discovered burying the babe in the fire.

Instead, Demeter gifted Triptolemus a chariot drawn by winged dragons or serpents and wheat, representative of the gift of agriculture. Demeter taught Triptolemus the art of agriculture and shared with him how to conduct her rites and taught him her mysteries. From Triptolemus, the rest of Greece learned to plant and reap crops as he flew across the land on his chariot wafting the wheat through the air to sow crops across the inhabitied earth. Demeter and Persephone, once restored to her mother, cared for him, and helped him complete his mission of educating the whole world in the art of agriculture.

In the Homeric &quot;Hymn to Demeter&quot;&quot;,&quot; Triptolemus is not a son of Celeus and Metanira but rather known as a king of Eleusis who served justice, and Demeter is asked to nurse their only son Demophon. Rather than nurse Demophon, Demeter anoints him with ambrosia, the food of the gods, breathes on him gently while holding him to her chest, and places him within the flames of fire during the night, all in an effort to make him immortal. Demeter is foiled in her plan in this retelling as well.

Triptolemus was equally associated with the bestowal of hope for the afterlife associated with the expansion of the Eleusinian Mysteries.

=== Spreading the Art of Agriculture ===

Triptolemus traveled to Scythia on his dragon drawn chariot to teach King Lyncus and the Scythians the art of agriculture. Bearing the gifts of Demeter, he scattered seeds across Scythia so the realm may yield a large harvest of good food. Lyncus grew envious of Triptolemus and his gift of agriculture, so he planned to murder Triptolemus while he slept, hoping that he could receive the praise for the harvest instead. Before Lyncus could enact his plan he was thwarted by Demeter who turned him into a lynx as punishment and sent Triptolemus back into the sky in her chariot.

Triptolemus also traveled to the kingdom of Getae where he intended to continue to spread the art of agriculture and share grain with the people. The king of Getae, Charnabon (also spelt Carnabon) made an attempt at Triptolemus&#x27; life, seized him and ordering one of the chariot dragons to be killed keep Triptolemus from escaping. Again Demeter came to Triptolemus&#x27; rescue, returning the chariot to him and replacing the lost dragon.

Traveling from Attica, Triptolemus went to the city of Patrae located near the river Peirus and the river Glaucus. The land was ruled by Eumelus, who was said to be indigenous to the land, and he was king over few subjects. Triptolemus shared with him cultivated corn and taught him how to found a city, which Eumelus named Aroe from the tilling of soil or fertile land. The son of Eumelus, Antheias, attempted to sow the seed of agriculture himself by using the dragon drawn chariot while Triptolemus slept, but Antheias fell from the car and was killed. Eumelus and Triptolemus then founded another nearby city and named it Antheia for his lost son.

Triptolemus is credited with teaching the cultivation of crops to the Pelasgian later known as the Arcadians. He taught Arcas, the son of Callisto and the King of Pelasgia (later Arcadia) following the death of Nyctimus.

=== Eleusinian Mysteries ===
The Eleusinian Mysteries were initiations held every year for the cult of Demeter and Persephone based at the Panhellenic Sanctuary of Eleusis in ancient Greece. They are considered the &quot;most famous of the secret religious rites of ancient Greece&quot;.

In the archaic Homeric &quot;Hymn to Demeter&quot;, Triptolemus is briefly mentioned as one of the original priests of Demeter, one of the first men to learn the secret rites and mysteries of Eleusinian Mysteries: Diocles driver of horses, the mighty Eumolpos, Celeus leader of peoples, and Polyxeinus were the others mentioned as some of the first priests. According to Xenophon, Triptolemus first shares the rites of Demeter and Persephone with Heracles, the traditional ancestor of the Spartan kings, and the Dioscuri, twin deities Castor and Pollux. Celeus or the peasant Dysaules may be substituted for Triptolemus as the primordial Eleusinian recipient of the first gifts of the Mysteries.

Triptolemus&#x27; role at Eleusis is unique as he was one of the first men to learn the mystic rites and was a pupil of Demeter who was charged with bringing agriculture to humankind. Separate from the Mysteries, Triptolemus was thought to have a cult of his own as he had a temples dedicated to him in Athens and Eleusis. It is said that temples and alters were erected in his honor because he gave the people food by cultivation and shared with them the way to not only live but to live well. In the 5th-century bas-relief in the National Museum, Athens (&quot;illustration&quot;), which probably came from his temple, the boy Triptolemus stands between the two Goddesses, Demeter and the Kore, and receives from Demeter a golden ear of grain (now lost).

Triptolemus was given three commandments to living a simple and pious life: &quot;Honor your parents&quot;, &quot;Honor the gods with fruits&quot;—for the Greeks, this includes grains—and &quot;Spare the animals&quot;.

=== Judge of the Afterlife ===
Socrates names Triptolemus as one of the judges in the afterlife along with three sons of Zeus, Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus. Each of the judges had their own roles in the afterlife: Aeacus was the doorkeeper and judged the deceased of Europe, Rhadamanthus was the Lord of Elysium and judged the deceased of Asia, and Minos was to be the deal breaker if any indeceasion was reached. Triptolemus was said to have rule over the deceased who were initiated into the mysteries.

=== Parentage ===
Triptolemus&#x27; parentage is highly debated across sources: He was either a mortal prince and the eldest son of King Celeus of Eleusis and Metanira or according to Pseudo-Apollodorus, Panyasis believed he was the son of Eleusis, while Pherecydes believed he was the son of the divine son of Gaia and Oceanus (Ocean and Earth). Multiple other parentage combinations have been mentioned by other authors as seen in the comparative table. Triptolemus was said to be the ancestor to a royal priestly caste of the Eleusinian Mysteries, who claimed to be Buzygae (Βουζύγαι), that taught agriculture and performed secret rites and rituals, of which Pericles was its most famous descendant.
==See also==

*Indra
*Eleusinsian Mysteries
*Eleusis

== References == </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="0" end="11" title="Triptolemus" label="Triptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="30" end="37" title="Triptolemus" label="Buzyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791219" start="56" end="63" title="Eleusis (Boeotia)" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="67" end="82" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="99" end="119" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q721221" start="667" end="675" title="Serpent (symbolism)" label="serpents"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="755" end="762" title="scepter" label="scepter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132999" start="942" end="969" title="Rape of Persephone" label="the abduction of Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="977" end="984" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="1058" end="1068" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="1102" end="1107" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="1156" end="1162" title="Celeus" label="Celeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475776" start="1207" end="1215" title="Demophon of Eleusis" label="Demophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469456" start="1302" end="1310" title="Metanira" label="Metanira"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="1815" end="1822" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="2422" end="2457" title="Homeric Hymn to Demeter" label="Homeric &amp;quot;Hymn to Demeter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="2685" end="2693" title="ambrosia" label="ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="3133" end="3140" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q610197" start="3183" end="3189" title="Lyncus" label="Lyncus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="3198" end="3207" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="3733" end="3738" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660394" start="3854" end="3863" title="Charnabon" label="Charnabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660394" start="3876" end="3884" title="Carnabon" label="Carnabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="4149" end="4155" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="4181" end="4195" title="Patras" label="city of Patrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555219" start="4219" end="4225" title="Peiros" label="Peirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558323" start="4240" end="4247" title="Glafkos (river)" label="Glaucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27955841" start="4271" end="4278" title="Eumelus" label="Eumelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795485" start="4458" end="4462" title="Aroi, Patras" label="Aroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771497" start="4760" end="4767" title="Antheia, Patras" label="Antheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q606422" start="4907" end="4912" title="Arcas" label="Arcas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203673" start="4925" end="4933" title="Callisto (mythology)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130084" start="4950" end="4958" title="Pelasgia" label="Pelasgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170054" start="4966" end="4973" title="Arcadia (regional unit)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599183" start="4998" end="5006" title="Nyctimus" label="Nyctimus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5313" end="5348" title="Homeric Hymns#List of the Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric &amp;quot;Hymn to Demeter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="5490" end="5510" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480354" start="5512" end="5519" title="Diocles (mythology)" label="Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="5549" end="5557" title="Eumolpos" label="Eumolpos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="5559" end="5565" title="Celeus" label="Celeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446690" start="5589" end="5599" title="Polyxeinus" label="Polyxeinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="5669" end="5677" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="5810" end="5818" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Dioscuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="5833" end="5850" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="5874" end="5882" title="Dysaules" label="Dysaules"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="6670" end="6677" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="6686" end="6690" title="Persephone" label="Kore"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="7004" end="7012" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="7094" end="7098" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="7100" end="7105" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193609" start="7107" end="7119" title="Rhadamanthus" label="Rhadamanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206187" start="7125" end="7131" title="Aeacus" label="Aeacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157128" start="7280" end="7287" title="Elysium" label="Elysium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="7619" end="7625" title="Celeus" label="Celeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="7629" end="7636" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469456" start="7641" end="7649" title="Metanira" label="Metanira"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="7666" end="7684" title="Pseudo-Apollodorus" label="Pseudo-Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q983680" start="7686" end="7694" title="Panyassis" label="Panyasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311485" start="7737" end="7747" title="Pherecydes of Syros" label="Pherecydes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="7793" end="7797" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="7802" end="7809" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242921" start="7989" end="8003" title="priestly caste" label="priestly caste"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8051" end="8058" title=":el:Βουζύγοι" label="Buzygae"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="8144" end="8152" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="8200" end="8205" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="8207" end="8228" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinsian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328260" start="8230" end="8237" title="Eleusis (mythology)" label="Eleusis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80181" wikidata="Q1469456" url="?curid=80181" title="Metanira">
<text>In Greek mythology, Metanira (; Ancient Greek: Μετάνειρα &quot;Metáneira&quot;) or Meganira was a queen of Eleusis as wife of King Celeus. She was the daughter of Amphictyon, the king of Athens.

== Mythology ==
While Demeter was searching for her daughter, having taken the form of an old woman called Doso, she received a hospitable welcome from Celeus, the King of Eleusis in Attica. He asked her to nurse Demophoon, his son by Metanira. As a gift to Celeus, because of his hospitality, Demeter planned to make Demophoon immortal by burning his mortal spirit away in the family hearth every night. She was unable to complete the ritual because Metanira walked in on her one night and screamed at seeing her child in flames, which distracted the goddess. Some theories suggested that Demophoon, as a result, was destroyed by the flames, but in other sources he suffered no harm. 

In Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Fasti&quot;, the baby was Triptolemus and not Demophoon, although in most other versions he was an adult by the time; some sources state that even his parentage was different. However, all versions agree that Demeter chose to teach Triptolemus the art of agriculture and, from him, the rest of Greece learned to plant and reap crops. He flew across the land on a winged chariot while Demeter and Persephone cared for him, and helped him complete his mission of educating the whole of Greece on the art of agriculture. Some mythological traditions tell that Metanira&#x27;s son Abas mocked Demeter and as punishment was turned into a lizard; others, however, relate this of Ascalabus, son of Misme.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Antoninus Liberalis, &quot;The Metamorphoses of Antoninus Liberalis&quot; translated by Francis Celoria (Routledge 1992). Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses.&quot; Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.

==External links==
* &quot;Pentelic Fragment,&quot; a poem about Metaneira by Jared Carter.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469456" start="20" end="28" title="Metanira" label="Metanira"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="32" end="45" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469456" start="83" end="91" title="Metanira" label="Meganira"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="107" end="114" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141300" start="131" end="137" title="Celeus" label="Celeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q474854" start="163" end="173" title="Amphictyon" label="Amphictyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="187" end="193" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="218" end="225" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="303" end="307" title="Doso (mythology)" label="Doso"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="379" end="385" title="Attica, Greece" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475776" start="409" end="418" title="Demophon of Eleusis" label="Demophoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="886" end="890" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q269243" start="930" end="941" title="Triptolemus" label="Triptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="1300" end="1310" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663542" start="1481" end="1485" title="Abas (mythology)" label="Abas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655419" start="1577" end="1586" title="Ascalabus" label="Ascalabus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1595" end="1600" title="Misme (mythology)" label="Misme"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="1633" end="1652" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1799" end="1810" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="2093" end="2113" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2299" end="2308" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2707" end="2727" title="Ovid" label="Publius Ovidius Naso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683467" start="3404" end="3416" title="Jared Carter (poet)" label="Jared Carter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80183" wikidata="Q1889152" url="?curid=80183" title="Mike Mansfield">
<text>Michael Joseph Mansfield (March 16, 1903 – October 5, 2001) was an American Democratic Party politician and diplomat who represented Montana in the United States House of Representatives from 1943 to 1953 and United States Senate from 1953 to 1977. As the leader of the Senate Democratic Caucus from 1961 to 1977, Mansfield shepherded Great Society programs through the Senate; his tenure of exactly sixteen years was the longest of any party leader in Senate history, until the record was broken by Mitch McConnell in 2023.

Born in Brooklyn, New York, Mansfield grew up in Great Falls, Montana. He lied about his age to serve in the United States Navy during World War I. After the war, he became a professor of history and political science at the University of Montana. He won election to the House of Representatives and served on the House Committee on Foreign Affairs during World War II.

In 1952, he defeated incumbent Republican Senator Zales Ecton to take a seat in the Senate. Mansfield served as Senate Majority Whip from 1957 to 1961. Mansfield ascended to Senate Majority Leader after Lyndon B. Johnson resigned from the Senate to become vice president. In the later years of the Vietnam War, he opposed escalation of American involvement and supported President Richard Nixon&#x27;s plans for Vietnamization.

After retiring from the Senate, Mansfield served as United States Ambassador to Japan from 1977 to 1988. Mansfield is the longest-serving American ambassador to Japan in history. Upon his retirement, he was awarded the nation&#x27;s highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Mansfield also worked as a senior adviser on East Asian affairs to Goldman Sachs.

==Early childhood==
Michael Joseph (Mike) Mansfield was born on March 16, 1903, in Brooklyn, New York, to Irish immigrant parents, Patrick J. Mansfield and Josephine (née O&#x27;Brien) Mansfield. His father worked various jobs, including as a construction worker, hotel porter, and maintenance man, to support the family. In 1910, Josephine died from nephritis. Shortly before her death, Patrick had been injured in a construction accident, which left him unable to care for his three children. As a result, Patrick sent Mike and his two sisters to live with his great-aunt and uncle, Richard and Margaret, in Great Falls, Montana. In Montana, attended local public schools, and worked in his relatives&#x27; grocery store. He turned into a habitual runaway, even living at a state orphanage in Twin Bridges for half a year.

In 1917, at age 14, Mansfield dropped out of school, left home and made his way to a logging camp in Leavenworth, Washington. There, he met members of the Oregon National Guard, who were stationed nearby. They helped him board their troop train as it traveled east to New York, en route to their eventual deployment in Europe. He made it to New York City, where he reunited with his father.

==Military service==
Wanting to join the war effort during World War I, the 14 year old Mansfield forged his father&#x27;s signature in order to enlist in the US Navy. He went on several overseas convoys on the , but was discharged by the Navy after his real age was discovered. (He was the last known veteran of the war to die before he reached the age of 100 and the last World War I veteran to sit in the US Senate.) After his Navy discharge, he enlisted in the US Army, serving as a private from 1919 to 1920.

Mansfield was a Private First Class in the US Marine Corps from 1920 to 1922. He served in the Western Recruiting Division at San Francisco until January 1921, when he was transferred to the Marine Barracks at Puget Sound, Washington. The following month, he was detached to the Guard Company, Marine Barracks, Navy Yard, Mare Island, California. In April, he boarded the &quot;USAT Sherman&quot;, bound for the Philippines. After a brief stopover at the Marine Barracks at Cavite, he arrived at his duty station on May 5, 1921, the Marine Barracks, Naval Station, Olongapo, Philippine Islands. One year later, Mansfield was assigned to Company A, Marine Battery, Asiatic Fleet. A short tour of duty with the Asiatic Fleet took him along the coast of China before he returned to Olongapo in late May 1922. His service with the Marines established a lifelong interest in Asia.

That August, Mansfield returned to Cavite in preparation for his return to the United States and eventual discharge. On November 9, 1922, Private Mansfield was released from the Marine Corps on the completion of his enlistment. He was awarded the Good Conduct Medal, his character being described as &quot;excellent&quot; during his two years as a Marine.

==Education==
Following his return to Montana in 1922, Mansfield worked as a &quot;mucker&quot; and shoveled ore and other waste in the copper mines of Butte for eight years. Having never attended high school, he gained admission to Montana School of Mines (MSM) in Butte by taking their entrance examinations. He attended MSM from 1927 to 1928, studying to become a mining engineer.

In 1928, Mansfield met Maureen Hayes, a local schoolteacher who would become his wife. She encouraged him to pursue further education. In December 1931, Mansfield began his studies at the University of Montana (UM) in Missoula, where he took both high school and college courses. Maureen moved to Missoula, and they married on September 13, 1932. She worked as a social worker, to help support Mansfield through his studies.

At the University of Montana, Mansfield joined the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity. In 1933, he earned both his high school equivalency and his Bachelor of Arts degree. He continued with graduate studies at UM, while also working part-time in the registrar&#x27;s office and teaching two courses as a graduate assistant. He earned a Master of Arts degree from UM in 1934 with a thesis titled &quot;American Diplomatic Relations with Korea, 1866–1910.&quot;

After completing his graduate studies, Mansfield accepted a position as administrator and professor at UM, teaching courses in Latin American and Far Eastern History, and occasionally lecturing on Greek and Roman history. Additionally, he studied towards a PhD at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) from 1936 to 1937. Though he left UM in 1942 to enter politics, he remained a tenured Professor of History at the University of Montana until his death.

==U.S. Representative==

In 1940, Mansfield ran for the Democratic nomination for the House of Representatives in Montana&#x27;s 1st congressional district but was defeated by Jerry J. O&#x27;Connell, a former holder of the seat, in the primary. The general election was won by Republican Jeannette Rankin, who had previously won what was formerly an at-large seat in the House in 1916 and served until her defeat in 1920. Mansfield decided to run for the seat again in the following election and won it by defeating the businessman Howard K. Hazelbaker after Rankin, who had voted against the entry of the United States into World War II, decided not to run for what would have been her third term.

Mansfield served five terms in the House, being re-elected in 1944, 1946, 1948, and 1950. His military service and academic experience landed him a seat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee. He went to China on a special mission for US President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 and served as a delegate to the ninth Inter-American Conference in Colombia in 1948. In 1951, he was appointed by President Harry S. Truman as a delegate to the United Nations&#x27; sixth session in Paris. During his House tenure, he also expressed his support for price controls, a higher minimum wage, the Marshall Plan, and aid to Turkey and Greece. He opposed the House Un-American Activities Committee, the Taft–Hartley Act, and the Twenty-second Amendment.

==U.S. Senator==
In 1952, Mansfield was elected to the Senate after he had narrowly defeated the Republican incumbent, Zales Ecton. He served as Senate Majority Whip under Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson from 1957 to 1961. In 1961, after Johnson resigned from the Senate to become Vice President, Mansfield was unanimously elected the Democratic floor leader and thus Senate Majority Leader. Serving sixteen years, from 1961 until his retirement in 1977, Mansfield is the longest-serving Majority Leader in the history of the Senate. The &quot;Washington Post&quot; compared Mansfield&#x27;s behavior as Majority Leader to Johnson&#x27;s by saying, &quot;Instead of Johnson&#x27;s browbeating tactics, Mansfield led by setting an example of humility and accommodation.&quot;
Mansfield was critical of US involvement in Laos. On December 28, 1960, he opined that US aid to Laos had produced nothing but &quot;chaos, discontent, armies on the loose, and a large mission of hundreds of officials in Vientiane.&quot;

An early supporter of Ngo Dinh Diem, Mansfield altered his opinion on the Vietnam War after a visit to Vietnam in 1962. He reported to John F. Kennedy on December 2, 1962, that US money given to Diem&#x27;s government was being squandered and that the US should avoid further involvement in Vietnam. He was thus the first American official to comment even mildly negatively on the war&#x27;s condition.

On September 25, 1963, Mansfield introduced Kennedy during a joint appearance with him at the Yellowstone County Fairgrounds, Kennedy expressing his appreciation afterward and adding, &quot;I know that those of you who live in Montana know something of his character and his high standard of public service, but I am not sure that you are completely aware of what a significant role he has played in the last 3 years in passing through the United States Senate measure after measure which strengthens this country at home and abroad.&quot;

Mansfield delivered a eulogy on November 24, 1963, as President Kennedy&#x27;s casket lay in state in the Capitol rotunda, saying, &quot;He gave that we might give of ourselves, that we might give to one another until there would be no room, no room at all, for the bigotry, the hatred, prejudice, and the arrogance which converged in that moment of horror to strike him down.&quot;

During the Johnson administration, Mansfield, convinced that it was a blunder based on just aims, became a skeptic of US involvement in the Vietnam War. In February 1965, he lobbied against escalating aerial bombardment of North Vietnam in the aftermath of Pleiku, arguing in a letter to the president that Operation Rolling Thunder would lead to a need for &quot;vastly strengthened... American forces.&quot;

In 1964, Mansfield, as Senate Majority Leader, filed a procedural motion to have the Civil Rights Act of 1964 discussed by the whole Senate rather than by the Judiciary Committee, which had killed similar legislation seven years earlier. Mansfield voted in favor of the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968, as well as the 24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Mansfield voted in favor of the initial Senate amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1957 on August 7, 1957, but did not vote on the House amendment to the bill on August 29, 1957. Mansfield did not vote on the Civil Rights Act of 1960 or the confirmation of Thurgood Marshall to the U.S. Supreme Court.

He hailed the new Richard Nixon administration, especially the &quot;Nixon Doctrine&quot; announced at Guam in 1969 that the US would honor all treaty commitments, provide a nuclear umbrella for its allies, and supply weapons and technical assistance to countries where warranted without committing American forces to local conflicts.

In turn, Nixon turned to Mansfield for advice and as his liaison with the Senate on Vietnam. Nixon began a steady withdrawal and replacement of US troops shortly after he took office in January 1969, a policy supported by Mansfield. During his first term, Nixon reduced American forces by 95%, leaving only 24,200 in late 1972; the last ones left in March 1973.

During the economic crisis of 1971, Mansfield was not afraid to reach across the aisle to help the economy:

What we&#x27;re in is not a Republican recession or a Democratic recession; both parties had much to do with bringing us where we are today. But we&#x27;re facing a national situation which calls for the best which all of us can produce, because we know the results will be something which we will regret.

Mansfield attended the November 17, 1976, meeting between President-elect Jimmy Carter and Democratic congressional leaders in which Carter sought out support for a proposal to have the president&#x27;s power to reorganize the government reinstated with potential to be vetoed by Congress.

===Mansfield Amendments===
Two controversial amendments by Mansfield limiting military funding of research were passed by Congress.
*The Mansfield Amendment of 1969, passed as part of the fiscal year 1970 Military Authorization Act (Public Law 91-121), prohibited military funding of research that lacked a direct or apparent relationship to specific military function. Through subsequent modification the Mansfield amendment moved the Department of Defense toward the support of more short-term applied research in universities. The amendment affected the military, such as research funding by the Office of Naval Research (ONR).
*The Mansfield Amendment of 1973 expressly limited appropriations for defense research through the Advanced Research Projects Agency, which is largely independent of the military, to projects with direct military application. This controversial amendment greatly reduced ARPA funding for many university-based computer projects, thereby forcing many American computer science experts to move to private sector research facilities such as Xerox PARC. However, for that very reason, the amendment is also credited with giving birth to the contemporary computer technology industry.

An earlier Mansfield Amendment, offered in 1971, called for the number of US troops stationed in Europe to be halved. On May 19, 1971, however, the Senate defeated the resolution 61–36.

==U.S. ambassador to Japan==

Mansfield retired from the Senate in 1976 and was appointed ambassador to Japan in April 1977 by Jimmy Carter, a role that he retained during the Reagan administration until 1988. While serving in Japan, Mansfield was highly respected and was particularly renowned for describing the US-Japan relationship as the &quot;most important bilateral relationship in the world, bar none.&quot; Mansfield&#x27;s successor in Japan, Michael Armacost, noted in his memoirs that for Mansfield, the phrase was a &quot;mantra.&quot; While in office, Mansfield also fostered relations between his home state of Montana and Japan. The state capital of Helena is the sister city to Kumamoto, on the island of Kyushu.

==Honors==
The Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library at the University of Montana, Missoula, is named after him and his wife Maureen, as was his request when informed of the honor. The library also contains the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Center, which is dedicated to Asian studies, and, like the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation, &quot;advancing understanding and co-operation in US-Asia relations.&quot; The Mike Mansfield Federal Building and United States Courthouse in Butte was renamed in his honor in 2002.

The Montana Democratic Party holds an annual Mansfield-Metcalf Dinner named partially in his honor.

In 1977, Mansfield received the US Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.

In 1977, he was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame, the oldest and most prestigious award for American Catholics.

On January 19, 1989, Mansfield and Secretary of State George P. Shultz were awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Ronald Reagan. In his speech, Reagan recognized Mansfield as someone who has &quot;distinguished himself as a dedicated public servant and loyal American.&quot; In 1990, he was given both the United States Military Academy, Sylvanus Thayer Award and Japan&#x27;s Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers, Grand Cordon. This is Japan&#x27;s highest honor for someone who is not a head of state.

In 1999, Missoula&#x27;s daily newspaper, the &quot;Missoulian&quot;, chose Mansfield as The Most Influential Montanan of the 20th Century.

==Final years and death==

Throughout his later years, Mansfield lived in Washington, D.C., where he remained active, delivering speaking engagements well into his nineties and working from his office at Goldman Sachs until the week before his death.

Mansfield&#x27;s wife, Maureen, died on September 20, 2000. 
He died from heart failure at Walter Reed Army Medical Center just over one year later, on October 5, 2001, at the age of 98. He was survived by his daughter, Anne Fairclough Mansfield (1939–2013), and one granddaughter.

The burial plot of Mansfield and his wife can be found in section 2, marker 49-69F of Arlington National Cemetery. His gravemarker reads, &quot;Michael Joseph Mansfield - PVT, US Marine Corps.&quot;

==See also==

* List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines
* Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation
== Citations ==
== General references ==
=== Print ===
*
* online
* online

=== Web ===
*

===Interviews===

==External links==

*Arlington National Cemetery
* The Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation, US-Asia relations
* The Maureen and Mike Mansfield Center at the University of Montana
* 
* Legislative Summary: Statement by Senator Mike Mansfield , John F. Kennedy Library, 1964
* Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony for the Presidential Medal of Freedom – January 19, 1989 
* Mike Mansfield Papers (University of Montana Archives)
* Mansfield&#x27;s America Oral History Project (University of Montana Archives)
* Don Oberdorfer Interviews with Mike Mansfield Oral History Project (University of Montana Archives)
* 



|-


|-


|-




|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1889152" start="0" end="24" title="Mike Mansfield" label="Michael Joseph Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="76" end="92" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="133" end="140" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="148" end="186" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="209" end="229" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117832" start="270" end="294" title="Senate Democratic Caucus" label="Senate Democratic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="335" end="348" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="437" end="449" title="Party leaders of the United States Senate" label="party leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q355522" start="500" end="515" title="Mitch McConnell" label="Mitch McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="534" end="542" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="575" end="595" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="635" end="653" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="672" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="751" end="772" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="840" end="874" title="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="House Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="882" end="894" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145051" start="947" end="958" title="Zales Ecton" label="Zales Ecton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="1009" end="1029" title="Senate Majority Whip" label="Senate Majority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="1071" end="1093" title="Senate Majority Leader" label="Senate Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="1100" end="1117" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1195" end="1206" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="1278" end="1291" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="1309" end="1323" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q120428579" start="1378" end="1411" title="United States Ambassador to Japan" label="United States Ambassador to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="1587" end="1616" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="1685" end="1698" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1784" end="1792" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1794" end="1802" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="1807" end="1812" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="2311" end="2331" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q954670" start="2496" end="2508" title="Twin Bridges, Montana" label="Twin Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11892704" start="2612" end="2624" title="logging camp" label="logging camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025813" start="2628" end="2651" title="Leavenworth, Washington" label="Leavenworth, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101266" start="2682" end="2703" title="Oregon National Guard" label="Oregon National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410539" start="2846" end="2853" title="European theatre of World War I" label="Europe."/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2978" end="2989" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3078" end="3085" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3384" end="3391" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="3406" end="3413" title="private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352637" start="3450" end="3469" title="Private First Class" label="Private First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3477" end="3492" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3846" end="3857" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="3908" end="3914" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q766401" start="4804" end="4815" title="copper mine" label="copper mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="4820" end="4825" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="4901" end="4924" title="Montana Tech of the University of Montana" label="Montana School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="5241" end="5262" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="5271" end="5279" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735131" start="5530" end="5545" title="Alpha Tau Omega" label="Alpha Tau Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q947286" start="5586" end="5609" title="high school equivalency degree" label="high school equivalency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="5618" end="5634" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5721" end="5744" title="Registrar (education)#Registrar&amp;#x27;s office" label="registrar&amp;#x27;s office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592055" start="5775" end="5793" title="graduate assistant" label="graduate assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="6189" end="6192" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="6200" end="6237" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="6323" end="6330" title="Academic tenure" label="tenured"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6455" end="6465" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6485" end="6509" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904203" start="6513" end="6554" title="Montana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Montana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355945" start="6575" end="6598" title="Jerry J. O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Jerry J. O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6677" end="6687" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="6688" end="6704" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="7260" end="7291" title="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="House Foreign Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7348" end="7369" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="7445" end="7453" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="7502" end="7517" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="7643" end="7657" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865497" start="7668" end="7680" title="minimum wage in the United States" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="7686" end="7699" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="7712" end="7718" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="7723" end="7729" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="7746" end="7784" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="7790" end="7806" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="7816" end="7839" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7897" end="7903" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145051" start="7961" end="7972" title="Zales Ecton" label="Zales Ecton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="7987" end="8007" title="Assistant party leaders of the United States Senate" label="Senate Majority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="8030" end="8047" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="8212" end="8234" title="Party leaders of the United States Senate" label="Senate Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="8388" end="8403" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="8663" end="8667" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="8840" end="8849" title="Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="8880" end="8893" title="Ngo Dinh Diem" label="Ngo Dinh Diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8932" end="8943" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="8993" end="9008" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="9149" end="9156" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133692" start="9889" end="9924" title="State funeral of John F. Kennedy" label="lay in state in the Capitol rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10327" end="10338" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="10410" end="10423" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599" start="10444" end="10450" title="Pleiku" label="Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="10494" end="10519" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Operation Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="10683" end="10707" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="10757" end="10776" title="Senate Judiciary Committee" label="Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="10868" end="10893" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Acts of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094483" start="10898" end="10902" title="Civil Rights Act of 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="10919" end="10958" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="10967" end="10992" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678778" start="11058" end="11082" title="Civil Rights Act of 1957" label="Civil Rights Act of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678779" start="11204" end="11228" title="Civil Rights Act of 1960" label="Civil Rights Act of 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="11252" end="11269" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11277" end="11295" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="11316" end="11329" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q494938" start="11367" end="11381" title="Nixon Doctrine" label="Nixon Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="11401" end="11405" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q852160" start="11472" end="11488" title="nuclear umbrella" label="nuclear umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="12487" end="12499" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="13434" end="13467" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="13694" end="13710" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="13773" end="13783" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="14230" end="14242" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="14279" end="14300" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q555504" start="14557" end="14573" title="Michael Armacost" label="Michael Armacost"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="14770" end="14776" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q199889" start="14799" end="14807" title="Kumamoto" label="Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="14826" end="14832" title="Kyushu" label="Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792771" start="14850" end="14884" title="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library" label="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="14892" end="14913" title="University of Montana – Missoula" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="14915" end="14923" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806809" start="15100" end="15113" title="Asian studies" label="Asian studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792769" start="15129" end="15166" title="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation" label="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847792" start="15247" end="15307" title="Mike Mansfield Federal Building and United States Courthouse" label="Mike Mansfield Federal Building and United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="15311" end="15316" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904239" start="15356" end="15380" title="Montana Democratic Party" label="Montana Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175374" start="15609" end="15625" title="Jefferson Awards for Public Service" label="Jefferson Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800135" start="15656" end="15669" title="Laetare Medal" label="Laetare Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="15677" end="15701" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="15745" end="15763" title="American Catholics" label="American Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="15820" end="15836" title="George P. Shultz" label="George P. Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="15854" end="15883" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="15897" end="15910" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="16089" end="16119" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311715" start="16121" end="16142" title="Sylvanus Thayer Award" label="Sylvanus Thayer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="16160" end="16183" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879431" start="16350" end="16360" title="Missoulian" label="Missoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="16568" end="16587" title="speaking engagement" label="speaking engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473658" start="16782" end="16813" title="Walter Reed Army Medical Center" label="Walter Reed Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q173387" start="16978" end="16989" title="grave (burial)" label="burial plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="17060" end="17087" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602868" start="17190" end="17259" title="List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines" label="List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792769" start="17262" end="17299" title="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation" label="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="17568" end="17589" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="17654" end="17677" title="John F. Kennedy Library" label="John F. Kennedy Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80184" wikidata="Q297227" url="?curid=80184" title="Diocles">
<text>Diocles may refer to:

==People==
*Diocles (mathematician) (c. 240 BC–c. 180 BC), Greek mathematician and geometer
*Diocles (mythology), one of the first priests of Demeter
*Diocles of Carystus (4th century BC), also known as &quot;Diocles Medicus&quot;, Greek physician
*Diocles of Cnidus (3rd or 2nd century BC), Greek philosopher who wrote a work quoted by Eusebius
*Diocles of Corinth, winner of the stadion race of the 13th Olympic Games in 728 BC
*Diocles of Magnesia (2nd or 1st century BC), Greek writer on ancient philosophers quoted many times by Diogenes Laertius
*Diocles of Megara, ancient Greek warrior from Athens
*Diocles of Messenia, winner of the stadion race of the 7th Olympic Games in 752 BC
*Diocles of Peparethus (3rd century BC), Greek historian
*Diocles of Phlius (fl. ), comic poet
*Diocles of Syracuse (fl. 413–408 BC), Greek lawgiver in the city-state of Syracuse
*Diocletian (244–311), Roman emperor formerly named Diocles
*Diocles (1st century BC), or Tyrannion the Younger
*Gaius Appuleius Diocles (104–after 146 AD), Roman charioteer

==Other==
* &quot;Diocles&quot; (bug), a genus of bugs in the family Coreidae
*Diocles laser, a laser that uses Chirped pulse amplification at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297227" start="0" end="7" title="Diocles" label="Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226886" start="35" end="58" title="Diocles (mathematician)" label="Diocles (mathematician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480354" start="116" end="135" title="Diocles (mythology)" label="Diocles (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226889" start="174" end="193" title="Diocles of Carystus" label="Diocles of Carystus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279079" start="272" end="289" title="Diocles of Cnidus" label="Diocles of Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279078" start="370" end="388" title="Diocles of Corinth" label="Diocles of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127228" start="454" end="473" title="Diocles of Magnesia" label="Diocles of Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001055" start="576" end="593" title="Diocles of Megara" label="Diocles of Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683706" start="630" end="649" title="Diocles of Messenia" label="Diocles of Messenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q301785" start="714" end="735" title="Diocles of Peparethus" label="Diocles of Peparethus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592229" start="771" end="788" title="Diocles of Phlius" label="Diocles of Phlius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451406" start="809" end="828" title="Diocles of Syracuse" label="Diocles of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="893" end="903" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328969" start="982" end="1003" title="Tyrannion the Younger" label="Tyrannion the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q983525" start="1005" end="1028" title="Gaius Appuleius Diocles" label="Gaius Appuleius Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1079" end="1104" title="Diocles (bug)" label="&amp;quot;Diocles&amp;quot; (bug)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423466" start="1136" end="1144" title="Coreidae" label="Coreidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q905436" start="1179" end="1206" title="Chirped pulse amplification" label="Chirped pulse amplification"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80186" wikidata="Q7509157" url="?curid=80186" title="Sidney James (footballer)">
<text>Sidney James (1891 – 9 April 1917) was an English professional footballer who played in the Football League for Huddersfield Town as a centre forward.

== Personal life ==
James served in The Duke of Wellington&#x27;s (West Riding) Regiment and the King&#x27;s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry during the First World War and held the rank of acting lance corporal. He was killed on 9 April 1917 during the capture of the village of Saint-Martin-sur-Cojeul. He was buried in Cojeul British Cemetery, Saint-Martin-sur-Cojeul.

== Career statistics ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7509157" start="0" end="12" title="Sidney James (footballer)" label="Sidney James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="63" end="73" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="92" end="107" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="112" end="129" title="Huddersfield Town A.F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="135" end="149" title="centre forward" label="centre forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313130" start="188" end="240" title="The Duke of Wellington&amp;#x27;s (West Riding) Regiment" label="The Duke of Wellington&amp;#x27;s (West Riding) Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411042" start="249" end="289" title="King&amp;#x27;s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry" label="King&amp;#x27;s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="301" end="316" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="345" end="359" title="lance corporal" label="lance corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="368" end="374" title="Killed in action" label="killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023816" start="428" end="451" title="Saint-Martin-sur-Cojeul" label="Saint-Martin-sur-Cojeul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80187" wikidata="Q2446690" url="?curid=80187" title="Polyxenus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Polyxenus or Polyxeinus (, &quot;Poluxenos&quot;, or , &quot;Poluxeinos&quot;) is a name that may refer to:

*Polyxenus, one of the first priests of Demeter and one of the first to learn the secrets of the Eleusinian Mysteries.
*Polyxenus, son of Agasthenes and Peloris, king of Elis. He was counted among the suitors of Helen, and accordingly participated in the Trojan War, having brought 40 ships with him. He returned home safely after the war, and had a son Amphimachus, whom he possibly named after his friend Amphimachus (son of Cteatus), who had died at Troy. 
*Polyxenus, king of Elis, was said to have been entrusted with the stolen cattle by the Taphians under Pterelaus; the cattle was ransomed from him by Amphitryon. This Polyxenus, however, appears to be a figure distinct from Polyxenus, son of Agasthenes, since he lived two generations before the Trojan War.
*Polyxenus, also called Medus, son of the hero Jason and the Colchian sorceress Medea, the daughter of King Aeëtes. He was the brother of Eriopis.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Dares Phrygius, &quot;from The Trojan War.&quot; &quot;The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian&quot; translated by Richard McIlwaine Frazer, Jr. (1931-). Indiana University Press. 1966. Online version at theoi.com
* Dictys Cretensis&quot;, from The Trojan War.&quot; &quot;The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian&quot; translated by Richard McIlwaine Frazer, Jr. (1931-). Indiana University Press. 1966. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446690" start="20" end="29" title="Polyxenus" label="Polyxenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446690" start="33" end="43" title="Polyxenus" label="Polyxeinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="169" end="176" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="226" end="246" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723619" start="267" end="277" title="Agasthenes" label="Agasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="282" end="289" title="Peloris (mythology)" label="Peloris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="299" end="303" title="Ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="341" end="346" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="384" end="394" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616661" start="483" end="494" title="Amphimachus" label="Amphimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q958315" start="556" end="563" title="Cteatus" label="Cteatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432910" start="677" end="685" title="Taphians" label="Taphians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17395817" start="692" end="701" title="Pterelaus" label="Pterelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206214" start="739" end="749" title="Amphitryon" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851846" start="921" end="926" title="Medus" label="Medus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="944" end="949" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="958" end="966" title="Colchis" label="Colchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174278" start="977" end="982" title="Medea" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q241971" start="1005" end="1011" title="Aeëtes" label="Aeëtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389488" start="1035" end="1042" title="Eriopis" label="Eriopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1075" end="1086" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="1388" end="1402" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares Phrygius"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="1461" end="1476" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="1621" end="1637" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="1716" end="1734" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1870" end="1890" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2076" end="2081" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2083" end="2104" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2729" end="2738" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80188" wikidata="Q724360" url="?curid=80188" title="Graham Martin">
<text>Graham Anderson Martin (September 22, 1912 – March 13, 1990) was an American diplomat. He was the ambassador to Thailand and as U.S. representative to SEATO from 1963 to 1967, ambassador to Italy from 1969 to 1973 and the last United States Ambassador to South Vietnam from 1973 until his evacuation during the Fall of Saigon in 1975.

==Early life==
Martin was born and raised in the small town of Mars Hill, North Carolina, in the state&#x27;s western mountains. His father was an ordained Baptist minister. He graduated from Wake Forest College in 1932. Like almost all whites from the South at the time, Martin was a Democrat in his politics. However, unlike many other Southern whites who represented the conservative wing of the Democratic Party, Martin was an avid supporter of the New Deal, which he saw as a way to improve North Carolina, which was a very backward and underdeveloped state at the time. Under the administration of Franklin Roosevelt, Martin became a protégé of W. Averell Harriman, who became his patron, which greatly aided his career. Martin began his career in the National Recovery Administration, a New Deal agency created to counter the effects of the Great Depression. During World War II, he was a U.S. Army Intelligence Officer, and he was aboard USS &quot;Missouri&quot; for the Japanese surrender in 1945.

==Career==
Martin first worked in the diplomatic field at the U.S. embassy in Paris, France, from 1947 to 1955. The American journalist Stanley Karnow described Martin as a &quot;fierce anti-Communist liberal&quot; whose main duties in Paris were to counter the influence of the French Communist Party on French life. His abilities as an administrative counselor and deputy Chief of Mission gained him attention from the State Department, which rapidly advanced his career. President Eisenhower appointed Martin as the Representative of the United States to the European Office of the United Nations in Geneva, and he served in that office 1960–62.

===Ambassador to Thailand===
Martin was appointed on 10 September 1963 and left this post on 9 September 1967.

While serving as ambassador to Thailand, Martin came to the attention of Richard Nixon, during a banquet for King Bhumibol Adulyadej at the Embassy in Bangkok. Nixon was in Thailand acting as a corporate attorney, accompanying Vice President Hubert Humphrey. When the King toasted President Johnson, Humphrey tried to return the toast with a toast to the King. Martin interceded and gave the toast himself, explaining later to both Humphrey and Nixon that as the Ambassador, he was the President&#x27;s personal representative. He finished his explanation by saying &quot;If you become President yourself someday, Mr. Vice President, you can be sure that I will guard your interests as closely as I did President Johnson&#x27;s tonight&quot;.

During Ambassador Martin&#x27;s tenure in Thailand, he forged close bonds with the local government and the Thai Royal family. President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara heeded the Joint Chiefs&#x27; request to escalate bombing runs over North Vietnam; and to provide close air support cover for covert missions in the highlands of South Vietnam; the secret war in Laos; and Cambodian excursions. The U.S. military needed more air bases for staging, and to launch B-52 bomber missions. Using his personal relations with Thai royals and government leaders, Martin convinced Thailand to allow more U.S. troops and materiel to be stationed at bases on Thai soil. Ambassador Martin advised that if Thai commanders were &quot;in charge&quot;, these would remain &quot;Thai bases&quot;...and avoid embarrassment or public support for the escalating U.S. war. The U.S. military worked to expand existing bases and build new ones; including Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base; and the U-Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield in October 1965. From 1966 to 1975, U-Tapao became the most important strategic air base for U.S. bombing and cover missions of the entire war.

===Ambassador to Italy===
Martin was appointed on 30 October 1969 and left this post on 10 February 1973.

In 1972 Martin gave $800,000 over to Vito Miceli, as Italy&#x27;s intelligence chief, with approval of the director of the National Security Council, Henry Kissinger, over the objections of the CIA Rome station chief. It is unknown how Miceli spent the money.

===Ambassador to South Vietnam===

Martin was appointed as Ambassador to South Vietnam on 21 June 1973. Karnow wrote about Martin that: &quot;anachronistically, he was still inspired by the crusade to save Southeast Asia&quot; from Communism. Martin&#x27;s nephew had been killed in action in South Vietnam in 1965, and Martin felt a strong sense of responsibility to ensure that his death was not in vain by winning the war. Karnow described the reasons for Martin&#x27;s appointment as ambassador by President Richard Nixon because he was the ideal &quot;fall guy&quot; should South Vietnam collapse. Martin was one of the few U.S. diplomats who was still committed to winning the Vietnam war, and as a liberal Democrat, any failures in Saigon on his part would not reflect badly on the Republican Nixon administration. Karnow noted that the disdain and contempt he was held in Washington could be seen in the fact that neither Nixon nor his National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger mentioned him even once in their respective memoirs. Though not in his memoirs, Kissinger does give accolades to Martin indirectly while relating the circumstances surrounding the U.S. evacuation from Saigon in his book &quot;Ending the Vietnam War.&quot; 

Martin was a controversial U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam; he was ill-prepared to act as an ambassador in a country fighting for its survival. Martin had been injured in an automobile accident, which limited his ability to travel. During his time in Saigon, he almost never left that city to tour the rest of the country, and as a result his contacts were only with the South Vietnamese elite. Martin spoke no Vietnamese, but he was fluent in French, a language widely spoken by the South Vietnamese elite as Vietnam was a former French colony. Martin&#x27;s dispatches to Washington tended to reflect his contacts with elite circles in Saigon, and he showed little interest in the masses. In common with many other American diplomats, Martin found President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu to be a &quot;prickly&quot; personality who was too sensitive to any slight, real or imagined. Martin also had an abrasive personality, much given to rudeness and outbursts of rage, and many found him to be unpleasant. Through Martin had difficult relations with Thiệu, he had an unbounded confidence in his regime, and his dispatches to Washington during almost all of his entire time in Saigon portrayed South Vietnam in a very optimistic light.

The Arab oil shock of October 1973-March 1974 set off a massive bout of inflation that destroyed South Vietnam&#x27;s economy. In turn, the inflation caused corruption in South Vietnam to reach epic levels as corrupt officials stole more to make up for the inflationary pressure. By the summer of 1974, about 90% of the soldiers of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) were not receiving enough pay to support themselves or their families. Many diplomats at the US Embassy from the summer of 1974 onward reported their concerns that morale in the ARVN had fallen to dangerously low levels. Reflecting his tendency to put the best possible gloss on South Vietnam, Martin in his cables to Washington downplayed these concerns, stating that the ARVN would not collapse. In December 1974, the North Vietnamese People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam (PAVN) launched an offensive in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam that proved more successful than expected and on 6 January 1975 took the provincial capital of Phước Long. The PAVN commanders reported that many ARVN soldiers simply did not want to fight and surrendered after only token resistance.

On 1 March 1975 the PAVN started the Battle of Ban Me Thuot in the Central Highlands. After the battle ended in a PAVN victory on 11 March 1975, the North Vietnamese decided to launch an offensive to end the war in 1975 instead of 1976 as initially planned. The offensive was named the Ho Chi Minh campaign, a choice of name that reflected the viewpoint it would be a successful operation. By 25 March Huế, the old imperial capital of Vietnam fell to the PAVN. Thiệu was slow to order an withdraw of his divisions and by 30 March when Danang was taken by the PAVN, the ARVN&#x27;s best divisions were lost. With the road to Saigon wide open, it became imperative for the PAVN to take the capital before the monsoons began in May, leading to a rapid march on Saigon. Once the monsoons began, large scale military operations would be impossible. With the PAVN advancing on Saigon, Martin continued to give optimistic reports about the ability of the ARVN to hold out, and stated that he was against an evacuation. William Colby, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency at a meeting with Kissinger warned that Martin was delusional in his assessment, and advised an evacuation, advice that Kissinger rejected.

During the first four months of 1975, Martin ignored advice to reduce the number of American officials in Saigon down from 6,500 to 1,100 in order to facilitate an evacuation. Believing Saigon would not fall, Martin vetoed plans to move South Vietnamese refugees from Saigon via river freighters down the Saigon River to the port of Vũng Tàu on the South China Sea, where ships would pick them up. Martin advised Kissinger, who was now the Secretary of State, that he was against a mass evacuation from Saigon, which he feared would depress morale in the ARVN. On 3 April 1975, Martin at a meeting with Thiệu admitted that the situation had become grim with the North Vietnamese taking the Central Highlands, but promised him that the United States would send more military aid to help the ARVN hold a line along the Mekong river. In early April 1975, Martin had Alan Carter, the chief of the U.S. information bureau in Saigon, tape a video in which Carter stated that there was no danger of Saigon falling and the United States would stand by the Paris Peace Accords. Martin was sick with pneumonia in April 1975 and his body did not react well with the antibiotics he was taking, he was described as looking &quot;like a walking corpse&quot;. By 10 April 1975, the PAVN had reached the town of Xuân Lộc, just northeast of Saigon.

Martin continued to believe that the ARVN would hold Saigon and the Mekong Delta area after observing ARVN&#x27;s tenacious 12 days of fighting in the Battle of Xuan Loc under the command of General Le Minh Dao. His delays in initiating an evacuation meant that only a limited number of people could be evacuated in the final airlift. In the NSA history &quot;The Secret Sentry&quot;, the author says: &quot;In Saigon, Ambassador Graham Martin refused to believe the SIGINT (signals intelligence) reporting that detailed the massive North Vietnamese military buildup taking place all around (Saigon) ... and repeatedly refused to allow NSA&#x27;s station chief, Tom Glenn, to evacuate his forty-three man staff and their twenty-two dependents from Saigon.&quot; Because of Martin&#x27;s refusal to believe the SIGINT, and his refusal to allow the evacuation of the intelligence staff from the embassy, &quot;The North Vietnamese captured the entire 2,700 man (South Vietnamese SIGINT) organization intact as well as their equipment.&quot;

====Evacuation of Saigon====
On 20 April 1975, Kissinger instructed Martin to start preparing to pull out all the Americans in South Vietnam while also saying that no South Vietnamese were to be pulled out. Martin in a telephone call to Kissinger complained the &quot;only ass which isn&#x27;t covered is mine&quot;. Kissinger assured him: &quot;When this thing is finally over, I&#x27;ll be hanging several yards higher than you&quot;. On 21 April 1975, Thiệu resigned as president and on 25 April fled to Taiwan as the United States was unwilling to grant him asylum, being replaced as president by General Trần Văn Hương.

The evacuation was chaotic largely because Martin did not order an evacuation to begin until late April 1975. On 29 April 1975, Operation Frequent Wind, the largest helicopter evacuation ever began as U.S. helicopters flew 8,000 people from Saigon to the fleet offshore in the South China Sea. Martin had waited so long to order an evacuation that it was only possible to leave Saigon via air as the city was surrounded by the advancing PAVN. Martin also refused to classify the Vietnamese common law wives of Americans and their illegitimate children as refugees under the grounds he disapproved of premarital sex. Martin decreed that only Vietnamese women married to Americans and their legitimate children would be flown out, a ruling that excluded the vast majority of the Vietnamese women in relationships with American men and their children. General Homer D. Smith, the American military attaché was able to perform an end-run around Martin&#x27;s order by having an embassy secretary, Eva Kim, type up an unofficial document known as an &quot;affidavit of support&quot; bearing the seal of the embassy together with a blank space for the name of the Vietnamese refugee and another blank space for an American promising to be financially responsible for the said refugee when he or she arrived in the United States that was photocopied thousands of times. Through the &quot;affidavits of support&quot;, Smith was able to allow many more Vietnamese to flee South Vietnam than what Martin wanted. 

The CIA had provided thousands of laminated name cards for Vietnamese who worked as spies for the CIA that was intended to serve as free passes that would allow them to fly out of Saigon. Because of Martin&#x27;s opposition to evacuation, the passes were never issued, and instead had to be burned on the embassy&#x27;s grounds to protect the identities of the CIA&#x27;s spies. Malcolm Browne, an American journalist in Saigon married to a Vietnamese women described the evacuation as characterized by &quot;blatant racism&quot; as even those Vietnamese with American passports had their papers carefully scrutinized and were often turned away while any white person was allowed in. Browne complained that the embassy staff were most suspicious of his wife and children despite having valid American passports. Browne was finally forced to have his wife and children fly out in one of the last passenger flights out of Saigon airport to Hong Kong as it proved impossible to leave via the embassy.

Martin ordered the U.S. Marines who served as the embassy&#x27;s guards to burn the $2 million U.S. dollars in cash that served as the embassy&#x27;s reserve funds. The Marines took the bags of cash out to the embassy&#x27;s courtyard, doused them in gasoline and set them afire. Moments later, an aide ran out to shout that Martin had changed his mind and wanted to save the money after all. As the Marines attempted to rescue the burning money, the blades of the helicopters scattered the money, leading to a chaotic scene as the refugees pressing their way into the embassy fought with themselves to grab as many of the charred U.S. dollars as possible. Martin also pressed to have the gold of South Vietnam&#x27;s Central Bank worth $60 million US moved to New York, but the State Department would not allow the gold to be flown out of Saigon until it was insured. The State Department moved so slowly in insuring the gold that the gold was still at the Central Bank when Saigon fell on 30 April 1975. Martin&#x27;s attempt to leave the embassy on 29 April 1975 via his limousine to go to his house set off a near-riot outside the embassy as thousands of people clamored to get inside the embassy when they saw the gates opening. Unable to exit via his car, Martin was forced to walk four blocks down from the embassy to his house where he picked up his wife, Dorothy, together with one suitcase and a model of a Buddhist pagoda. Upon returning to the American embassy, Martin gave the model of the pagoda as a gift to Jean‐Marie Merillon, the French ambassador who was frenetically trying to negotiate a compromise peace. Later that day, Dorothy Martin boarded a helicopter that took her to the American fleet in the South China Sea, leaving behind her personal suitcase so a South Vietnamese woman might be able to squeeze on board with her. Kissinger was highly concerned that Martin would not leave the embassy and stay behind to die fighting for South Vietnam, observing that Martin was deeply committed to saving that state. Later on the same day, Kissinger ordered Martin to blow up the satellite terminal at the embassy in Saigon, saying &quot;I want you heroes home&quot;. At 7:53 am on 30 April, the last Marine helicopter flew away from the embassy in Saigon, marking the end of the American presence in Vietnam.

Martin was evacuated by helicopter from the US Embassy on the morning of 30 April 1975 as PAVN forces overran the city. Though he did not know it, the helicopter&#x27;s crew had orders to arrest him and bring him on board by force if he had refused to go. The helicopter used was a USMC CH-46 Sea Knight call sign &quot;Lady Ace 09&quot; of HMM-165 serial number 154803.

==Death==
Martin died in March 1990 and is buried in Section 3 at Arlington National Cemetery.

==Family==
While Martin was serving as Ambassador to Thailand, his adopted nephew, Marine 1st Lt Glenn Dill Mann, was killed near Chu Lai, South Vietnam, in November 1965, while attacking enemy positions at Thach Tru with his UH-1 helicopter gunship. 1st Lt Mann is buried in Section 3 at Arlington National Cemetery.

==Exhibits==
The helicopter that evacuated the ambassador out of Saigon, on the same day the Vietnam War ended, is on display at the Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum in San Diego, California.

==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War&quot;, ed. Spencer Tucker, s.v. Graham A. Martin.
* Aid, Matthew M. &quot;The Secret Sentry&quot;, , Bloomsbury Press, 2009; pages 125–7.
* 
* Snepp, Frank. &quot;Decent Interval: An Insider&#x27;s Account of Saigon&#x27;s Indecent End Told by the CIA&#x27;s Chief Strategy Analyst in Vietnam&quot;, (), Simon &amp; Schuster, 1981.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724360" start="0" end="22" title="Graham Martin" label="Graham Anderson Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="112" end="120" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="151" end="156" title="SEATO" label="SEATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="190" end="195" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056139" start="227" end="268" title="United States Ambassador to South Vietnam" label="United States Ambassador to South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="311" end="325" title="Fall of Saigon" label="Fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024024" start="399" end="424" title="Mars Hill, North Carolina" label="Mars Hill, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="528" end="547" title="Wake Forest College" label="Wake Forest College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="940" end="958" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="987" end="1006" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="W. Averell Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967656" start="1094" end="1126" title="National Recovery Administration" label="National Recovery Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q894836" start="1406" end="1427" title="U.S. Embassy, Paris" label="U.S. embassy in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="1480" end="1494" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="1818" end="1838" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314255" start="1863" end="1943" title="Representative of the United States to the European Office of the United Nations" label="Representative of the United States to the European Office of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="2179" end="2192" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="2220" end="2238" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021888" start="2246" end="2253" title="Embassy of the United States, Bangkok" label="Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="2257" end="2264" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="2348" end="2363" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877292" start="3792" end="3823" title="Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base" label="Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862930" start="3833" end="3865" title="U-Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield" label="U-Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015108" start="4155" end="4166" title="Vito Miceli" label="Vito Miceli"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="4241" end="4266" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="4268" end="4283" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4312" end="4315" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432122" start="4936" end="4944" title="fall guy" label="fall guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="5349" end="5364" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="5875" end="5881" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="6384" end="6400" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="7186" end="7217" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q894834" start="7318" end="7328" title="Embassy of the United States, Saigon" label="US Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="7645" end="7658" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="7662" end="7691" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="7728" end="7745" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616310" start="7858" end="7868" title="Battle of Phước Long" label="Phước Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888227" start="8035" end="8057" title="Battle of Ban Me Thuot" label="Battle of Ban Me Thuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="8284" end="8304" title="1975 spring offensive" label="Ho Chi Minh campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616301" start="8400" end="8403" title="Hue–Da Nang Campaign" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q482827" start="9010" end="9023" title="William Colby" label="William Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="9045" end="9072" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060805" start="9519" end="9531" title="Saigon River" label="Saigon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q21194" start="9547" end="9555" title="Vũng Tàu" label="Vũng Tàu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="9563" end="9578" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="10262" end="10281" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258599" start="10510" end="10518" title="Xuân Lộc" label="Xuân Lộc"/>
<link wikidata="Q487076" start="10698" end="10716" title="Battle of Xuân Lộc" label="Battle of Xuan Loc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525668" start="10746" end="10757" title="Lê Minh Đảo" label="Le Minh Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12094" end="12100" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936777" start="12196" end="12210" title="Trần Văn Hương" label="Trần Văn Hương"/>
<link wikidata="Q780730" start="12341" end="12364" title="Operation Frequent Wind" label="Operation Frequent Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914796" start="13070" end="13084" title="Homer D. Smith" label="Homer D. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q952789" start="14096" end="14110" title="Malcolm Browne" label="Malcolm Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="17147" end="17163" title="Fall of Saigon" label="overran the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="17327" end="17331" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q282934" start="17332" end="17348" title="Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight" label="CH-46 Sea Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q16747619" start="17386" end="17393" title="HMM-165" label="HMM-165"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115146" start="17643" end="17650" title="Chu Lai" label="Chu Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="17652" end="17665" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q154106" start="17739" end="17743" title="UH-1" label="UH-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="17802" end="17829" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463466" start="17965" end="17999" title="Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum" label="Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80193" wikidata="Q532342" url="?curid=80193" title="Pete Peterson">
<text>Douglas Brian &quot;Pete&quot; Peterson (born June 26, 1935) is an American politician and diplomat. He served as a United States Air Force pilot during the Vietnam War and spent over six years as a prisoner of the North Vietnamese army after his plane was shot down. He served three terms in the United States House of Representatives from 1991 to 1996 and returned to Hanoi when he became the first United States Ambassador to Vietnam in 1997. He was an ambassador until July 2001, after which he devoted himself to philanthropic work.

==Early life and education==
Peterson grew up in Milton, Iowa, and attended college at the University of Tampa. He joined the United States Air Force and served in the Vietnam War, where his F-4 Phantom II fighter was shot down on September 10, 1966. He spent six years in prison, a period he described as &quot;hours and hours of boredom, spliced with moments of stark terror.&quot; He was released on March 4, 1973.

==Career==
After the Vietnam War, Peterson remained in the Air Force and retired in 1981 as a colonel with 26 years of service. After retirement he established a general contracting firm in Tampa, Florida and later a small computer company in Marianna, Florida called CRT Computers. He served for 5 years on the faculty of Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida.

=== Congress ===
In 1990, Peterson ran as a Democrat for a seat in the United States House of Representatives in Florida&#x27;s 2nd congressional district. He defeated Bill Grant, the incumbent congressman who had grown unpopular after switching from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party in the middle of his second term. Peterson won and served three terms from 1991 to 1996.

Jason Altmire, who later became a three-term congressman himself, was a staffer during Peterson’s first campaign and time in Congress.

=== Ambassador to Vietnam ===
Peterson declined to run for a fourth term (he was succeeded by Allen Boyd) and was asked by President Bill Clinton to become the United States&#x27;s first post-war ambassador to Vietnam. He was confirmed by the Senate and began his tenure in 1997. His primary goals were securing an account of those still listed as missing in action from the war and helping to resolve the Vietnam War POW/MIA issue.

=== Presidential Citizens Medal ===
On November 17, 2000, he was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Clinton.

===Philanthropy and business===
Since retiring as ambassador, Peterson founded The Alliance for Safe Children, TASC, which aims to lower preventable injuries to children worldwide, and focuses specifically on such issues as drowning in Asia. With his wife he started a company whose aim it is to promote American business in Southeast Asia.

Peterson later was a senior advisor for Albright Stonebridge Group, an international strategic consulting firm.

==Personal life==
Peterson&#x27;s first wife died in 1995. Two weeks after his installation in Hanoi, he met Vi Le, Australia&#x27;s senior trade commissioner, born in Vietnam, whom he married. In 2002, he moved to Melbourne, Australia, so they could be closer to her family.

In 2009, Peterson acquired Australian citizenship.

==See also==
==References==

==External links==
*All POW-MIA InterNetwork</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532342" start="0" end="13" title="Pete Peterson" label="Douglas Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q532342" start="20" end="24" title="Pete Peterson" label="Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q532342" start="31" end="39" title="Pete Peterson" label="Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="116" end="139" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="157" end="168" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="215" end="236" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="North Vietnamese army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="297" end="335" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="370" end="375" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889399" start="401" end="436" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to Vietnam" label="United States Ambassador to Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928357" start="588" end="600" title="Milton, Iowa" label="Milton, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q751289" start="630" end="649" title="University of Tampa" label="University of Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="665" end="688" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="730" end="744" title="F-4 Phantom II" label="F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="1148" end="1162" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924806" start="1201" end="1218" title="Marianna, Florida" label="Marianna, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="1281" end="1305" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="1309" end="1329" title="Tallahassee, Florida" label="Tallahassee, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1376" end="1384" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1403" end="1441" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461124" start="1445" end="1486" title="Florida&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Florida&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q598241" start="1500" end="1510" title="James W. Grant" label="Bill Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1611" end="1627" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q606309" start="1718" end="1731" title="Jason Altmire" label="Jason Altmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600908" start="1948" end="1958" title="Allen Boyd" label="Allen Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1987" end="1999" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928571" start="2260" end="2285" title="Vietnam War POW/MIA issue" label="Vietnam War POW/MIA issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582967" start="2372" end="2399" title="Presidential Citizens Medal" label="Presidential Citizens Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713177" start="2502" end="2532" title="The Alliance for Safe Children" label="The Alliance for Safe Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q258142" start="2805" end="2831" title="Albright Stonebridge Group" label="Albright Stonebridge Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="2973" end="2978" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3093" end="3102" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="80197" wikidata="Q83085" url="?curid=80197" title="Soviet–Afghan War">
<text>The Soviet–Afghan War was an armed conflict that took place in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan from December 1979 to February 1989. Marking the beginning of the 46-year-long Afghan conflict, it saw the Soviet Union and the Afghan military fight against the rebelling Afghan mujahideen. While they were backed by various countries and organizations, the majority of the mujahideen&#x27;s support came from Pakistan, the United States (as part of Operation Cyclone), the United Kingdom, China, Iran, and the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, in addition to a large influx of foreign fighters known as the Afghan Arabs. American and British involvement on the side of the mujahideen escalated the Cold War, ending a short period of relaxed Soviet Union–United States relations. Combat took place throughout the 1980s, mostly in the Afghan countryside, as most of the country&#x27;s cities remained under Soviet control. The conflict resulted in the deaths of one to three million Afghans, while millions more fled from the country as refugees; most externally displaced Afghans sought refuge in Pakistan and in Iran. Between 6.5 and 11.5% of Afghanistan&#x27;s erstwhile population of 13.5 million people (per the 1979 census) is estimated to have been killed over the course of the Soviet–Afghan War. The decade-long confrontation between the mujahideen and the Soviet and Afghan militaries inflicted grave destruction throughout Afghanistan and has also been cited by scholars as a significant factor that contributed to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991; it is for this reason that the conflict is sometimes referred to as &quot;the Soviet Union&#x27;s Vietnam&quot; in retrospective analyses.

In March 1979, there had been a violent uprising in Herat, wherein a number of Soviet military advisers were executed. The ruling People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), which had determined that it could not subdue the uprising by itself, asked for urgent Soviet military assistance; in 1979, over 20 requests were sent. Soviet premier Alexei Kosygin, declining to send troops, advised in one call to Afghan prime minister Nur Muhammad Taraki to use local industrial workers in the province. This was apparently on the belief that these workers would be supporters of the Afghan government. This was discussed further in the Soviet Union with a wide range of views, mainly split between those who wanted to ensure that Afghanistan remained a socialist state and those who were concerned that the unrest would escalate. Eventually, a compromise was reached to send military aid, but not troops.

The conflict began when the Soviet military, under the command of Leonid Brezhnev, moved into Afghanistan to support the Afghan administration that had been installed during Operation Storm-333. Debate over their presence in the country soon ensued in international channels, with the Muslim world and the Western Bloc classifying it as an invasion, while the Eastern Bloc asserted that it was a legal intervention. Nevertheless, numerous sanctions and embargoes were imposed on the Soviet Union by the international community shortly after the beginning of the conflict. Soviet troops occupied Afghanistan&#x27;s major cities and all main arteries of communication, whereas the mujahideen waged guerrilla warfare in small groups across the 80% of the country that was not subject to uncontested Soviet control—almost exclusively comprising the rugged, mountainous terrain of the countryside. In addition to laying millions of landmines across Afghanistan, the Soviets used their aerial power to deal harshly with both Afghan resistance and civilians, levelling villages to deny safe haven to the mujahideen, destroying vital irrigation ditches and other infrastructure through tactics of scorched earth.

The Soviet government had initially planned to swiftly secure Afghanistan&#x27;s towns and road networks, stabilize the PDPA, and withdraw all of their military forces in a span of six months to one year. However, they were met with fierce resistance from Afghan guerrillas and experienced great operational difficulties on the rugged mountainous terrain. By the mid-1980s, the Soviet military presence in Afghanistan had increased to approximately 115,000 troops and fighting across the country intensified; the complication of the war effort gradually inflicted a high cost on the Soviet Union as military, economic, and political resources became increasingly exhausted. By mid-1987, reformist Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced that the Soviet military would begin a complete withdrawal from Afghanistan. The final wave of disengagement was initiated on 15 May 1988, and on 15 February 1989, the last Soviet military column occupying Afghanistan crossed into the Uzbek SSR. With continued external Soviet backing, the PDPA government pursued a solo war effort against the mujahideen, and the conflict evolved into the Afghan Civil War. However, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, all support to the Democratic Republic was pulled, leading to the toppling of the government at the hands of the mujahideen in 1992 and the start of a second Afghan Civil War shortly thereafter.

== Naming ==
In Afghanistan, the war is usually called the Soviet war in Afghanistan (; ). In Russia and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, it is usually called the Afghan war (; ; ; ); it is sometimes simply referred to as &quot;Afgan&quot; (), with the understanding that this refers to the war (just as the Vietnam War is often called &quot;Vietnam&quot; or just Nam&quot; in the United States). It is also known as the Afghan jihad, especially by the non-Afghan volunteers of the Mujahideen.

== Background ==

=== Russian interest in Central Asia ===
In the 19th century, the British Empire was fearful that the Russian Empire would invade Afghanistan and use it to threaten the large British colonies in India. This regional rivalry was called the &quot;Great Game&quot;. In 1885, Russian forces seized a disputed oasis south of the Oxus River from Afghan forces, which became known as the Panjdeh Incident. The border was agreed by the joint Anglo-Russian Afghan Boundary Commission of 1885–1887. The Russian interest in Afghanistan continued through the Soviet era, with billions in economic and military aid sent to Afghanistan between 1955 and 1978.

Following Amanullah Khan&#x27;s ascent to the throne in 1919 and the subsequent Third Anglo-Afghan War, the British conceded Afghanistan&#x27;s full independence. King Amanullah afterwards wrote to Russia (now under Bolshevik control) desiring for permanent friendly relations. Vladimir Lenin replied by congratulating the Afghans for their defence against the British, and a treaty of friendship between Afghanistan and Russia was finalized in 1921. The Soviets saw possibilities in an alliance with Afghanistan against the United Kingdom, such as using it as a base for a revolutionary advance towards British-controlled India.

The Red Army intervened in Afghanistan to suppress the Islamic Basmachi movement in 1929 and 1930, supporting the ousted king Amanullah, as part of the Afghan Civil War (1928–1929). The Basmachi movement had originated in a 1916 revolt against Russian conscription during World War I, bolstered by Turkish general Enver Pasha during the Caucasus campaign. Afterwards, the Soviet Army deployed around 120,000–160,000 troops in Central Asia, a force similar to the peak strength of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in size. By 1926–1928, the Basmachis were mostly defeated by the Soviets, and Central Asia was incorporated into the Soviet Union. In 1929, the Basmachi rebellion reignited, associated with anti-forced collectivization riots. Basmachis crossed over into Afghanistan under Ibrahim Bek, which gave a pretext for the Red Army interventions in 1929 and 1930.

==== Soviet–Afghan relations post-1920s ====

The Soviet Union (USSR) had been a major power broker and influential mentor in Afghan politics, its involvement ranging from civil-military infrastructure to Afghan society. Since 1947, Afghanistan had been under the influence of the Soviet government and received large amounts of aid, economic assistance, military equipment training and military hardware from the Soviet Union. Economic assistance and aid had been provided to Afghanistan as early as 1919, shortly after the Russian Revolution and when the regime was facing the Russian Civil War. Provisions were given in the form of small arms, ammunition, a few aircraft, and (according to debated Soviet sources) a million gold rubles to support the resistance during the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919. In 1942, the USSR again moved to strengthen the Afghan Armed Forces by providing small arms and aircraft and establishing training centers in Tashkent, Uzbek SSR. Soviet-Afghan military cooperation began on a regular basis in 1956, and further agreements were made in the 1970s, which saw the USSR send advisers and specialists. The Soviets also had interests in the energy resources of Afghanistan, including oil and natural gas exploration from the 1950s and 1960s. The USSR began to import Afghan gas from 1968 onwards. Between 1954 and 1977, the Soviet Union provided Afghanistan with economic aid worth of about 1 billion rubles.

=== Afghanistan–Pakistan border ===

In the 19th century, with the Czarist Russian forces moving closer to the Pamir Mountains, near the border with British India, civil servant Mortimer Durand was sent to outline a border, likely in order to control the Khyber Pass. The demarcation of the mountainous region resulted in an agreement, signed with the Afghan Emir, Abdur Rahman Khan, in 1893. It became known as the Durand Line.

In 1947, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Afghanistan, Mohammad Daoud Khan, rejected the Durand Line, which had been accepted as an international border by successive Afghan governments for over half a century.

The British Raj also came to an end, and the Dominion of Pakistan gained independence from British India and inherited the Durand Line as its frontier with Afghanistan.

Under the regime of Daoud Khan, Afghanistan had hostile relations with both Pakistan and Iran. Like all previous Afghan rulers since 1901, Daoud Khan also wanted to emulate Emir Abdur Rahman Khan and unite his divided country.

To do that, he needed a popular cause to unite the Afghan people divided along tribal lines, and a modern, well equipped Afghan army which would be used to suppress anyone who would oppose the Afghan government. His Pashtunistan policy was to annex Pashtun areas of Pakistan, and he used this policy for his own benefit.

Daoud Khan&#x27;s irredentist foreign policy to reunite the Pashtun homeland caused much tension with Pakistan, a state that allied itself with the United States. The policy had also angered the non-Pashtun population of Afghanistan, and similarly, the Pashtun population in Pakistan were also not interested in having their areas being annexed by Afghanistan. In 1951, the U.S. State Department urged Afghanistan to drop its claim against Pakistan and accept the Durand Line.

=== 1960s–1970s: Proxy war ===
In 1954, the United States began selling arms to its ally Pakistan, while refusing an Afghan request to buy arms, out of fear that the Afghans would use the weapons against Pakistan. As a consequence, Afghanistan, though officially neutral in the Cold War, drew closer to India and the Soviet Union, which were willing to sell them weapons. In 1962, China defeated India in a border war, and as a result, China formed an alliance with Pakistan against their common enemy, India, pushing Afghanistan even closer to India and the Soviet Union.

In 1960 and 1961, the Afghan Army, on the orders of Daoud Khan following his policy of Pashtun irredentism, made two unsuccessful incursions into Pakistan&#x27;s Bajaur District. In both cases, the Afghan army was routed, suffering heavy casualties. In response, Pakistan closed its consulate in Afghanistan and blocked all trade routes through the Pakistan–Afghanistan border. This damaged Afghanistan&#x27;s economy and Daoud&#x27;s regime was pushed towards closer alliance with the Soviet Union for trade. However, these stopgap measures were not enough to compensate the loss suffered by Afghanistan&#x27;s economy because of the border closure. As a result of continued resentment against Daoud&#x27;s autocratic rule, close ties with the Soviet Union and economic downturn, Daoud Khan was forced to resign by the King of Afghanistan, Mohammed Zahir Shah. Following his resignation, the crisis between Pakistan and Afghanistan was resolved and Pakistan re-opened the trade routes. After the removal of Daoud Khan, the King installed a new prime minister and started creating a balance in Afghanistan&#x27;s relation with the West and the Soviet Union, which angered the Soviet Union.

===1973 coup d&#x27;état===

In 1973, Daoud Khan, supported by Soviet-trained Afghan Army officers and a large base of the Afghan Commando Forces, seized power from the King in a bloodless coup, and established the first Afghan republic. Following his return to power, Daoud revived his Pashtunistan policy and for the first time started proxy warring against Pakistan by supporting anti-Pakistani groups and providing them with arms, training and sanctuaries. The Pakistani government of prime minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was alarmed by this. The Soviet Union also supported Daoud Khan&#x27;s militancy against Pakistan as they wanted to weaken Pakistan, which was an ally of both the United States and China. However, it did not openly try to create problems for Pakistan as that would damage the Soviet Union&#x27;s relations with other Islamic countries, hence it relied on Daoud Khan to weaken Pakistan. They had the same thought regarding Iran, another major U.S. ally. The Soviet Union also believed that the hostile behaviour of Afghanistan against Pakistan and Iran could alienate Afghanistan from the west, and Afghanistan would be forced into a closer relationship with the Soviet Union. The pro-Soviet Afghans (such as the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA)) also supported Daoud Khan&#x27;s hostility towards Pakistan, as they believed that a conflict with Pakistan would induce Afghanistan to seek aid from the Soviet Union. As a result, the pro-Soviet Afghans would be able to establish their influence over Afghanistan.

In response to Afghanistan&#x27;s proxy war, Pakistan started supporting Afghans who were critical of Daoud Khan&#x27;s policies. Bhutto authorized a covert operation under MI&#x27;s Major-General Naseerullah Babar. In 1974, Bhutto authorized another secret operation in Kabul where the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and the Air Intelligence of Pakistan (AI) extradited Burhanuddin Rabbani, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and Ahmad Shah Massoud to Peshawar, amid fear that Rabbani, Hekmatyar and Massoud might be assassinated by Daoud. According to Baber, Bhutto&#x27;s operation was an excellent idea and it had hard-hitting impact on Daoud and his government, which forced Daoud to increase his desire to make peace with Bhutto. Pakistan&#x27;s goal was to overthrow Daoud&#x27;s regime and establish an Islamist theocracy in its place. The first ever ISI operation in Afghanistan took place in 1975, supporting militants from the Jamiat-e Islami party, led by Ahmad Shah Massoud, attempting to overthrow the government. They started their rebellion in the Panjshir valley, but lack of support along with government forces easily defeating them made it a failure, and a sizable portion of the insurgents sought refuge in Pakistan where they enjoyed the support of Bhutto&#x27;s government.

The 1975 rebellion, though unsuccessful, shook President Daoud Khan and made him realize that a friendly Pakistan was in his best interests. He started improving relations with Pakistan and made state visits there in 1976 and 1978. During the 1978 visit, he agreed to stop supporting anti-Pakistan militants and to expel any remaining militants in Afghanistan. In 1975, Daoud Khan established his own party, the National Revolutionary Party of Afghanistan and outlawed all other parties. He then started removing members of its Parcham wing from government positions, including the ones who had supported his coup, and started replacing them with familiar faces from Kabul&#x27;s traditional government elites. Daoud also started reducing his dependence on the Soviet Union. As a consequence of Daoud&#x27;s actions, Afghanistan&#x27;s relations with the Soviet Union deteriorated. In 1978, after witnessing India&#x27;s nuclear test, &quot;Smiling Buddha&quot;, Daoud Khan initiated a military buildup to counter Pakistan&#x27;s armed forces and Iranian military influence in Afghan politics.

=== Saur Revolution of 1978 ===

The Marxist People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan&#x27;s strength grew considerably after its foundation. In 1967, the PDPA split into two rival factions, the Khalq (Masses) faction headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki and the Parcham (Flag) faction led by Babrak Karmal. Symbolic of the different backgrounds of the two factions were the fact that Taraki&#x27;s father was a poor Pashtun herdsman while Karmal&#x27;s father was a Tajik general in the Royal Afghan Army. More importantly, the radical Khalq faction believed in rapidly transforming Afghanistan, if necessary even using violence, from a feudal system into a Communist society, while the moderate Parcham faction favored a more gradualist and gentler approach, arguing that Afghanistan was simply not ready for Communism and would not be for some time. The Parcham faction favored building up the PDPA as a mass party in support of the Daoud Khan government, while the Khalq faction were organized in the Leninist style as a small, tightly organized elite group, allowing the latter to enjoy ascendancy over the former. In 1971, the U.S. Embassy in Kabul reported that there had been increasing leftist activity in the country, attributed to disillusionment of social and economic conditions, and the poor response from the Kingdom&#x27;s leadership. It added that the PDPA was &quot;perhaps the most disgruntled and organized of the country&#x27;s leftist groups.&quot;
Intense opposition from factions of the PDPA was sparked by the repression imposed on them by Daoud&#x27;s regime and the death of a leading PDPA member, Mir Akbar Khyber. The mysterious circumstances of Khyber&#x27;s death sparked massive anti-Daoud demonstrations in Kabul, which resulted in the arrest of several prominent PDPA leaders. On 27 April 1978, the Afghan Army, which had been sympathetic to the PDPA cause, overthrew and executed Daoud along with members of his family. The Finnish scholar Raimo Väyrynen wrote about the so-called &quot;Saur Revolution&quot;: &quot;There is a multitude of speculations on the real nature of this coup. The reality appears to be that it was inspired first of all by domestic economic and political concerns and that the Soviet Union did not play any role in the Saur Revolution&quot;. After this the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) was formed. Nur Muhammad Taraki, General Secretary of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan, became Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the newly established Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. On 5 December 1978, a treaty of friendship was signed between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.

==== &quot;Red Terror&quot; of the revolutionary government ====
After the revolution, Taraki assumed the leadership, prime ministership and general secretaryship of the PDPA. As before in the party, the government never referred to itself as &quot;communist&quot;. The government was divided along factional lines, with Taraki and Deputy Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin of the Khalq faction pitted against Parcham leaders such as Babrak Karmal. Though the new regime promptly allied itself to the Soviet Union, many Soviet diplomats believed that the Khalqi plans to transform Afghanistan would provoke a rebellion from the general population, which was socially and religiously conservative. Immediately after coming to power, the Khalqis began to persecute the Parchamis, not the least because the Soviet Union favored the Parchami faction whose &quot;go slow&quot; plans were felt to be better suited for Afghanistan, thereby leading the Khalqis to eliminate their rivals so the Soviets would have no other choice but to back them. Within the PDPA, conflicts resulted in exiles, purges and executions of Parcham members. The Khalq state executed between 10,000 and 27,000 people, mostly at Pul-e-Charkhi prison, prior to the Soviet intervention. Political scientist Olivier Roy estimated between 50,000 and 100,000 people disappeared during the Taraki–Amin period:
During its first 18 months of rule, the PDPA applied a Soviet-style program of modernizing reforms, many of which were viewed by conservatives as opposing Islam. Decrees setting forth changes in marriage customs and land reform were not received well by a population deeply immersed in tradition and Islam, particularly by the powerful landowners harmed economically by the abolition of usury (although usury is prohibited in Islam) and the cancellation of farmers&#x27; debts. The new government also enhanced women&#x27;s rights, sought a rapid eradication of illiteracy and promoted Afghanistan&#x27;s ethnic minorities, although these programs appear to have had an effect only in the urban areas. By mid-1978, a rebellion started, with rebels attacking the local military garrison in the Nuristan region of eastern Afghanistan and soon civil war spread throughout the country. In September 1979, Deputy Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin seized power, arresting and killing Taraki. More than two months of instability overwhelmed Amin&#x27;s regime as he moved against his opponents in the PDPA and the growing rebellion.

==== Affairs with the USSR after the revolution ====

Even before the revolutionaries came to power, Afghanistan was &quot;a militarily and politically neutral nation, effectively dependent on the Soviet Union.&quot; A treaty, signed in December 1978, allowed the Democratic Republic to call upon the Soviet Union for military support.

Following the Herat uprising, the first major sign of anti-regime resistance, General Secretary Taraki contacted Alexei Kosygin, chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers and asked for &quot;practical and technical assistance with men and armament&quot;. Kosygin was unfavorable to the proposal on the basis of the negative political repercussions such an action would have for his country, and he rejected all further attempts by Taraki to solicit Soviet military aid in Afghanistan. Following Kosygin&#x27;s rejection, Taraki requested aid from Leonid Brezhnev, the general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Soviet head of state, who warned Taraki that full Soviet intervention &quot;would only play into the hands of our enemies – both yours and ours&quot;. Brezhnev also advised Taraki to ease up on the drastic social reforms and to seek broader support for his regime.

In 1979, Taraki attended a conference of the Non-Aligned Movement in Havana, Cuba. On his way back, he stopped in Moscow on 20 March and met with Brezhnev, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and other Soviet officials. It was rumoured that Karmal was present at the meeting in an attempt to reconcile Taraki&#x27;s Khalq faction and the Parcham against Amin and his followers. At the meeting, Taraki was successful in negotiating some Soviet support, including the redeployment of two Soviet armed divisions at the Soviet-Afghan border, the sending of 500 military and civilian advisers and specialists and the immediate delivery of Soviet armed equipment sold at 25 percent below the original price; however, the Soviets were not pleased about the developments in Afghanistan and Brezhnev impressed upon Taraki the need for party unity. Despite reaching this agreement with Taraki, the Soviets continued to be reluctant to intervene further in Afghanistan and repeatedly refused Soviet military intervention within Afghan borders during Taraki&#x27;s rule as well as later during Amin&#x27;s short rule.

Taraki and Amin&#x27;s regime even attempted to eliminate Parcham&#x27;s leader Babrak Karmal. After being relieved of his duties as ambassador, he remained in Czechoslovakia in exile, fearing for his life if he returned as the regime requested. He and his family were protected by the Czechoslovak StB; files from January 1979 revealed information that Afghanistan sent AGSA spies to Czechoslovakia to find and assassinate Karmal.

=== Initiation of the rebellion ===

In 1978, the Taraki government initiated a series of reforms, including a radical modernization of the traditional Islamic civil law, especially marriage law, aimed at &quot;uprooting feudalism&quot; in Afghan society. The government brooked no opposition to the reforms and responded with violence to unrest. Between April 1978 and the Soviet Intervention of December 1979, thousands of prisoners, perhaps as many as 27,000, were executed at the notorious Pul-e-Charkhi prison, including many village mullahs and headmen. Other members of the traditional elite, the religious establishment and intelligentsia fled the country.

Large parts of the country went into open rebellion. The Parcham Government claimed that 11,000 were executed during the Amin/Taraki period in response to the revolts. The revolt began in October among the Nuristani tribes of the Kunar Valley in the northeastern part of the country near the border with Pakistan, and rapidly spread among the other ethnic groups. By the spring of 1979, 24 of the 28 provinces had suffered outbreaks of violence. The rebellion began to take hold in the cities: in March 1979 in Herat, rebels led by Ismail Khan revolted. Between 3,000 and 5,000 people were killed and wounded during the Herat revolt. Some 100 Soviet citizens and their families were killed. By August 1979, up to 165,000 Afghans had fled across the border to Pakistan. The main reason the revolt spread so widely was the disintegration of the Afghan army in a series of insurrections. The numbers of the Afghan army fell from 110,000 men in 1978 to 25,000 by 1980. The U.S. embassy in Kabul cabled to Washington the army was melting away &quot;like an ice floe in a tropical sea&quot;. According to scholar Gilles Dorronsoro, it was the violence of the state rather than its reforms that caused the uprisings.

==== Pakistan–U.S. relations and rebel aid ====
Pakistani intelligence officials began privately lobbying the U.S. and its allies to send materiel assistance to the Islamist rebels. Pakistani President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq&#x27;s ties with the U.S. had been strained during Jimmy Carter&#x27;s presidency due to Pakistan&#x27;s nuclear program and the execution of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in April 1979, but Carter told National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance as early as January 1979 that it was vital to &quot;repair our relationships with Pakistan&quot; in light of the unrest in Iran. According to former Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) official Robert Gates, &quot;the Carter administration turned to CIA ... to counter Soviet and Cuban aggression in the Third World, particularly beginning in mid-1979.&quot; In March 1979, &quot;CIA sent several covert action options relating to Afghanistan to the SCC Special Coordination Committee]&quot; of the United States National Security Council. At a 30 March meeting, U.S. Department of Defense representative Walter B. Slocombe &quot;asked if there was value in keeping the Afghan insurgency going, &#x27;sucking the Soviets into a Vietnamese quagmire? When asked to clarify this remark, Slocombe explained: &quot;Well, the whole idea was that if the Soviets decided to strike at this tar baby [Afghanistan] we had every interest in making sure that they got stuck.&quot; Yet a 5 April memo from National Intelligence Officer Arnold Horelick warned: &quot;Covert action would raise the costs to the Soviets and inflame Moslem opinion against them in many countries. The risk was that a substantial U.S. covert aid program could raise the stakes and induce the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended.&quot;

In May 1979, U.S. officials secretly began meeting with rebel leaders through Pakistani government contacts. After additional meetings Carter signed two presidential findings in July 1979 permitting the CIA to spend $695,000 on non-military assistance (e.g., &quot;cash, medical equipment, and radio transmitters&quot;) and on a propaganda campaign targeting the Soviet-backed leadership of the DRA, which (in the words of Steve Coll) &quot;seemed at the time a small beginning.&quot;

== Soviet deployment, 1979 ==

The Amin government, having secured a treaty in December 1978 that allowed them to call on Soviet forces, repeatedly requested the introduction of troops in Afghanistan in the spring and summer of 1979. They requested Soviet troops to provide security and to assist in the fight against the mujahideen (&quot;Those engaged in jihad&quot;) rebels. After the killing of Soviet technicians in Herat by rioting mobs, the Soviet government sold several Mi-24 helicopters to the Afghan military. On 14 April 1979, the Afghan government requested that the USSR send 15 to 20 helicopters with their crews to Afghanistan, and on 16 June, the Soviet government responded and sent a detachment of tanks, BMPs, and crews to guard the government in Kabul and to secure the Bagram and Shindand air bases. In response to this request, an airborne battalion, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel A. Lomakin, arrived at Bagram on 7 July. They arrived without their combat gear, disguised as technical specialists. They were the personal bodyguards for General Secretary Taraki. The paratroopers were directly subordinate to the senior Soviet military advisor and did not interfere in Afghan politics. Several leading politicians at the time such as Alexei Kosygin and Andrei Gromyko were against intervention.

After a month, the Afghan requests were no longer for individual crews and subunits, but for regiments and larger units. In July, the Afghan government requested that two motorized rifle divisions be sent to Afghanistan. The following day, they requested an airborne division in addition to the earlier requests. They repeated these requests and variants to these requests over the following months right up to December 1979. However, the Soviet government was in no hurry to grant them.

Based on information from the KGB, Soviet leaders felt that Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin&#x27;s actions had destabilized the situation in Afghanistan. Following his initial coup against and killing of Taraki, the KGB station in Kabul warned Moscow that Amin&#x27;s leadership would lead to &quot;harsh repressions, and as a result, the activation and consolidation of the opposition.&quot;

The Soviets established a special commission on Afghanistan, comprising the KGB chairman Yuri Andropov, Boris Ponomarev from the Central Committee and Dmitry Ustinov, the Minister of Defence. In late April 1979, the committee reported that Amin was purging his opponents, including Soviet loyalists, that his loyalty to Moscow was in question and that he was seeking diplomatic links with Pakistan and possibly the People&#x27;s Republic of China (which at the time had poor relations with the Soviet Union). Of specific concern were Amin&#x27;s supposed meetings with the U.S. chargé d&#x27;affaires, J. Bruce Amstutz, which were used as a justification for the invasion by the Kremlin.

Information forged by the KGB from its agents in Kabul provided the last arguments to eliminate Amin. Supposedly, two of Amin&#x27;s guards killed the former General Secretary Nur Muhammad Taraki with a pillow, and Amin himself was portrayed as a CIA agent. The latter is widely discredited, with Amin repeatedly demonstrating friendliness toward the various delegates of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan and maintaining the pro-Soviet line. Soviet General Vasily Zaplatin, a political advisor of Premier Brezhnev at the time, claimed that four of General Secretary Taraki&#x27;s ministers were responsible for the destabilization. However, Zaplatin failed to emphasize this in discussions and was not heard.

During meetings between General Secretary Taraki and Soviet leaders in March 1979, the Soviets promised political support and to send military equipment and technical specialists, but upon repeated requests by Taraki for direct Soviet intervention, the leadership adamantly opposed him; reasons included that they would be met with &quot;bitter resentment&quot; from the Afghan people, that intervening in another country&#x27;s civil war would hand a propaganda victory to their opponents, and Afghanistan&#x27;s overall inconsequential weight in international affairs, in essence realizing they had little to gain by taking over a country with a poor economy, unstable government, and population hostile to outsiders. However, as the situation continued to deteriorate from May–December 1979, Moscow changed its mind on dispatching Soviet troops. The reasons for this complete turnabout are not entirely clear, and several speculative arguments include: the grave internal situation and inability for the Afghan government to retain power much longer; the effects of the Iranian Revolution that brought an Islamic theocracy into power, leading to fears that religious fanaticism would spread through Afghanistan and into Soviet Muslim Central Asian republics; Taraki&#x27;s murder and replacement by Amin, who the Soviet leadership believed had secret contacts within the American embassy in Kabul and &quot;was capable of reaching an agreement with the United States&quot;; however, allegations of Amin colluding with the Americans have been widely discredited and it was revealed in the 1990s that the KGB actually planted the story; and the deteriorating ties with the United States after NATO&#x27;s two-track missile deployment decision in response to Soviet nuclear presence in Eastern Europe and the failure of Congress to ratify the SALT II treaty, creating the impression that détente was &quot;already effectively dead.&quot;

The British journalist Patrick Brogan wrote in 1989: &quot;The simplest explanation is probably the best. They got sucked into Afghanistan much as the United States got sucked into Vietnam, without clearly thinking through the consequences, and wildly underestimating the hostility they would arouse&quot;. By the fall of 1979, the Amin regime was collapsing with morale in the Afghan Army having fallen to rock-bottom levels, while the mujahideen had taken control of much of the countryside. The general consensus amongst Afghan experts at the time was that it was not a question of if, but when the mujahideen would take Kabul.

In October 1979, a KGB Spetsnaz force &quot;Zenith&quot; covertly dispatched a group of specialists to determine the potential reaction from local Afghans to a presence of Soviet troops there. They concluded that deploying troops would be unwise and could lead to war, but this was reportedly ignored by the KGB chairman Yuri Andropov. A Spetsnaz battalion of Central Asian troops, dressed in Afghan Army uniforms, was covertly deployed to Kabul between 9 and 12 November 1979. They moved a few days later to the Tajbeg Palace, where Amin was moving to.

In Moscow, Leonid Brezhnev was indecisive and waffled as he usually did when faced with a difficult decision. The three decision-makers in Moscow who pressed the hardest for an invasion in the fall of 1979 were the troika consisting of Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko; the Chairman of KGB, Yuri Andropov, and the Defense Minister Marshal Dmitry Ustinov. The principal reasons for the invasion were the belief in Moscow that Amin was a leader both incompetent and fanatical who had lost control of the situation, together with the belief that it was the United States via Pakistan who was sponsoring the Islamist insurgency in Afghanistan. Andropov, Gromyko and Ustinov all argued that if a radical Islamist regime came to power in Kabul, it would attempt to sponsor radical Islam in Soviet Central Asia, thereby requiring a preemptive strike. What was envisioned in the fall of 1979 was a short intervention under which Moscow would replace radical Khalqi Communist Amin with the moderate Parchami Communist Babrak Karmal to stabilize the situation. Contrary to the contemporary view of Brzezinski and the regional powers, access to the Persian Gulf played no role in the decision to intervene on the Soviet side.

The concerns raised by the Chief of the Soviet Army General Staff, Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov who warned about the possibility of a protracted guerrilla war, were dismissed by the troika who insisted that any occupation of Afghanistan would be short and relatively painless. Most notably, though the diplomats of the Narkomindel at the Embassy in Kabul and the KGB officers stationed in Afghanistan were well informed about the developments in that country, such information rarely filtered through to the decision-makers in Moscow who viewed Afghanistan more in the context of the Cold War rather than understanding Afghanistan as a subject in its own right. The viewpoint that it was the United States that was fomenting the Islamic insurgency in Afghanistan with the aim of destabilizing Soviet-dominated Central Asia tended to downplay the effects of an unpopular Communist government pursuing policies that the majority of Afghans violently disliked as a generator of the insurgency and strengthened those who argued some sort of Soviet response was required to a supposed &quot;outrageous American provocation.&quot; It was assumed in Moscow that because Pakistan (an ally of both the United States and China) was supporting the &quot;mujahideen&quot; that therefore it was ultimately the United States and China who were behind the rebellion in Afghanistan.

Amin&#x27;s revolutionary government had lost credibility with virtually all of the Afghan population. A combination of chaotic administration, excessive brutality from the secret police, unpopular domestic reforms, and a deteriorating economy, along with public perceptions that the state was atheistic and anti-Islamic, all added to the government&#x27;s unpopularity. After 20 months of Khalqist rule, the country deteriorated in almost every facet of life. The Soviet Union believed that without intervention, Amin&#x27;s government would have been disintegrated by the resistance and the country would have been &quot;lost&quot; to a regime most likely hostile to the USSR.

== Soviet invasion and palace coup ==
On 31 October 1979, Soviet informants under orders from the inner circle of advisors around Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev relayed information to the Afghan Armed Forces for them to undergo maintenance cycles for their tanks and other crucial equipment. Meanwhile, telecommunications links to areas outside of Kabul were severed, isolating the capital.

The Soviet 40th Army launched its initial incursion into Afghanistan on 25 December under the pretext of extending &quot;international aid&quot; to its puppet Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. On 25 December, Soviet Defence Minister Dmitry Ustinov issued an official order, stating that &quot;[t]he state frontier of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is to be crossed on the ground and in the air by forces of the 40th Army and the Air Force at 15:00 hrs on 25 December&quot;. This was the formal beginning of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Subsequently, on 27 December, Soviet troops arrived at Kabul International Airport, causing a stir among the city&#x27;s residents.

Simultaneously, Amin moved the offices of the General Secretary to the Tajbeg Palace, believing this location to be more secure from possible threats. According to Colonel General Tukharinov and Merimsky, Amin was fully informed of the military movements, having requested Soviet military assistance to northern Afghanistan on 17 December. His brother and General Dmitry Chiangov met with the commander of the 40th Army before Soviet troops entered the country, to work out initial routes and locations for Soviet troops.
On 27 December 1979, 700 Soviet troops dressed in Afghan uniforms, including KGB and GRU special forces officers from the &quot;Alpha Group&quot; and &quot;Zenith Group&quot;, occupied major governmental, military and media buildings in Kabul, including their primary target, the Tajbeg Palace. The operation began at 19:00, when the KGB-led Soviet &quot;Zenith Group&quot; destroyed Kabul&#x27;s communications hub, paralyzing Afghan military command. At 19:15, the assault on Tajbeg Palace began; as planned, General Secretary Hafizullah Amin was assassinated. Simultaneously, other key buildings were occupied (e.g., the Ministry of Interior Affairs at 19:15). The operation was fully complete by the morning of 28 December 1979.

The Soviet military command at Termez, Uzbek SSR, announced on Radio Kabul that Afghanistan had been &quot;liberated&quot; from Amin&#x27;s rule. According to the Soviet Politburo, they were complying with the 1978 &quot;Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Good Neighborliness&quot;, and Amin had been &quot;executed by a tribunal for his crimes&quot; by the Afghan Revolutionary Central Committee. That committee then installed former Deputy Prime Minister Babrak Karmal as head of government, who had been demoted to the relatively insignificant post of ambassador to Czechoslovakia following the Khalq takeover and announced that it had requested Soviet military assistance.

Soviet ground forces, under the command of Marshal Sergey Sokolov, entered Afghanistan from the north on 27 December. In the morning, the 103rd Guards &#x27;Vitebsk&#x27; Airborne Division landed at the airport at Bagram and the deployment of Soviet troops in Afghanistan was underway. The force that entered Afghanistan, in addition to the 103rd Guards Airborne Division, was under command of the 40th Army and consisted of the 108th and 5th Guards Motor Rifle Divisions, the 860th Separate Motor Rifle Regiment, the 56th Separate Airborne Assault Brigade, and the 36th Mixed Air Corps. Later on, the 201st and 68th Motor Rifle Divisions also entered the country, along with other smaller units. In all, the initial Soviet force was around 1,800 tanks, 80,000 soldiers and 2,000 AFVs. In the second week alone, Soviet aircraft had made a total of 4,000 flights into Kabul. With the arrival of the two later divisions, the total Soviet force rose to over 100,000 personnel.

As part of Baikal-79, a larger operation aimed at taking 20 key strongholds in and around Kabul, the Soviet 105th Airborne Division secured the city and disarmed Afghan Army units without facing opposition. On 1 January 1980, Soviet paratroopers ordered the 26th Airborne Regiment in Bala Hissar to disarm, only for them to refuse and fire upon the Soviets as a firefight ensued. The Soviet paratroopers annihilated most of the regiment, with 700 Afghan paratroopers being killed or captured. In the aftermath of the battle, 26th Airborne Regiment was disbanded and later reorganized into the 37th Commando Brigade, led by Col. Shahnawaz Tanai, being the largest commando formation at a strength of three battalions. As a result of the battle with the 26th Airborne Regiment, the Soviet 357th Guards Airborne Regiment were permanently stationed in Bala Hissar fortress, meaning this new brigade was stationed as Rishkhor Garrison In the same year, the 81st Artillery Brigade was given airborne training and converted into the 38th Commando Brigade, stationed in Mahtab Qala (lit. Moonlit Fortress) garrison southwest of Kabul under the command of Brig. Tawab Khan.

=== International positions on Soviet invasion ===
The Christmas-time invasion of a practically defenseless country was shocking for the international community, and caused a sense of alarm for its neighbor Pakistan. On 2 January 1980 President Carter withdrew the SALT-II treaty from consideration before the Senate, and on 3 January he recalled US Ambassador Thomas J. Watson from Moscow. On 9 January the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 462. Following the resolution, the Sixth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly took place. Soviet military activities were met with strong criticism internationally, including some of its allies at the UN General Assembly (UNGA), but the Soviet machine scored a victory when, in the words of political scientist William Maley, &quot;the General Assembly accepted the credentials of the delegation of the Soviet-installed puppet regime in Kabul which duly voted against the resolution.&quot; The UNGA passed a resolution on 15 January by a vote of 104–18 protesting the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. On 29 January foreign ministers from 34 Muslim-majority countries adopted at the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation a resolution which condemned the Soviet intervention and demanded &quot;the immediate, urgent and unconditional withdrawal of Soviet troops&quot; from the Muslim nation of Afghanistan. According to political scientist Gilles Kepel, the Soviet intervention or invasion was viewed with &quot;horror&quot; in the West, considered to be a fresh twist on the geo-political &quot;Great Game&quot; of the 19th century in which Britain feared that Russia sought access to the Indian Ocean, and posed a threat to Western security, explicitly violating the world balance of power agreed upon at Yalta in 1945.

The general feeling in the United States was that inaction against the Soviet Union could encourage Moscow to go further in its international ambitions. President Carter placed a trade embargo against the Soviet Union on shipments of commodities such as grain, while also leading a 66-nation boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. Carter later suspended high-technology exports to the Soviet Union. The invasion, along with other concurrent events such as the Iranian Revolution and the hostage stand-off that accompanied it showed the volatility of the wider region for U.S. foreign policy. This was identified on 4 January during President Carter&#x27;s Address to the Nation:

China condemned the Soviet coup and its military buildup, calling it a threat to Chinese security (both the Soviet Union and Afghanistan shared borders with China), that it marked the worst escalation of Soviet expansionism in over a decade, and that it was a warning to other Third World leaders with close relations to the Soviet Union. Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping warmly praised the &quot;heroic resistance&quot; of the Afghan people. Beijing also stated that the lacklustre worldwide reaction against Vietnam (in the Sino-Vietnamese War earlier in 1979) encouraged the Soviets to feel free invading Afghanistan.

Ba&#x27;athist Syria, led by Hafez al-Assad, was one of the few states outside the Warsaw Pact that publicly favoured the invasion. Soviet Union expanded its military support to the Syrian government in return. The Warsaw Pact Soviet satellites (excluding Romania) publicly supported the intervention; however, a press account in June 1980 showed that Poland, Hungary and Romania privately informed the Soviet Union that the invasion was a damaging mistake.

In his 2009 book, Maley excoriated &quot;the West&quot;, which &quot;allowed the issues for these negotiations to be determined substantially by the USSR—a
classic weakness of Western negotiating style. On 14 May 1980, the Kabul regime issued at Moscow&#x27;s behest a statement directed at Iran and Pakistan, outlining a program for a &#x27;political solution&#x27; to the &#x27;tension that has come about in this region&#x27;. Its program was to be precisely mirrored in the agenda of the
subsequent negotiations conducted under UN auspices, which dealt with the withdrawal of the foreign troops, non-interference in the internal affairs of states, international guarantees, and the voluntary return of the refugees to their homes. This was a notable victory for the Soviet Union: the issue of self-determination
for the Afghan people, also mentioned by the General Assembly, of course did not figure in Kabul&#x27;s program, and its exclusion effectively subordinated the General
Assembly&#x27;s conditions for an acceptable settlement to those specified by the Soviet leadership.&quot;

=== Military aid ===
Weapons supplies were made available through numerous countries. Before the Soviet intervention, the insurgents received support from the United States, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Libya and Kuwait, albeit on a limited scale. After the intervention, aid was substantially increased. The US clandestinely purchased all of Israel&#x27;s captured Soviet weapons, and then funnelled the weapons to the Mujahideen, while Egypt upgraded its army&#x27;s weapons and sent the older weapons to the militants. Turkey sold their World War II stockpiles to the warlords, and the British and Swiss provided Blowpipe missiles and Oerlikon anti-aircraft guns respectively, after they were found to be poor models for their own forces. China provided the most relevant weapons, likely due to their own experience with guerrilla warfare, and kept meticulous record of all the shipments. The US, Saudi and Chinese aid combined totaled between $6 billion and $12 billion.

=== State of the Cold War ===

In the wider Cold War, drastic changes were taking place in Southwestern Asia concurrent with the 1978–1979 upheavals in Afghanistan that changed the nature of the two superpowers. In February 1979, the Iranian Revolution ousted the American-backed Shah from Iran, losing the United States as one of its most powerful allies. The United States then deployed twenty ships in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea including two aircraft carriers, and there were constant threats of war between the U.S. and Iran.

American observers argued that the global balance of power had shifted to the Soviet Union following the emergence of several pro-Soviet regimes in the Third World in the latter half of the 1970s (such as in Nicaragua and Ethiopia), and the action in Afghanistan demonstrated the Soviet Union&#x27;s expansionism.

March 1979 marked the signing of the U.S.-backed peace agreement between Israel and Egypt. The Soviet leadership saw the agreement as giving a major advantage to the United States. A Soviet newspaper stated that Egypt and Israel were now &quot;gendarmes of the Pentagon&quot;. The Soviets viewed the treaty not only as a peace agreement between their erstwhile allies in Egypt and the US-supported Israelis but also as a military pact. In addition, the US sold more than 5,000 missiles to Saudi Arabia, and the USSR&#x27;s previously strong relations with Iraq had recently soured, as in June 1978 it began entering into friendlier relations with the Western world and buying French and Italian-made weapons, though the vast majority still came from the Soviet Union, its Warsaw Pact satellites, and China.

The Soviet invasion has also been analyzed with the model of the resource curse. The 1979 Islamic Revolution in Iran saw a massive increase in the scarcity and price of oil, adding tens of billions of dollars to the Soviet economy, as it was the major source of revenue for the USSR that spent 40–60% of its entire federal budget (15% of the GDP) on the military. The oil boom may have overinflated national confidence, serving as a catalyst for the invasion. The Politburo was temporarily relieved of financial constraints and sought to fulfill a long-term geopolitical goal of seizing the lead in the region between Central Asia and the Gulf.

=== December 1979 – February 1980: Occupation and national unrest ===
The first phase of the war began with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and first battles with various opposition groups. Soviet troops entered Afghanistan along two ground routes and one air corridor, quickly taking control of the major urban centers, military bases and strategic installations. However, the presence of Soviet troops did not have the desired effect of pacifying the country. On the contrary, it exacerbated nationalistic sentiment, causing the rebellion to spread further. Babrak Karmal, Afghanistan&#x27;s new leader, charged the Soviets with causing an increase in the unrest, and demanded that the 40th Army step in and quell the rebellion, as his own army had proved untrustworthy. Thus, Soviet troops found themselves drawn into fighting against urban uprisings, tribal armies (called &quot;lashkar&quot;), and sometimes against mutinying Afghan Army units. These forces mostly fought in the open, and Soviet airpower and artillery made short work of them.

The Soviet occupation provoked a great deal of fear and unrest amongst a wide spectrum of the Afghan populace. The Soviets held the view that their presence would be accepted after having rid Afghanistan of the &quot;tyrannical&quot; Khalq regime, but this was not to be. In the first week of January 1980, attacks against Soviet soldiers in Kabul became common, with roaming soldiers often assassinated in the city in broad daylight by civilians. In the summer of that year, numerous members of the ruling party would be assassinated in individual attacks. The Soviet Army quit patrolling Kabul in January 1981 after their losses due to terrorism, handing the responsibility over to the Afghan army. Tensions in Kabul peaked during the 3 Hoot uprising on 22 February 1980, when the Soviet soldiers murdered hundreds of protesters. The city uprising took a dangerous turn once again during the student demonstrations of April and May 1980, in which scores of students were killed by soldiers and PDPA sympathizers.

The opposition to the Soviet presence was great nationally, crossing regional, ethnic, and linguistic lines. Never before in Afghan history had this many people been united in opposition against an invading foreign power. In Kandahar a few days after the invasion, civilians rose up against Soviet soldiers, killing a number of them, causing the soldiers to withdraw to their garrison. In this city, 130 Khalqists were murdered between January and February 1980.

According to the Mitrokhin Archive, the Soviet Union deployed numerous active measures at the beginning of the intervention, spreading disinformation relating to both diplomatic status and military intelligence. These efforts focused on most countries bordering Afghanistan, on several international powers, the Soviet&#x27;s main adversary, the United States, and neutral countries. The disinformation was deployed primarily by &quot;leaking&quot; forged documents, distributing leaflets, publishing nominally independent articles in Soviet-aligned press, and conveying reports to embassies through KGB residencies. Among the active measures pursued in 1980–1982 were both pro- and anti-separatist documents disseminated in Pakistan, a forged letter implying a Pakistani-Iranian alliance, alleged reports of U.S. bases on the Iranian border, information regarding Pakistan&#x27;s military intentions filtered through the Pakistan embassy in Bangkok to the Carter Administration, and various disinformation about armed interference by India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal, Indonesia, Jordan, Italy, and France, among others.

== Soviet occupation, 1980–1985 ==

=== Soviet military operations against Afghan guerrillas ===

The war now developed into a new pattern: the Soviets occupied the cities and main axis of communication, while the Afghan mujahideen, which the Soviet Army soldiers called &#x27;Dushman,&#x27; meaning &#x27;enemy&#x27;, divided into small groups and waged a guerrilla war in the mountains. Almost 80 percent of the country was outside government control. Soviet troops were deployed in strategic areas in the northeast, especially along the road from Termez to Kabul. In the west, a strong Soviet presence was maintained to counter Iranian influence. Incidentally, special Soviet units would have also performed secret attacks on Iranian territory to destroy suspected Mujahideen bases, and their helicopters then got engaged in shootings with Iranian jets. Conversely, some regions such as Nuristan, in the northeast, and Hazarajat, in the central mountains of Afghanistan, were virtually untouched by the fighting, and lived in almost complete independence. Bashgal, in Nuristan, was additionally a Salafi quasi-state known as the Islamic Revolutionary State of Afghanistan. Parts of Kunar, Laghman and Nangarhar were also incorporated into the short-lived Islamic Emirate of Kunar after the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Periodically the Soviet Army undertook multi-divisional offensives into Mujahideen-controlled areas. Between 1980 and 1985, nine offensives were launched into the strategically important Panjshir Valley, but government control in the area did not improve. Heavy fighting also occurred in the provinces neighbouring Pakistan, where cities and government outposts were constantly besieged by the Mujahideen. Massive Soviet operations would regularly break these sieges, but the Mujahideen would return as soon as the Soviets left. In the west and south, fighting was more sporadic, except in the cities of Herat and Kandahar, which were always partly controlled by the resistance.

The Soviets did not initially foresee taking on such an active role in fighting the rebels and attempted to play down their role there as giving light assistance to the Afghan army. However, the arrival of the Soviets had the opposite effect as it incensed instead of pacified the people, causing the Mujahideen to gain in strength and numbers. Originally the Soviets thought that their forces would strengthen the backbone of the Afghan army and provide assistance by securing major cities, lines of communication and transportation. The Afghan army forces had a high desertion rate and were loath to fight, especially since the Soviet forces pushed them into infantry roles while they manned the armored vehicles and artillery. The main reason that the Afghan soldiers were so ineffective, though, was their lack of morale, as many of them were not truly loyal to the communist government but simply wanting a paycheck.
Once it became apparent that the Soviets would have to get their hands dirty, they followed three main strategies aimed at quelling the uprising. Intimidation was the first strategy, in which the Soviets would use airborne attacks and armored ground attacks to destroy villages, livestock and crops in trouble areas. The Soviets would bomb villages that were near sites of guerrilla attacks on Soviet convoys or known to support resistance groups. Local peoples were forced to either flee their homes or die as daily Soviet attacks made it impossible to live in these areas. By forcing the people of Afghanistan to flee their homes, the Soviets hoped to deprive the guerrillas of resources and safe havens. The second strategy consisted of subversion, which entailed sending spies to join resistance groups and report information, as well as bribing local tribes or guerrilla leaders into ceasing operations. Finally, the Soviets used military forays into contested territories in an effort to root out the guerrillas and limit their options. Classic search and destroy operations were implemented using Mil Mi-24 helicopter gunships that would provide cover for ground forces in armored vehicles. Once the villages were occupied by Soviet forces, inhabitants who remained were frequently interrogated and tortured for information or killed.

To complement their brute force approach to weeding out the insurgency, the Soviets used KHAD (Afghan secret police) to gather intelligence, infiltrate the Mujahideen, spread false information, bribe tribal militias into fighting and organize a government militia. While it is impossible to know exactly how successful KHAD was in infiltrating Mujahideen groups, it is thought that they succeeded in penetrating a good many resistance groups based in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran. KHAD is thought to have had particular success in igniting internal rivalries and political divisions amongst the resistance groups, rendering some of them completely useless because of infighting. KHAD had some success in securing tribal loyalties but many of these relationships were fickle and temporary. Often KHAD secured neutrality agreements rather than committed political alignment.

The Sarandoy were a centrally-commanded government paramilitary group placed under the control of the Ministry of Interior Affairs, before being placed under the control of the unified Ministry of State Security (WAD) in 1986. They had mixed success in the war, as Osama bin Laden and the Arab mujahideen fought the Sarandoy&#x27;s 7th Operative Regiment, only to fail and sustain massive casualties. The label “Sarandoy” additionally included traffic police, provincial officers and corrections/labor facility officers. Large salaries and proper weapons attracted a good number of recruits to the cause, even if they were not necessarily &quot;pro-communist&quot;. The problem was that many of the recruits they attracted were in fact Mujahideen who would join up to procure arms, ammunition and money while also gathering information about forthcoming military operations. By the end of 1981, there were reports of Bulgarian Armed Forces present in Mazar-i-Sharif, the Warsaw Pact and the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces all operating in Afghanistan. A fighter of the Mujahideen, describing the Cubans in combat, said they were &quot;big and black and shout very loudly when they fight. Unlike the Russians they were not afraid to attack us in the open&quot;.

In 1985, the size of the LCOSF (Limited Contingent of Soviet Forces) was increased to 108,800 and fighting increased throughout the country, making 1985 the bloodiest year of the war. However, despite suffering heavily, the Mujahideen were able to remain in the field, mostly because they received thousands of new volunteers daily, and continued resisting the Soviets

=== Reforms of the Karmal administration ===
Babrak Karmal, after the invasion, promised reforms to win support from the population alienated by his ousted predecessors. A temporary constitution, the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, was adopted in April 1980. On paper, it was a democratic constitution including &quot;right of free expression&quot; and disallowing &quot;torture, persecution, and punishment, contrary to human dignity&quot;. Karmal&#x27;s government was formed of his fellow Parchamites along with (pro-Taraki) Khalqists, and a number of known non-communists/leftists in various ministries.

Karmal called his regime &quot;a new evolutionary phase of the glorious April Revolution&quot;, but he failed at uniting the PDPA. In the eyes of many Afghans, he was still seen as a &quot;puppet&quot; of the Soviet Union.

=== Mujahideen insurrection ===
In the mid-1980s, the Afghan resistance movement, assisted by the United States, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, Egypt, the People&#x27;s Republic of China and others, contributed to Moscow&#x27;s high military costs and strained international relations. The U.S. viewed the conflict in Afghanistan as an integral Cold War struggle, and the CIA provided assistance to anti-Soviet forces through the Pakistani intelligence services, in a program called Operation Cyclone.

Pakistan&#x27;s North-West Frontier Province became a base for the Afghan resistance fighters and the Deobandi ulama of that province played a significant role in the Afghan &#x27;jihad&#x27;, with Darul Uloom Haqqania becoming a prominent organisational and networking base for the anti-Soviet Afghan fighters. As well as money, Muslim countries provided thousands of volunteer fighters known as &quot;Afghan Arabs&quot;, who wished to wage jihad against the atheist communists. Notable among them was a young Saudi named Osama bin Laden, whose Arab group eventually evolved into al-Qaeda. Despite their numbers, the contribution has been called a &quot;curious sideshow to the real fighting,&quot; with only an estimated 2000 of them fighting &quot;at any one time&quot;, compared with about 250,000 Afghan fighters and 125,000 Soviet troops.

Their efforts were also sometimes counterproductive, as in the March 1989 battle for Jalalabad, when they showed the enemy the fate awaiting infidels in the form of a truck filled with dismembered bodies of their comrades chopped to pieces after surrendering to radical non-Afghan salafists. Though demoralized by the abandonment of them by the Soviets, the Afghan Communist government forces rallied to break the siege of Jalalabad and to win the first major government victory in years. &quot;This success reversed the government&#x27;s demoralization from the withdrawal of Soviet forces, renewed its determination to fight on, and allowed it to survive three more years.&quot;

Maoist guerrilla groups were also active, to a lesser extent compared to the religious Mujahideen. A notable Maoist group was the Liberation Organization of the People of Afghanistan (SAMA), whose founder and leader Abdul Majid Kalakani was reportedly arrested in 1980.

Afghanistan&#x27;s resistance movement was born in chaos, spread and triumphed chaotically, and did not find a way to govern differently. Virtually all of its war was waged locally by regional warlords. As warfare became more sophisticated, outside support and regional coordination grew. Even so, the basic units of Mujahideen organization and action continued to reflect the highly segmented nature of Afghan society.
Olivier Roy estimates that after four years of war, there were at least 4,000 bases from which Mujahideen units operated. Most of these were affiliated with the seven expatriate parties headquartered in Pakistan, which served as sources of supply and varying degrees of supervision. Significant commanders typically led 300 or more men, controlled several bases and dominated a district or a sub-division of a province. Hierarchies of organization above the bases were attempted. Their operations varied greatly in scope, the most ambitious being achieved by Ahmad Shah Massoud of the Panjshir valley north of Kabul. He led at least 10,000 trained troopers at the end of the Soviet war and had expanded his political control of Tajik-dominated areas to Afghanistan&#x27;s northeastern provinces under the Supervisory Council of the North.
Roy also describes regional, ethnic and sectarian variations in Mujahideen organization. In the Pashtun areas of the east, south and southwest, tribal structure, with its many rival sub-divisions, provided the basis for military organization and leadership. Mobilization could be readily linked to traditional fighting allegiances of the tribal &quot;lashkar&quot; (fighting force). In favorable circumstances such formations could quickly reach more than 10,000, as happened when large Soviet assaults were launched in the eastern provinces, or when the Mujahideen besieged towns, such as Khost in Paktia province in July 1983. But in campaigns of the latter type the traditional explosions of manpower—customarily common immediately after the completion of harvest—proved obsolete when confronted by well dug-in defenders with modern weapons. Lashkar durability was notoriously short; few sieges succeeded.

Mujahideen mobilization in non-Pashtun regions faced very different obstacles. Prior to the intervention, few non-Pashtuns possessed firearms. Early in the war they were most readily available from army troops or gendarmerie who defected or were ambushed. The international arms market and foreign military support tended to reach the minority areas last. In the northern regions, little military tradition had survived upon which to build an armed resistance. Mobilization mostly came from political leadership closely tied to Islam. Roy contrasts the social leadership of religious figures in the Persian- and Turkic-speaking regions of Afghanistan with that of the Pashtuns. Lacking a strong political representation in a state dominated by Pashtuns, minority communities commonly looked to pious learned or charismatically revered &quot;pirs&quot; (saints) for leadership. Extensive Sufi and maraboutic networks were spread through the minority communities, readily available as foundations for leadership, organization, communication and indoctrination. These networks also provided for political mobilization, which led to some of the most effective of the resistance operations during the war.

The Mujahideen favoured sabotage operations. The more common types of sabotage included damaging power lines, knocking out pipelines and radio stations, blowing up government office buildings, air terminals, hotels, cinemas, and so on. In the border region with Pakistan, the Mujahideen would often launch 800 rockets per day. Between April 1985 and January 1987, they carried out over 23,500 shelling attacks on government targets. The Mujahideen surveyed firing positions that they normally located near villages within the range of Soviet artillery posts, putting the villagers in danger of death from Soviet retaliation. The Mujahideen used land mines heavily. Often, they would enlist the services of the local inhabitants, even children.
They concentrated on both civilian and military targets, knocking out bridges, closing major roads, attacking convoys, disrupting the electric power system and industrial production, and attacking police stations and Soviet military installations and air bases. They assassinated government officials and PDPA members, and laid siege to small rural outposts. In March 1982, a bomb exploded at the Ministry of Education, damaging several buildings. In the same month, a widespread power failure darkened Kabul when a pylon on the transmission line from the Naghlu power station was blown up. In June 1982 a column of about 1,000 young communist party members sent out to work in the Panjshir valley were ambushed within 30 km of Kabul, with heavy loss of life. On 4 September 1985, insurgents shot down a domestic Bakhtar Airlines plane as it took off from Kandahar airport, killing all 52 people aboard.

Mujahideen groups used for assassination had three to five men in each. After they received their mission to kill certain government officials, they busied themselves with studying his pattern of life and its details and then selecting the method of fulfilling their established mission. They practiced shooting at automobiles, shooting out of automobiles, laying mines in government accommodation or houses, using poison, and rigging explosive charges in transport.

In May 1985, the seven principal rebel organizations formed the Seven Party Mujahideen Alliance to coordinate their military operations against the Soviet Army. Late in 1985, the groups were active in and around Kabul, unleashing rocket attacks and conducting operations against the communist government.

==== Raids inside Soviet territory ====

In an effort to foment unrest and rebellion by the Islamic populations of the Soviet Union, starting in late 1984 Director of CIA William Casey encouraged Mujahideen militants to mount sabotage raids inside the Soviet Union, according to Robert Gates, Casey&#x27;s executive assistant and Mohammed Yousef, the Pakistani ISI brigadier general who was the chief for Afghan operations. The rebels began cross-border raids into the Soviet Union in spring 1985. In April 1987, three separate teams of Afghan rebels were directed by the ISI to launch coordinated raids on multiple targets across the Soviet border and extending, in the case of an attack on an Uzbek factory, as deep as over into Soviet territory. In response, the Soviets issued a thinly-veiled threat to invade Pakistan to stop the cross-border attacks, and no further attacks were reported.

==== Media reaction ====
International journalistic perception of the war varied. Major American television journalists were sympathetic to the Mujahideen. Most visible was CBS News correspondent Dan Rather, who in 1982 accused the Soviet Union of genocide, comparing them to Hitler. Rather was embedded with the Mujahideen for a &quot;60 Minutes&quot; report. In 1987, CBS produced a full documentary special on the war.

&quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; took a highly positive view of the Mujahideen, a reversal of their usual view of Islamic fighters. The publication praised their martyrdom and their role in entrapping the Soviets in a Vietnam War-style disaster.

Leftist journalist Alexander Cockburn was unsympathetic, criticizing Afghanistan as &quot;an unspeakable country filled with unspeakable people, sheepshaggers and smugglers, who have furnished in their leisure hours some of the worst arts and crafts ever to penetrate the occidental world. I yield to none in my sympathy to those prostrate beneath the Russian jackboot, but if ever a country deserved rape it&#x27;s Afghanistan.&quot; Robert D. Kaplan on the other hand, thought any perception of Mujahideen as &quot;barbaric&quot; was unfair: &quot;Documented accounts of mujahidin savagery were relatively rare and involved enemy troops only. Their cruelty toward civilians was unheard of during the war, while Soviet cruelty toward civilians was common.&quot; Lack of interest in the Mujahideen cause, Kaplan believed, was not the lack of intrinsic interest to be found in a war between a small, poor country and a superpower where a million civilians were killed, but the result of the great difficulty and unprofitability of media coverage. Kaplan noted that &quot;none of the American TV networks had a bureau for a war&quot;, and television cameramen venturing to follow the Mujahideen &quot;trekked for weeks on little food, only to return ill and half starved&quot;. In October 1984, the Soviet ambassador to Pakistan, Vitaly Smirnov, told Agence France Presse &quot;that journalists traveling with the mujahidin &#x27;will be killed. And our units in Afghanistan will help the Afghan forces to do it. Unlike Vietnam and Lebanon, Afghanistan had &quot;absolutely no clash between the strange and the familiar&quot;, no &quot;rock-video quality&quot; of &quot;zonked-out GIs in headbands&quot; or &quot;rifle-wielding Shiite terrorists wearing Michael Jackson T-shirts&quot; that provided interesting &quot;visual materials&quot; for newscasts.

== Soviet exit and change of Afghan leadership, 1985–1989 ==
=== Foreign diplomatic efforts ===
As early as 1983, Pakistan&#x27;s Foreign Ministry began working with the Soviet Union to provide them an exit from Afghanistan, initiatives led by Foreign Minister Yaqub Ali Khan and Khurshid Kasuri. Despite an active support for insurgent groups, Pakistanis remained sympathetic to the challenges faced by the Soviets in restoring the peace, eventually exploring the possibility of setting up an interim system of government under former monarch Zahir Shah, but this was not authorized by President Zia-ul-Haq due to his stance on the issue of the Durand Line. In 1984–85, Foreign Minister Yaqub Ali Khan paid state visits to China, Saudi Arabia, Soviet Union, France, United States and the United Kingdom in order to develop a framework. On 20 July 1987, the withdrawal of Soviet troops from the country was announced.

=== April 1985 – January 1987: Exit strategy ===
The first step of the Soviet Union&#x27;s exit strategy was to transfer the burden of fighting the Mujahideen to the Afghan armed forces, with the aim of preparing them to operate without Soviet help. During this phase, the Soviet contingent was restricted to supporting the DRA forces by providing artillery, air support and technical assistance, though some large-scale operations were still carried out by Soviet troops.

Under Soviet guidance, the DRA armed forces were built up to an official strength of 302,000 in 1986. To minimize the risk of a coup d&#x27;état, they were divided into different branches, each modeled on its Soviet counterpart. The ministry of defence forces numbered 132,000, the ministry of interior 70,000 and the ministry of state security (KHAD) 80,000. However, these were theoretical figures: in reality each service was plagued with desertions, the army alone suffering over 10% annual losses, or 32,000 per year.

The decision to engage primarily Afghan forces was taken by the Soviets, but was resented by the PDPA, who viewed the departure of their protectors without enthusiasm. In May 1987 a DRA force attacked well-entrenched Mujahideen positions in the Arghandab District, but the Mujahideen managed to hold their ground, and the attackers suffered heavy casualties. Meanwhile, the Mujahideen benefited from expanded foreign military support from the United States, United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and other Muslim-majority countries. Two Heritage Foundation foreign policy analysts, Michael Johns and James A. Phillips, championed Ahmad Shah Massoud as the Afghan resistance leader most worthy of US support under the Reagan Doctrine.

=== May 1986–1988: Najibullah and his reforms ===
The government of President Karmal, a puppet state, was largely ineffective. It was weakened by divisions within the PDPA and the Parcham faction, and the regime&#x27;s efforts to expand its base of support proved futile. Moscow came to regard Karmal as a failure and blamed him for the problems. Years later, when Karmal&#x27;s inability to consolidate his government had become obvious, Mikhail Gorbachev, then General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party, said, &quot;The main reason that there has been no national consolidation so far is that Comrade Karmal is hoping to continue sitting in Kabul with our help.&quot; Karmal&#x27;s consolidation plan only involved those who had not raised arms against the regime, and even demanded Soviet troops to seal the border with Pakistan before any negotiations with Mujahideen. Eventually, the Soviet Union decided to dispose of Karmal from the leadership of Afghanistan.
In May 1986, Mohammad Najibullah, former chief of the Afghan secret police (KHAD), was elected General Secretary and later as President of the Revolutionary Council. The relatively young new leader wasn&#x27;t known that well to the Afghan population at the time, but he made swift reforms to change the country&#x27;s situation and win support as devised by experts of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. An eloquent speaker in both the Pashto and Dari languages, Najibullah engaged with elders and presented both himself and the state as Islamic, sometimes backing his speeches with excerpts from the Qur&#x27;an. A number of prisoners were released, while the night curfew in Kabul that had been in place since 1980 was finally lifted. He also moved against pro-Karmal Parchamites, who were expelled from the Revolutionary Council and the Politburo.

President Najibullah launched the &quot;National Reconciliation&quot; program at the start of 1987, the goal of which was to unite the nation and end the war that had enveloped the nation for seven years. He expressed willingness to negotiate with the Mujahideen resistance, allow parties other than the PDPA to be active, and indicated that exiled King Zahir Shah could be part of the process. A six-month ceasefire also began in December 1986. His administration was also more open to foreign visitors outside the Soviet bloc. In November 1987, Najibullah convened a &quot;loya jirga&quot; selected by the authorities which successfully passed a new constitution for Afghanistan, creating a presidential system with an elective bicameral parliament. The constitution declared &quot;the sacred religion of Islam&quot; the official religion, guaranteed the democratic rights of the individual, made it legal to form &quot;political parties&quot;, and promoted equality between the various tribes and nationalities. Despite high expectations, the new policy only had limited impact in regaining support from the population and the resistance, partly because of the high distrust and unpopularity of the PDPA and KHAD, as well as Najibullah&#x27;s loyalty to Moscow.

As part of the new structure, national parliamentary elections were held in 1988 to elect members of the new National Assembly, the first such elections in Afghanistan in 19 years.

==== Negotiations for a coalition ====
Ex-king Zahir Shah remained a popular figure to most Afghans. Diego Cordovez of the UN also recognized the king as a potential key to a political settlement to the war after the Soviet troops would leave. Polls in 1987 showed that he was a favored figure to lead a potential coalition between the DRA regime and Mujahideen factions, as well as an opposition to the unpopular but powerful guerrilla leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who was strongly against the King&#x27;s return. Pakistan however was against this and refused to grant the ex-king a visa for potential negotiations with Mujahideen. Pakistan&#x27;s President Zia-ul-Haq and his supporters in the military were determined to put a conservative Islamic ally in power in Kabul.

Negotiations continued and in 1988 through 1989, The Interim Afghan Government was formed in Pekhawar as an alliance of various Mujahadeen groups including Hezbi Islami and Jamiat, and would be involved in Operation Arrow and the siege of Khost.

=== April 1988: The Geneva Accords ===

Following lengthy negotiations, the Geneva Accords was signed in 1988 between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Supported by the Soviet Union and the United States respectively, the two Asian countries agreed to refrain from any form of interference in each other&#x27;s territory. They also agreed to allow Afghan refugees in Pakistan to voluntarily return. The two superpowers agreed to halt their interference in Afghanistan, which included a Soviet withdrawal.

The United Nations set up a special mission to oversee the process. In this way, President Najibullah had stabilized his political position enough to begin matching Moscow&#x27;s moves toward withdrawal. Among other things the Geneva Accords identified the US and Soviet non-intervention in the internal affairs of Pakistan and Afghanistan and a timetable for full Soviet withdrawal. The agreement on withdrawal held, and on 15 February 1989, the last Soviet troops departed on schedule from Afghanistan.

=== January 1987 – February 1989: Withdrawal ===

The promotion of Mikhail Gorbachev to General Secretary in 1985 and his &#x27;new thinking&#x27; on foreign and domestic policy was likely an important factor in the Soviets&#x27; decision to withdraw. Gorbachev had been attempting to remove the Soviet Union from the economic stagnation that had set in under the leadership of Brezhnev, and to reform the Soviet Union&#x27;s economy and image with the Glasnost and Perestroika policies. Gorbachev had also been attempting to ease cold war tensions by signing the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty with the U.S. in 1987 and withdrawing the troops from Afghanistan, whose presence had garnered so much international condemnation. Beijing had stipulated that a normalization of relations would have to wait until Moscow withdrew its army from Afghanistan (among other things), and in 1989 the first Sino-Soviet summit in 30 years took place. At the same time, Gorbachev pressured his Cuban allies in Angola to scale down activities and withdraw even though Soviet allies were faring somewhat better there. The Soviets also pulled many of their troops out of Mongolia in 1987, where they were also having a far easier time than in Afghanistan, and restrained the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea to the point of an all-out withdrawal in 1988. This massive withdrawal of Soviet forces from such highly contested areas shows that the Soviet government&#x27;s decision to leave Afghanistan was based upon a general change in Soviet foreign policy – from one of confrontation to avoidance of conflict wherever possible.

In the last phase, Soviet troops prepared and executed their withdrawal from Afghanistan, whilst limiting the launching of offensive operations by those who had not withdrawn yet.

By mid-1987 the Soviet Union announced that it would start withdrawing its forces. Sibghatullah Mojaddedi was selected as the head of the Interim Islamic State of Afghanistan, in an attempt to reassert its legitimacy against the Moscow-sponsored Kabul regime. Mojaddedi, as head of the Interim Afghan Government, met with then-Vice President of the United States George H. W. Bush, achieving a critical diplomatic victory for the Afghan resistance. Defeat of the Kabul government was their solution for peace. This confidence, sharpened by their distrust of the United Nations, virtually guaranteed their refusal to accept a political compromise.

In September 1988, Soviet MiG-23 fighters shot down two Iranian AH-1J Cobra helicopters which had intruded into Afghan airspace.

Operation Magistral was one of the final offensive operations undertaken by the Soviets, a successful sweep operation that cleared the road between the towns of Gardez and Khost. This operation did not have any lasting effect on the outcome of the conflict nor on the soiled political and military status of the Soviets in the eyes of the West but was a symbolic gesture that marked the end of their widely condemned presence in the country with a victory.

The first half of the Soviet contingent was withdrawn from 15 May to 16 August 1988, and the second from 15 November to 15 February 1989. In order to ensure a safe passage, the Soviets had negotiated ceasefires with local Mujahideen commanders. The withdrawal was generally executed peacefully except for the operation &quot;Typhoon&quot;.

General Yazov, the Defense Minister of Soviet Union, ordered the 40th Army to violate the agreement with Ahmad Shah Massoud, who commanded a large force in the Panjshir Valley, and attack his relaxed and exposed forces. The Soviet attack was initiated to protect Najibullah, who did not have a ceasefire in effect with Massoud, and who rightly feared an offensive by Massoud&#x27;s forces after the Soviet withdrawal. General Gromov, the 40th Army Commander, objected to the operation, but reluctantly obeyed the order. &quot;Typhoon&quot; began on 23 January and continued for three days. To minimize their own losses, the Soviets abstained from close-range fighting. Instead, they used long-range artillery, surface-to-surface and air-to-surface missiles. Numerous civilian casualties were reported. Massoud had not threatened the withdrawal to this point and did not attack Soviet forces after they breached the agreement. Overall, the Soviet attack represented a defeat for Massoud&#x27;s forces, who lost 600 fighters killed and wounded.

After the withdrawal of the Soviets, the DRA forces were left fighting alone and had to abandon some provincial capitals, as well as disbanding their air assault brigades a year prior. It was widely believed that they would not be able to resist the Mujahideen for long. However, in the spring of 1989, DRA forces inflicted a major defeat on the Mujahideen during the Battle of Jalalabad, as well launching successful assaults on fortified complexes in Paghman in 1990. The United States, having achieved its goal of forcing the Soviet Union&#x27;s withdrawal from Afghanistan, gradually disengaged itself from the country.

==== Causes of withdrawal ====
Some of the causes of the Soviet Union&#x27;s withdrawal from Afghanistan leading to the Afghanistan regime&#x27;s eventual defeat include
* The Soviet Army of 1980 was trained and equipped for large scale, conventional warfare in Central Europe against a similar opponent, i.e., it used armored and motor-rifle formations. This was notably ineffective against small scale guerrilla groups using hit-and-run tactics in the rough terrain of Afghanistan. Also, the Soviet Army&#x27;s large formations were not mobile enough to engage small groups of Mujahideen fighters that easily merged back into the terrain. The set strategy also meant that troops were discouraged from &quot;tactical initiative&quot;, essential in counter insurgency, because it &quot;tended to upset operational timing&quot;.
* The Soviets used large-scale offensives against Mujahideen strongholds, such as in the Panjshir Valley, which temporarily cleared those sectors and killed many civilians in addition to enemy combatants. The biggest shortcoming here, though, was the fact that once the Soviets engaged the enemy with force, they failed to hold the ground, as they withdrew once their operation was completed. The killing of civilians further alienated the population from the Soviets, with bad long-term effects.
* The Soviets did not have enough men to fight a counter-insurgency war (COIN), and their troops had low morale. The peak number of Soviet troops during the war was 115,000, but the bulk of these troops were conscripts, which led to poor combat performance in their Motor-Rifle Formations. However, the Soviets did have their elite infantry units, such as the famed Spetsnaz, the VDV, and their recon infantry. The problem with their elite units was not combat effectiveness, but that there were not enough of them and that they were employed incorrectly.
* Intelligence gathering, essential for successful COIN, was inadequate. The Soviets overly relied on less-than-accurate aerial recon and radio intercepts rather than their recon infantry and special forces. Although their special forces and recon infantry units performed very well in combat against the Mujahideen, they would have better served in intelligence gathering.
* The concept of a &quot;war of national liberation&quot; against a Soviet-sponsored &quot;revolutionary&quot; regime was so alien to the Soviet dogma that the leadership could not &quot;come to grips&quot; with it. This led to, among other things, a suppression by the Soviet media for several years of the truth about how bad the war was going, which caused a backlash when it was unable to hide it further.

== Fall of Najibullah government, 1992 ==

After the withdrawal of Soviet troops in 1989, the government of Mohammad Najibullah remained in power until 15 April 1992. Najibullah stepped down that day as Mujahideen guerrilla forces moved into Kabul. He attempted to fly to India under the protection of the U.N. but was blocked from leaving at the airport. He then took refuge at a United Nations compound in Kabul. After a bloody, four-year power struggle between different factions of the victorious anti-Najibullah forces, the Taliban took Kabul. They stormed the U.N. compound on September 26, 1996. They eventually tortured and killed Najibullah.

== Aerial engagements ==
===Aerial losses in Pakistan airspace===

During the conflict, Pakistan Air Force F-16 had shot down ten aircraft, belonging to Soviet Union, which had intruded into Pakistani territory. However, the Soviet record only confirmed five kills (three Su-22s, one Su-25 and one An-26). Some sources show that PAF had shot down at least a dozen more aircraft during the war. However, those kills were not officially acknowledged because they took place in Afghanistan&#x27;s airspace and acknowledging those kills would mean that Afghan airspace was violated by PAF. In all, Pakistan Air Force F-16s had downed several MiG-23s, Su-22s, a Su-25, and an An-24 while losing only one F-16.

=== Stinger missiles and the &quot;Stinger effect&quot; ===

Whether the introduction of the personal, portable, infrared-homing &quot;Stinger&quot; surface-to-air missile in September 1986 was a turning point in the war is disputed.
Many Western military analysts credit the Stinger with a kill ratio of about 70% and with responsibility for most of the over 350 Soviet or Afghan government aircraft and helicopters downed in the last two years of the war. Some military analysts considered it a &quot;game changer&quot; and coined the term &quot;Stinger effect&quot; to describe it.
Congressman Charlie Wilson claimed that before the Stinger the Mujahideen never won a set piece battle with the Soviets, but after it was introduced, the Mujahideen never again lost one.

However, these statistics are based on Mujahideen self-reporting, which is of unknown reliability. A Russian general claimed the United States &quot;greatly exaggerated&quot; Soviet and Afghan aircraft losses during the war. According to Soviet figures, in 1987–1988, only 35 aircraft and 63 helicopters were destroyed by all causes. The Pakistan Army fired twenty-eight Stingers at Soviet aircraft near the border without a single kill.

Many Russian military analysts tend to be dismissive of the impact of the Stinger. Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev decided to withdraw from Afghanistan a year before the Mujahideen fired their first Stinger missiles; Gorbachev was motivated by U.S. sanctions, not military losses. The Stingers did make an impact at first but within a few months flares, beacons, and exhaust baffles were installed to disorient the missiles, while night operation and terrain-hugging tactics tended to prevent the rebels from getting a clear shot. By 1988 the Mujahideen had all but stopped firing them. Stingers also forced Soviet helicopters and ground attack planes to bomb from higher altitudes with less accuracy but did not bring down many more aircraft than Chinese heavy machine guns and other less sophisticated anti-aircraft weaponry. Gorbachev stated in an interview in 2010 that the Stinger did not influence his decision-making process.

== War crimes ==

The Soviet Union committed war crimes during the war to the point some have characterized their scale and systematicity as being a genocide of Afghans during the Soviet-Afghan War.

== Foreign involvement ==
The Afghan mujahideen were backed primarily by Pakistan, the United States, Saudi Arabia, and the United Kingdom making it a Cold War proxy war. Out of the countries that supported the Mujahideen, the U.S. and Saudi Arabia offered the greatest financial support. However, private donors and religious charities throughout the Muslim world—particularly in the Persian Gulf—raised considerably more funds for the Afghan rebels than any foreign government; Jason Burke recounts that &quot;as little as 25 per cent of the money for the Afghan jihad was actually supplied directly by states.&quot; Saudi Arabia was heavily involved in the war effort and matched the United States&#x27; contributions dollar-for-dollar in public funds. Saudi Arabia also gathered an enormous amount of money for the Afghan mujahideen in private donations that amounted to about $20 million per month at their peak.

Other countries that supported the Mujahideen were Egypt, China, and Israel. Iran on the other hand only supported the Shia Mujahideen, namely the Persian speaking Shiite Hazaras in a limited way. One of these groups was the Tehran Eight, a political union of Afghan Shi&#x27;a. They were supplied predominantly by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, but Iran&#x27;s support for the Hazaras nevertheless frustrated efforts for a united Mujahideen front.

==Spillover==
===Raids inside the Soviet Union===

The Mujahideen launched multiple raids into the Soviet Union in an effort to foment unrest and rebellion by the Islamic populations of the Soviet Union, starting in late 1984 Director of CIA William Casey encouraged Mujahideen militants to mount sabotage raids inside the Soviet Union, according to Robert Gates, Casey&#x27;s executive assistant and Mohammed Yousef, the Pakistani ISI brigadier general who was the chief for Afghan operations. The rebels began cross-border raids into the Soviet Union in Spring 1985.

===Aerial engagements with Pakistan===

During the conflict, Soviet aircraft intruded into Pakistani airspace multiple times and Pakistan Air Force F-16 had shot down ten aircraft, belonging to Soviet Union, which had intruded into Pakistani territory. However, the Soviet record only confirmed five plane kills (three Su-22s, one Su-25 and one An-26) and 4 helicopter (Mi-8) kills. Some sources show that PAF had shot down at least a dozen more aircraft during the war. However, those kills were not officially acknowledged because they took place in Afghanistan&#x27;s airspace and acknowledging those kills would mean that Afghan airspace was violated by PAF. In all, Pakistan Air Force F-16s had downed 3 Su-22,1 Su-25,2 Mig-23,2 An-26, and Several Mi-8 while 1 Mig-23 was damaged while losing only one F-16.

===Terror campaign in Pakistan===

The KhAD-KGB campaign in Pakistan was a joint campaign in which the Afghan KhAD’s foreign &quot;Tenth Directorate&quot; and the Soviet KGB targeted Pakistan using prostitution spy rings, terror attacks, hijackings, serial killings, assassinations and the dissemination of propaganda to dissuade Pakistan from supporting the Afghan Mujahideen.

===Miram Shah incident===

On 2 April 1986, the 38th commando brigade of Democratic Republic of Afghanistan accidentally landed inside Pakistan territory during the Second Battle of Zhawar. The strike force, in the darkness of night, accidentally landed near Miram Shah in Pakistan instead of Zhawar. The force was surrounded and 120 soldiers were taken prisoner and 6 Mi-8 helicopters were captured.

===Badaber uprising===

In between 26 and 27 April 1985, in Badaber, Pakistan, an armed rebellion was instigated by Soviet and Afghan prisoners of war who were being held at the Badaber fortress near Peshawar, Pakistan. The prisoners fought the Afghan Mujahideen of the Jamiat-e Islami party and the Pakistani XI Corps supported by American CIA advisors in an attempt to escape but the rebellion was squashed and all POWs were killed.

===Raid inside Iran===

On 5 April 1982, Soviet forces accidentally infiltrated Iranian territory, in which Soviet forces strayed from the target of a Mujahideen base in southern Afghanistan and accidentally destroyed an asphalt factory in Iran. Iranian security forces attacked this strike force by using tanks and aircraft destroying two Soviet Mi-8 helicopters and damaging many more.

== Impact ==
=== Soviet personnel strengths and casualties ===

Between 25 December 1979, and 15 February 1989, a total of 620,000 soldiers served with the forces in Afghanistan (though there were only 80,000–104,000 serving at one time): 525,000 in the Army, 90,000 with border troops and other KGB sub-units, 5,000 in independent formations of MVD Internal Troops, and police forces. A further 21,000 personnel were with the Soviet troop contingent over the same period doing various white collar and blue-collar jobs.

The total official fatalities of the Soviet Armed Forces, frontier, and internal security troops came to 14,453. Other estimates give a figure of 26,000 killed Soviet soldiers. Soviet Army formations, units, and HQ elements lost 13,833, KGB sub-units lost 572, MVD formations lost 28, and other ministries and departments lost 20 men. During this period 312 servicemen were missing in action or taken prisoner; 119 were later freed, of whom 97 returned to the USSR and 22 went to other countries.

Of the troops deployed, 53,753 were wounded, injured, or sustained concussion and 415,932 fell sick. A high proportion of casualties were those who fell ill. This was because of local climatic and sanitary conditions, which were such that acute infections spread rapidly among the troops. There were 115,308 cases of infectious hepatitis, 31,080 of typhoid fever, and 140,665 of other diseases. Of the 11,654 who were discharged from the army after being wounded, maimed, or contracting serious diseases, 10,751 men, were left disabled.

Material losses were as follows:
* 451 aircraft (includes 333 helicopters)
* 147 tanks
* 1,314 IFV/APCs
* 433 artillery guns and mortars
* 11,369 cargo and fuel tanker trucks.

In early 1987 a CIA report estimated that, from 1979 to 1986, the Soviet military spent 18 billion rubles on the war in Afghanistan (not counting other costs incurred to the Soviet state such as economic and military aid to the DRA). The CIA noted that this was the equivalent of US$50 billion ($115 billion in 2019 USD). The report credited the relatively low cost to the small size of the Soviet deployment and the fact that the supply lines to Afghanistan were very short (in some cases, easier and cheaper than internal USSR lines). Military aid to the DRA&#x27;s armed forces totaled 9.124 billion rubles from 1980 to 1989 (peaking at 3.972 billion rubles in 1989). Financial and economic aid were also significant; by 1990, 75% of the Afghan state&#x27;s income came from Soviet aid.

=== Casualties and destruction in Afghanistan ===

The war resulted in the deaths of approximately 3,000,000 Afghans, Civilian death and destruction from the war was massive and detrimental. Estimates of Afghan civilian deaths vary from 562,000 to 2,000,000. 

The Geneva Accords of 1988, which ultimately led to the withdrawal of the Soviet forces in early 1989, left the Afghan government in ruins. The accords had failed to address adequately the issue of the post-occupation period and the future governance of Afghanistan. The assumption among most Western diplomats was that the Soviet-backed government in Kabul would soon collapse; however, this was not to happen for another three years. During this time the Interim Islamic Government of Afghanistan (IIGA) was established in exile. The exclusion of key groups such as refugees and Shias, combined with major disagreements between the different Mujahideen factions, meant that the IIGA never succeeded in acting as a functional government.

Before the war, Afghanistan was already one of the world&#x27;s poorest countries. The prolonged conflict left Afghanistan ranked 170 out of 174 in the UNDP&#x27;s &quot;Human Development Index&quot;, making Afghanistan one of the least developed countries in the world.

Once the Soviets withdrew, US interest in Afghanistan slowly decreased over the following four years, much of it administered through the DoD Office of Humanitarian Assistance, under the then Director of HA, George M. Dykes III. With the first years of the Clinton Administration in Washington, DC, all aid ceased. The US decided not to help with reconstruction of the country, instead handing the interests of the country over to US allies Saudi Arabia and Pakistan. Pakistan quickly took advantage of this opportunity and forged relations with warlords and later the Taliban, to secure trade interests and routes. The ten years following the war saw much ecological and agrarian destruction—from wiping out the country&#x27;s trees through logging practices, which has destroyed all but 2% of forest cover country-wide, to substantial uprooting of wild pistachio trees for the exportation of their roots for therapeutic uses, to opium agriculture.

Captain Tarlan Eyvazov, a soldier in the Soviet forces during the war, stated that the Afghan children&#x27;s future is destined for war. Eyvazov said, &quot;Children born in Afghanistan at the start of the war... have been brought up in war conditions, this is their way of life.&quot; Eyvazov&#x27;s theory was later strengthened when the Taliban movement developed and formed from orphans or refugee children who were forced by the Soviets to flee their homes and relocate their lives in Pakistan. The swift rise to power, from the young Taliban in 1996, was the result of the disorder and civil war that had warlords running wild because of the complete breakdown of law and order in Afghanistan after the departure of the Soviets.

The &quot;CIA World Fact Book&quot; reported that as of 2004, Afghanistan still owed $8 billion in bilateral debt, mostly to Russia, however, in 2007 Russia agreed to cancel most of the debt.

=== Refugees ===

5.5 million Afghans were made refugees by the war—a full one third of the country&#x27;s pre-war population—fleeing the country to Pakistan or Iran. Another estimate states 6.2 million refugees. By the end of 1981, the UN High Commission for Refugees reported that Afghans represented the largest group of refugees in the world.

A total of 3.3 million Afghan refugees were housed in Pakistan by 1988, some of whom continue to live in the country up until today. Of this total, about 100,000 were based in the city of Peshawar, while more than 2 million were located in other parts of the northwestern province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (then known as the North-West Frontier Province). At the same time, close to two million Afghans were living in Iran. Over the years Pakistan and Iran have imposed tighter controls on refugees which have resulted in numerous returnees. In 2012 Pakistan banned extensions of visas to foreigners. Afghan refugees have also settled in India and became Indian citizens over time. Some also made their way into North America, the European Union, Australia, and other parts of the world. The photo of Sharbat Gula placed on &quot;National Geographic&quot; cover in 1985 became a symbol both of the 1980s Afghan conflict and of the refugee situation.

=== Effect on Afghan society ===
The legacy of the war introduced a culture of guns, drugs and terrorism in Afghanistan. The traditional power structure was also changed in favor of the powerful Mujahideen militias:

The militarization transformed the society in the country, leading to heavily armed police, private bodyguards, and openly armed civil defense groups becoming the norm in Afghanistan both during the war and decades thereafter.

The war also altered the ethnic balance of power in the country. While Pashtuns were historically politically dominant since the modern foundation of the Durrani Empire in 1747, many of the well-organized pro-Mujahideen or pro-government groups consisted of Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras. With Pashtuns increasingly politically fragmented, their influence on the state was challenged.

== Aftermath ==
== Media and popular culture ==

Within Afghanistan, war rugs were a popular form of carpet designs woven by victims of the war.

== Perception in Afghanistan ==
== Perception in the former Soviet Union ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (free online access courtesy of UCP).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Historiography and memory===
* Galbas, Michael. &quot; &#x27;We Are Heroes&#x27;: The Homogenising Glorification of the Memories on the Soviet–Afghan War in Present Russia.&quot; in &quot;Conflict Veterans: Discourses and Living Contexts of an Emerging Social Group&quot; (2018): 134+. online
* Gibbs, David N. &quot;Reassessing Soviet motives for invading Afghanistan: A declassified history.&quot; &quot;Critical Asian Studies&quot; 38.2 (2006): 239–263. online

==Further reading==
* Shaw, Tamsin, &quot;Ethical Espionage&quot; (review of Calder Walton, &quot;Spies: The Epic Intelligence War Between East and West&quot;, Simon and Schuster, 2023, 672 pp.; and Cécile Fabre, &quot;Spying Through a Glass Darkly: The Ethics of Espionage and Counter-Intelligence&quot;, Oxford University Press, 251 pp., 2024), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXXI, no. 2 (8 February 2024), pp. 32, 34–35. &quot;[I]n Walton&#x27;s view, there was scarcely a US covert action that was a long-term strategic success, with the possible exception of intervention in the Soviet-Afghan War (a disastrous military fiasco for the Soviets) and perhaps support for the anti-Soviet Solidarity movement in Poland.&quot;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="4" end="21" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="29" end="43" title="War" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="67" end="101" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="181" end="196" title="Afghan conflict" label="Afghan conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="209" end="221" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="230" end="245" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan military"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="274" end="291" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="412" end="420" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="426" end="439" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="452" end="469" title="Operation Cyclone" label="Operation Cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="476" end="490" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="492" end="497" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="499" end="503" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="513" end="544" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Arab states of the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233974" start="609" end="621" title="Afghan Arabs" label="Afghan Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="700" end="708" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424262" start="743" end="779" title="Soviet Union–United States relations" label="Soviet Union–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="1012" end="1045" title="Afghan refugees" label="fled from the country as refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689219" start="1095" end="1106" title="Afghans in Pakistan" label="in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689221" start="1111" end="1118" title="Afghans in Iran" label="in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1530" end="1561" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1669" end="1676" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="1743" end="1768" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="violent uprising in Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="1841" end="1886" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="2062" end="2076" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="2149" end="2168" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="2468" end="2483" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="2649" end="2664" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet military"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="2687" end="2702" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q975430" start="2795" end="2814" title="Operation Storm-333" label="Operation Storm-333"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="2906" end="2918" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="2927" end="2939" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="2981" end="2993" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="3810" end="3824" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="4538" end="4555" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="4605" end="4641" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="complete withdrawal from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484578" start="4801" end="4810" title="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Uzbek SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405009" start="4956" end="4972" title="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)" label="Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980081" start="5205" end="5221" title="Afghan Civil War (1992–1996)" label="Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="5259" end="5270" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5556" end="5567" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5629" end="5642" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5827" end="5841" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5863" end="5877" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="5936" end="5961" title="British Raj" label="British colonies in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="6006" end="6016" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="6085" end="6095" title="Amu Darya" label="Oxus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993585" start="6142" end="6158" title="Panjdeh incident" label="Panjdeh Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312526" start="6209" end="6235" title="Afghan Boundary Commission" label="Afghan Boundary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398160" start="6254" end="6285" title="Afghanistan–Russia relations" label="Russian interest in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="6417" end="6431" title="Amanullah Khan" label="Amanullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="6487" end="6509" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="6605" end="6611" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="6623" end="6632" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="6685" end="6699" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="7011" end="7035" title="British Raj" label="British-controlled India"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="7042" end="7050" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q255352" start="7101" end="7118" title="Basmachi movement" label="Basmachi movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072724" start="7122" end="7126" title="Red Army intervention in Afghanistan (1929)" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072725" start="7131" end="7135" title="Red Army intervention in Afghanistan (1930)" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952572" start="7190" end="7206" title="Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)" label="Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438492" start="7260" end="7273" title="Central Asian revolt of 1916" label="a 1916 revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7310" end="7321" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="7352" end="7363" title="Enver Pasha" label="Enver Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q523154" start="7375" end="7392" title="Caucasus campaign" label="Caucasus campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="7752" end="7775" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="forced collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4195335" start="7829" end="7840" title="Ibrahim Bek" label="Ibrahim Bek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7963" end="7975" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907486" start="8039" end="8054" title="Politics of Afghanistan" label="Afghan politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="8438" end="8456" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="8492" end="8509" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="8548" end="8558" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="8645" end="8650" title="ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="8689" end="8711" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="8769" end="8788" title="Afghan Armed Forces" label="Afghan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="8863" end="8871" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q484578" start="8873" end="8882" title="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Uzbek SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="9468" end="9483" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q255988" start="9535" end="9550" title="Mortimer Durand" label="Mortimer Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="9612" end="9623" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="9722" end="9739" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q288292" start="9773" end="9784" title="Durand Line" label="Durand Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="9846" end="9865" title="Mohammad Daoud Khan" label="Mohammad Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="10007" end="10018" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="10048" end="10068" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Dominion of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="10351" end="10368" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704398" start="10617" end="10629" title="Pashtunistan" label="Pashtunistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="10741" end="10752" title="irredentist" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="10783" end="10790" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="11608" end="11618" title="Sino-Indian War" label="border war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704398" start="11862" end="11881" title="Pashtun irredentism" label="Pashtun irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q804133" start="11937" end="11952" title="Bajaur District" label="Bajaur District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371358" start="11989" end="11993" title="rout" label="rout"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="12616" end="12635" title="Mohammed Zahir Shah" label="Mohammed Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q125981523" start="13089" end="13111" title="Afghan Commando Forces" label="Afghan Commando Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070166" start="13145" end="13159" title="1973 Afghan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="bloodless coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="13194" end="13202" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="13304" end="13313" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="13470" end="13489" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="14202" end="14247" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114378" start="14695" end="14697" title="Military Intelligence of Pakistan" label="MI"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="14705" end="14718" title="Major-General" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696229" start="14719" end="14736" title="Naseerullah Babar" label="Naseerullah Babar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="14793" end="14798" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="14809" end="14836" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698039" start="14851" end="14879" title="Air Intelligence of Pakistan" label="Air Intelligence of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188667" start="14896" end="14915" title="Burhanuddin Rabbani" label="Burhanuddin Rabbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="14917" end="14936" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="14941" end="14959" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="14963" end="14971" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="15448" end="15463" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="15574" end="15589" title="Panjshir valley" label="Panjshir valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="15728" end="15734" title="Afghan refugees" label="refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379591" start="16220" end="16263" title="National Revolutionary Party of Afghanistan" label="National Revolutionary Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="16336" end="16343" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426448" start="16749" end="16763" title="Smiling Buddha" label="Smiling Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q837906" start="16838" end="16850" title="Pakistan Armed Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609135" start="16863" end="16881" title="Iranian military" label="military influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="16940" end="16947" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="16948" end="16993" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="17103" end="17108" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="17136" end="17155" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="17164" end="17171" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="17194" end="17207" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="17539" end="17552" title="Feudalism" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134733" start="18526" end="18542" title="Mir Akbar Khyber" label="Mir Akbar Khyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="18641" end="18646" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q383108" start="18734" end="18745" title="Afghan Army" label="Afghan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="19219" end="19253" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318781" start="19388" end="19409" title="Revolutionary Council (Afghanistan)" label="Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q532240" start="19414" end="19450" title="Prime Minister of Afghanistan" label="Chairman of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19858" end="19867" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="19963" end="19978" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="20683" end="20688" title="exile" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262732" start="20691" end="20696" title="purge" label="purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="20802" end="20822" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Pul-e-Charkhi prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q635747" start="20878" end="20889" title="Olivier Roy (political scientist)" label="Olivier Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="21193" end="21204" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="21364" end="21369" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="21539" end="21549" title="illiteracy" label="illiteracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="21754" end="21762" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="21770" end="21778" title="Nuristan Province" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="22452" end="22466" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="Herat uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="22551" end="22565" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="22567" end="22575" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="22583" end="22608" title="Council of Ministers (Soviet Union)" label="USSR Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="22985" end="23000" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="23006" end="23066" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355240" start="23071" end="23091" title="List of heads of state of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="23382" end="23402" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="23406" end="23412" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="23493" end="23516" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="Soviet Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="23517" end="23531" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="24607" end="24621" title="Czechoslovak Socialist Republic" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164269" start="24746" end="24749" title="StB" label="StB"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="24818" end="24822" title="KHAD" label="AGSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="25101" end="25110" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="25374" end="25394" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Pul-e-Charkhi prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q188942" start="25419" end="25425" title="mullah" label="mullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="25512" end="25526" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737671" start="25752" end="25761" title="Nuristani people" label="Nuristani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308493" start="25776" end="25788" title="Kunar Valley" label="Kunar Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="26057" end="26062" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q283648" start="26078" end="26089" title="Ismail Khan" label="Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="26959" end="26978" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="27030" end="27042" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="27050" end="27060" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="27121" end="27140" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="27198" end="27217" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="27241" end="27252" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="27366" end="27380" title="Iranian Revolution" label="unrest in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="27402" end="27429" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="27445" end="27457" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27705" end="27735" title="[Oversight of United States covert operations#NSC Special Coordination Committee" label="Special Coordination Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="27750" end="27789" title="United States National Security Council" label="United States National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="27819" end="27840" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543508" start="27856" end="27874" title="Walter B. Slocombe" label="Walter B. Slocombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973808" start="28243" end="28272" title="National Intelligence Council" label="National Intelligence Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128771" start="29012" end="29022" title="Steve Coll" label="Steve Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="29432" end="29437" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="29463" end="29501" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="killing of Soviet technicians in Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="29554" end="29571" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mi-24 helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q155494" start="29799" end="29803" title="BMP-1" label="BMPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q800126" start="29866" end="29872" title="Bagram Air Base" label="Bagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886559" start="29877" end="29885" title="Shindand Air Base" label="Shindand"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="30333" end="30347" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="30352" end="30366" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="30914" end="30917" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="30959" end="30974" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="31087" end="31093" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499427" start="31353" end="31365" title="List of chairmen of the KGB" label="KGB chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="31366" end="31379" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q658759" start="31381" end="31396" title="Boris Ponomarev" label="Boris Ponomarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="31406" end="31423" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q48067" start="31428" end="31442" title="Dmitry Ustinov" label="Dmitry Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367317" start="31448" end="31467" title="Minister of Defence (Soviet Union)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="31747" end="31783" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="poor relations with the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q64020067" start="31879" end="31895" title="J. Bruce Amstutz" label="J. Bruce Amstutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="31956" end="31963" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32422" end="32437" title="Vasily Zaplatin" label="Vasily Zaplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="32462" end="32469" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="33748" end="33766" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q894835" start="34049" end="34074" title="Embassy of the United States, Kabul" label="American embassy in Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="34131" end="34144" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="34281" end="34284" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638236" start="34369" end="34418" title="NATO Double-Track Decision" label="NATO&amp;#x27;s two-track missile deployment decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="34518" end="34525" title="SALT II" label="SALT II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="34563" end="34570" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="35567" end="35580" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913000" start="35593" end="35626" title="15th Independent Special Forces Brigade" label="battalion of Central Asian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q937209" start="35759" end="35772" title="Tajbeg Palace" label="Tajbeg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="35812" end="35827" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="36054" end="36068" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="36091" end="36104" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q48067" start="36139" end="36153" title="Dmitry Ustinov" label="Dmitry Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="36584" end="36603" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="36809" end="36822" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48097" start="37091" end="37106" title="Nikolai Ogarkov" label="Nikolai Ogarkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="37330" end="37341" title="Narkomindel" label="Narkomindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="39189" end="39213" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="39214" end="39229" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="39257" end="39276" title="Afghan Armed Forces" label="Afghan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q231336" start="39472" end="39481" title="40th Army (Soviet Union)" label="40th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="39620" end="39654" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367317" start="39672" end="39695" title="Soviet Defence Minister" label="Soviet Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q48067" start="39696" end="39710" title="Dmitry Ustinov" label="Dmitry Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="39784" end="39818" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q744802" start="40069" end="40096" title="Kabul International Airport" label="Kabul International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q937209" start="40218" end="40231" title="Tajbeg Palace" label="Tajbeg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="40746" end="40749" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q24699995" start="40754" end="40757" title="GRU (Soviet Union)" label="GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q277188" start="40758" end="40772" title="Spetsnaz" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q294405" start="40797" end="40808" title="Alpha Group" label="Alpha Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q937209" start="40949" end="40962" title="Tajbeg Palace" label="Tajbeg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q975430" start="41132" end="41160" title="Operation Storm-333" label="the assault on Tajbeg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867688" start="41293" end="41321" title="Ministry of Interior Affairs (Afghanistan)" label="Ministry of Interior Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q491879" start="41434" end="41440" title="Termez" label="Termez"/>
<link wikidata="Q484578" start="41442" end="41451" title="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Uzbek SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="41466" end="41477" title="Radio Kabul" label="Radio Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q842008" start="41566" end="41582" title="Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="41863" end="41876" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48020" start="42135" end="42149" title="Sergey Sokolov (marshal)" label="Sergey Sokolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974912" start="42222" end="42272" title="103rd Guards Airborne Division" label="103rd Guards &amp;#x27;Vitebsk&amp;#x27; Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q231336" start="42482" end="42491" title="40th Army (Soviet Union)" label="40th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028317" start="42513" end="42518" title="108th Motor Rifle Division" label="108th"/>
<link wikidata="Q647926" start="42523" end="42554" title="5th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="5th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031816" start="42602" end="42640" title="56th Guards Air Assault Brigade" label="56th Separate Airborne Assault Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030014" start="42686" end="42691" title="201st Motor Rifle Division" label="201st"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031075" start="42696" end="42721" title="68th Motor Rifle Division" label="68th Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="42831" end="42835" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="42864" end="42868" title="Armoured fighting vehicle" label="AFVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="43149" end="43154" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12141303" start="43285" end="43304" title="Soviet Airborne Forces" label="Soviet paratroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q804581" start="43343" end="43354" title="Bala Hissar, Kabul" label="Bala Hissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="43408" end="43415" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q288264" start="43687" end="43702" title="Shahnawaz Tanai" label="Shahnawaz Tanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q804581" start="43907" end="43918" title="Bala Hissar, Kabul" label="Bala Hissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278781" start="43971" end="43979" title="Rish Khor camp" label="Rishkhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="44179" end="44184" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="44490" end="44504" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="SALT-II treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q46000" start="44586" end="44602" title="Thomas J. Watson Jr." label="Thomas J. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="44633" end="44664" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034368" start="44672" end="44686" title="Resolution 462" label="Resolution 462"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263661" start="44718" end="44788" title="Sixth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly" label="Sixth emergency special session of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="44912" end="44931" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45022" end="45035" title="William Maley" label="William Maley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="45396" end="45431" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917460" start="45650" end="45662" title="Gilles Kepel" label="Gilles Kepel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="45806" end="45816" title="The Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="46017" end="46022" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579489" start="46254" end="46292" title="United States grain embargo against the Soviet Union" label="shipments of commodities such as grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="46325" end="46332" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="46340" end="46360" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="46501" end="46519" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="46528" end="46545" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="hostage stand-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="47073" end="47086" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="47241" end="47260" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131404661" start="47337" end="47357" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Syria" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="47366" end="47380" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="47420" end="47431" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="47552" end="47563" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="47689" end="47695" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16410" start="47697" end="47704" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="49430" end="49442" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q774960" start="49506" end="49522" title="Blowpipe missile" label="Blowpipe missile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49528" end="49536" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="Oerlikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="49714" end="49731" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="49910" end="49918" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="49957" end="49974" title="Southwestern Asia" label="Southwestern Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="50100" end="50118" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="50146" end="50150" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="50275" end="50287" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="50296" end="50307" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745298" start="50392" end="50405" title="Iran–United States relations" label="U.S. and Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129412" start="50772" end="50812" title="Egypt–Israel peace treaty" label="peace agreement between Israel and Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q109293552" start="50967" end="50976" title="Gendarme (historical)" label="gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="50980" end="50992" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51200" end="51208" title="List of missiles by nation#United States" label="missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="51212" end="51224" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="51279" end="51283" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="51596" end="51610" title="resource curse" label="resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="51621" end="51639" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q842008" start="51995" end="52004" title="Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423981" start="52436" end="52448" title="air corridor" label="air corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="52674" end="52687" title="Nationalism" label="nationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="52740" end="52753" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004507" start="53967" end="53982" title="3 Hoot uprising" label="3 Hoot uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q108685410" start="54124" end="54146" title="1980 student protests in Kabul" label="student demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="54471" end="54479" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521159" start="54727" end="54744" title="Mitrokhin Archive" label="Mitrokhin Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q422886" start="54781" end="54796" title="active measures" label="active measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654257" start="55632" end="55648" title="List of diplomatic missions of Pakistan" label="Pakistan embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="55652" end="55659" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="55667" end="55688" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="56049" end="56066" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q491879" start="56385" end="56391" title="Termez" label="Termez"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="56725" end="56733" title="Nuristan" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178796" start="56757" end="56766" title="Hazarajat" label="Hazarajat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866806" start="56894" end="56901" title="Bashgal" label="Bashgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204052" start="56967" end="57009" title="Islamic Revolutionary State of Afghanistan" label="Islamic Revolutionary State of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188147" start="57020" end="57025" title="Kunar Province" label="Kunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185442" start="57027" end="57034" title="Laghman Province" label="Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178471" start="57039" end="57048" title="Nangarhar Province" label="Nangarhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q112873746" start="57093" end="57117" title="Islamic Emirate of Kunar" label="Islamic Emirate of Kunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="57128" end="57162" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="57210" end="57220" title="division (military)" label="divisional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382760" start="57294" end="57304" title="Panjshir offensives" label="offensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="57352" end="57367" title="Panjshir Valley" label="Panjshir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="57769" end="57774" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="57779" end="57787" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="59871" end="59880" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mil Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="60199" end="60203" title="KHAD" label="KHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423082" start="60990" end="60998" title="Sarandoy" label="Sarandoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867688" start="61088" end="61116" title="Ministry of Interior Affairs (Afghanistan)" label="Ministry of Interior Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="61199" end="61202" title="KHAD" label="WAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="61251" end="61266" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="61275" end="61290" title="Mujahideen" label="Arab mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q276261" start="61903" end="61925" title="Bulgarian Armed Forces" label="Bulgarian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q130469" start="61937" end="61951" title="Mazar-i-Sharif" label="Mazar-i-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="61957" end="61968" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q663472" start="61977" end="62009" title="Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces" label="Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="62027" end="62038" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="62057" end="62067" title="Mujahideen" label="Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="62084" end="62090" title="Cubans" label="Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="62187" end="62195" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="62665" end="62678" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="62932" end="62942" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="63452" end="63458" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431136" start="63930" end="63961" title="Pakistani intelligence services" label="Pakistani intelligence services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="63983" end="64000" title="Operation Cyclone" label="Operation Cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="64019" end="64047" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="North-West Frontier Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366025" start="64105" end="64113" title="Deobandi" label="Deobandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225790" start="64201" end="64221" title="Darul Uloom Haqqania" label="Darul Uloom Haqqania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233974" start="64406" end="64418" title="Afghan Arabs" label="Afghan Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="64445" end="64450" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="64463" end="64470" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="64526" end="64541" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="64549" end="64553" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="64584" end="64592" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q117184310" start="64923" end="64943" title="Battle of Jalalabad (1989)" label="battle for Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="65531" end="65537" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127219" start="65661" end="65713" title="Liberation Organization of the People of Afghanistan" label="Liberation Organization of the People of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q635747" start="66222" end="66233" title="Olivier Roy (professor)" label="Olivier Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="66781" end="66799" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q974525" start="66807" end="66822" title="Panjshir valley" label="Panjshir valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="66832" end="66837" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="66950" end="66955" title="Tajiks" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="67157" end="67164" title="Pashtun people" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q386682" start="67651" end="67656" title="Khost" label="Khost"/>
<link wikidata="Q182493" start="67660" end="67666" title="Paktia" label="Paktia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="68184" end="68195" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="68570" end="68577" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="68583" end="68589" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="68812" end="68816" title="pir (Sufism)" label="pirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="68858" end="68862" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80866" start="68867" end="68877" title="maraboutic" label="maraboutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="69197" end="69205" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="69270" end="69281" title="electric power transmission" label="power lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="69296" end="69305" title="Pipeline transport" label="pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="69348" end="69363" title="office building" label="office building"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="69366" end="69378" title="air terminal" label="air terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="69483" end="69489" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="69566" end="69574" title="shell (projectile)" label="shelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="69818" end="69828" title="land mines" label="land mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="70027" end="70033" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="70314" end="70322" title="Ministry (government department)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q828827" start="70397" end="70410" title="power failure" label="power failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="70551" end="70566" title="communist party" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259359" start="71150" end="71177" title="Drive-by" label="shooting out of automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="71354" end="71385" title="Seven Party Mujahideen Alliance" label="Seven Party Mujahideen Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656" start="71751" end="71766" title="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" label="Director of CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q983721" start="71767" end="71780" title="William Casey" label="William Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="71875" end="71887" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="71957" end="71960" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q484578" start="72291" end="72296" title="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334995" start="72787" end="72795" title="Embedded journalism" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="72828" end="72838" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="72921" end="72941" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974292" start="73181" end="73199" title="Alexander Cockburn" label="Alexander Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097982" start="73597" end="73613" title="Robert D. Kaplan" label="Robert D. Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40464" start="74511" end="74531" title="Agence France Presse" label="Agence France Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294393" start="75146" end="75162" title="Foreign Ministry of Pakistan" label="Foreign Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="75228" end="75239" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332457" start="75260" end="75276" title="Foreign Minister of Pakistan" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4537102" start="75277" end="75291" title="Sahabzada Yaqub Khan" label="Yaqub Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q707883" start="75296" end="75311" title="Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri" label="Khurshid Kasuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360256" start="75343" end="75359" title="Islamic Unity of Afghanistan Mujahideen" label="insurgent groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="75518" end="75538" title="system of government" label="system of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="75552" end="75559" title="King of Afghanistan" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="75560" end="75570" title="Mohammad Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="75613" end="75623" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q288292" start="75662" end="75673" title="Durand Line" label="Durand Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4537102" start="75704" end="75718" title="Sahabzada Yaqub Khan" label="Yaqub Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="75747" end="75759" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="76283" end="76292" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="76755" end="76759" title="KHAD" label="KHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="76851" end="76860" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870333" start="77125" end="77170" title="Battle of Arghandab (1987)" label="attacked well-entrenched Mujahideen positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920624" start="77178" end="77196" title="Arghandab District" label="Arghandab District"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="77472" end="77491" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="77565" end="77583" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="77652" end="77667" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="77758" end="77770" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="78158" end="78180" title="Soviet Communist Party" label="Soviet Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="78656" end="78675" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="78704" end="78717" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="78719" end="78723" title="KHAD" label="KHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="79017" end="79052" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="79251" end="79262" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975209" start="79542" end="79565" title="National Reconciliation (Afghanistan)" label="National Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="79856" end="79866" title="Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="80077" end="80087" title="loya jirga" label="loya jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689131" start="80807" end="80830" title="1988 Afghan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q317797" start="81394" end="81413" title="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" label="Gulbuddin Hekmatyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="81608" end="81618" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="81818" end="81826" title="Peshawar" label="Pekhawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135107" start="81881" end="81893" title="Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin" label="Hezbi Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="81898" end="81904" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096763" start="81931" end="81946" title="Operation Arrow" label="Operation Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080960" start="81955" end="81969" title="siege of Khost" label="siege of Khost"/>
<link wikidata="Q957806" start="82048" end="82062" title="Geneva Accords (1988)" label="Geneva Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413536" start="82506" end="82513" title="United Nations Good Offices Mission in Afghanistan and Pakistan" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="83043" end="83060" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="83429" end="83437" title="Glasnost" label="Glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="83442" end="83453" title="Perestroika" label="Perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="83540" end="83580" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="84139" end="84147" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="84243" end="84275" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q380474" start="84861" end="84883" title="Sibghatullah Mojaddedi" label="Sibghatullah Mojaddedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="85141" end="85158" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094189" start="85490" end="85501" title="Bell AH-1 SuperCobra" label="AH-1J Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702724" start="85556" end="85575" title="Operation Magistral" label="Operation Magistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q467632" start="85717" end="85723" title="Gardez" label="Gardez"/>
<link wikidata="Q386682" start="85728" end="85733" title="Khost" label="Khost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367317" start="86374" end="86406" title="Minister of Defence (Soviet Union)" label="Defense Minister of Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q200029" start="86460" end="86478" title="Ahmad Shah Massoud" label="Ahmad Shah Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="87440" end="87450" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="DRA forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760603" start="87549" end="87569" title="ANA Special Operations Command" label="air assault brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q117184310" start="87767" end="87786" title="Battle of Jalalabad (1989)" label="Battle of Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502256" start="87852" end="87859" title="Paghman" label="Paghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="90798" end="90817" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="91219" end="91226" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q223697" start="92183" end="92190" title="FIM-92 Stinger" label="Stinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="92197" end="92219" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683725" start="92339" end="92349" title="kill ratio" label="kill ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="92633" end="92644" title="US Congress" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333430" start="92645" end="92659" title="Charlie Wilson (Texas politician)" label="Charlie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="92719" end="92735" title="set piece battle" label="set piece battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="93159" end="93172" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="93343" end="93367" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="93368" end="93385" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735780" start="94354" end="94402" title="genocide of Afghans during the Soviet-Afghan War" label="genocide of Afghans during the Soviet-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="94435" end="94452" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="94478" end="94486" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="94492" end="94505" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="94507" end="94519" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="94529" end="94543" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="94556" end="94564" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="94565" end="94574" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="94757" end="94769" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306416" start="94885" end="94896" title="Jason Burke" label="Jason Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="95375" end="95380" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="95382" end="95387" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="95393" end="95399" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="95401" end="95405" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="95495" end="95502" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523722" start="95549" end="95561" title="Tehran Eight" label="Tehran Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="95643" end="95676" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656" start="96008" end="96023" title="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" label="Director of CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q983721" start="96024" end="96037" title="William Casey" label="William Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="96132" end="96144" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="96214" end="96217" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="97061" end="97066" title="Su-22" label="Su-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="97069" end="97074" title="Su-25" label="Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="97077" end="97083" title="Mig-23" label="Mig-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q62156" start="97086" end="97091" title="An-26" label="An-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="97105" end="97109" title="Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="97118" end="97124" title="Mig-23" label="Mig-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="97159" end="97163" title="F-16" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="97269" end="97275" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="97276" end="97280" title="KHAD" label="KhAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="97336" end="97339" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="97496" end="97504" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="97618" end="97652" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24934498" start="97710" end="97733" title="Second Battle of Zhawar" label="Second Battle of Zhawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124385" start="97804" end="97814" title="Miram Shah" label="Miram Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070637" start="97838" end="97844" title="Zhawar" label="Zhawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="97914" end="97918" title="Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840491" start="98007" end="98014" title="Badaber" label="Badaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="98016" end="98024" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="98063" end="98069" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="98074" end="98080" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="98081" end="98097" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="98147" end="98155" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="98157" end="98165" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="98192" end="98209" title="Afghan Mujahideen" label="Afghan Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261999" start="98217" end="98232" title="Jamiat-e Islami" label="Jamiat-e Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042243" start="98257" end="98265" title="XI Corps (Pakistan)" label="XI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="98562" end="98573" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="98623" end="98627" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="98730" end="98734" title="Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="99068" end="99071" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192838" start="99118" end="99121" title="MVD" label="MVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373961" start="99122" end="99137" title="Internal Troops" label="Internal Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="100120" end="100129" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="100141" end="100148" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436114" start="100365" end="100377" title="List of Soviet aircraft crashes in Afghanistan" label="451 aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="100392" end="100403" title="helicopters" label="helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="100411" end="100415" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="100425" end="100428" title="IFV" label="IFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="100429" end="100433" title="Armoured personnel carrier" label="APCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="100440" end="100454" title="Artillery" label="artillery guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="100459" end="100466" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q957806" start="101563" end="101585" title="Geneva Accords (1988)" label="Geneva Accords of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="102140" end="102144" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="103117" end="103124" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="103140" end="103147" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="103426" end="103435" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="103502" end="103507" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="104689" end="104720" title="UN High Commission for Refugees" label="UN High Commission for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="104830" end="104837" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="104988" end="104996" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="105084" end="105102" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689221" start="105192" end="105219" title="Afghans in Iran" label="Afghans were living in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="105249" end="105253" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="105528" end="105542" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q230487" start="105598" end="105610" title="Sharbat Gula" label="Sharbat Gula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="105627" end="105646" title="National Geographic Magazine" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575688" start="105969" end="105983" title="militarization" label="militarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="106264" end="106272" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="106347" end="106361" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="106451" end="106457" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="106459" end="106465" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="106470" end="106477" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750625" start="106645" end="106653" title="war rugs" label="war rugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873159" start="107602" end="107614" title="Cécile Fabre" label="Cécile Fabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="107756" end="107784" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="107898" end="107911" title="covert operation" label="covert action"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="108059" end="108066" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="108108" end="108127" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="108131" end="108137" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
