<doc id="83859" wikidata="Q131774" url="?curid=83859" title="Adolescence">
<text>Adolescence () is a transitional stage of physical and psychological development that generally occurs during the period from puberty to adulthood (typically corresponding to the age of majority). Adolescence is usually associated with the teenage years, but its physical, psychological or cultural expressions may begin earlier or end later. Puberty typically begins during preadolescence, particularly in females. Physical growth (particularly in males) and cognitive development can extend past the teens. Age provides only a rough marker of adolescence, and scholars have not agreed upon a precise definition. Some definitions start as early as 10 and end as late as 30. The World Health Organization definition officially designates adolescence as the phase of life from ages 10 to 19.

==Biological development==
===Puberty in general===
Puberty is a period of several years in which rapid physical growth and psychological changes occur, culminating in sexual maturity. The average age of onset of puberty is 10–11 for girls and 11–12 for boys. Every person&#x27;s individual timetable for puberty is influenced primarily by heredity, although environmental factors, such as diet and exercise, also exert some influences. These factors can also contribute to precocious and delayed puberty.

Some of the most significant parts of pubertal development involve distinctive physiological changes in individuals&#x27; height, weight, body composition, and circulatory and respiratory systems. These changes are largely influenced by hormonal activity. Hormones play an organizational role, priming the body to behave in a certain way once puberty begins, and an active role, referring to changes in hormones during adolescence that trigger behavioral and physical changes.

Puberty occurs through a long process and begins with a surge in hormone production, which in turn causes a number of physical changes. It is the stage of life characterized by the appearance and development of secondary sex characteristics (for example, a deeper voice and larger Adam&#x27;s apple in boys, and development of breasts and more curved and prominent hips in girls) and a strong shift in hormonal balance towards an adult state. This is triggered by the pituitary gland, which secretes a surge of hormonal agents into the blood stream, initiating a chain reaction. The male and female gonads are thereby activated, which puts them into a state of rapid growth and development; the triggered gonads now commence mass production of hormones. The testes primarily release testosterone, and the ovaries predominantly dispense estrogen. The production of these hormones increases gradually until sexual maturation is met. Some boys may develop gynecomastia due to an imbalance of sex hormones, tissue responsiveness or obesity.

Facial hair in males normally appears in a specific order during puberty: The first facial hair to appear tends to grow at the corners of the upper lip, typically between 14 and 17 years of age. It then spreads to form a moustache over the entire upper lip. This is followed by the appearance of hair on the upper part of the cheeks, and the area under the lower lip. The hair eventually spreads to the sides and lower border of the chin, and the rest of the lower face to form a full beard. As with most human biological processes, this specific order may vary among some individuals. Facial hair is often present in late adolescence, around ages 17 and 18, but may not appear until significantly later. Some men do not develop full facial hair for 10 years after puberty. Facial hair continues to get coarser, much darker, and thicker for another 2–4 years after puberty.

The major landmark of puberty for males is spermarche, the first ejaculation, which occurs, on average, at age 13. For females, it is menarche, the onset of menstruation, which occurs, on average, between ages 12 and 13. The age of menarche is influenced by heredity, but a girl&#x27;s diet and lifestyle contribute as well. Regardless of genes, a girl must have a certain proportion of body fat to attain menarche. Consequently, girls who have a high-fat diet and who are not physically active begin menstruating earlier, on average, than girls whose diet contains less fat and whose activities involve fat reducing exercise (e.g. ballet and gymnastics). Girls who experience malnutrition or are in societies in which children are expected to perform physical labor also begin menstruating at later ages.

The timing of puberty can have important psychological and social consequences. Early maturing boys are usually taller and stronger than their friends. They have the advantage in capturing the attention of potential partners and in being picked first for sports. Pubescent boys often tend to have a good body image, are more confident, secure, and more independent. Late maturing boys can be less confident because of poor body image when comparing themselves to already developed friends and peers. However, early puberty is not always positive for boys; early sexual maturation in boys can be accompanied by increased aggressiveness due to the surge of hormones that affect them. Because they appear older than their peers, pubescent boys may face increased social pressure to conform to adult norms; society may view them as more emotionally advanced, despite the fact that their cognitive and social development may lag behind their appearance. Studies have shown that early maturing boys are more likely to be sexually active and are more likely to participate in risky behaviors.

For girls, early maturation can sometimes lead to increased self-consciousness, a typical aspect in maturing females. Because of their bodies&#x27; developing in advance, pubescent girls can become more insecure and dependent. Consequently, girls that reach sexual maturation early are more likely than their peers to develop eating disorders (such as anorexia nervosa). Nearly half of all American high school girls&#x27; diets are to lose weight. In addition, girls may have to deal with sexual advances from older boys before they are emotionally and mentally mature. In addition to having earlier sexual experiences and more unwanted pregnancies than late maturing girls, early maturing girls are more exposed to alcohol and drug abuse. Those who have had such experiences tend to not perform as well in school as their &quot;inexperienced&quot; peers.

Girls have usually reached full physical development around ages 15–17, while boys usually complete puberty around ages 16–17. Any increase in height beyond the post-pubertal age is uncommon. Girls attain reproductive maturity about four years after the first physical changes of puberty appear. In contrast, boys develop more slowly but continue to grow for about six years after the first visible pubertal changes.

===Growth spurt===
The physical development of girls during their teenage years can be broken down into three distinct stages. At the start, which generally coincides with the beginning of rapid growth, there is the development of breast buds and pubic hair. The peak period of physical growth occurs approximately one year later in concert with stage two of sexual maturity. Approximately 1 to 1.6 years after the onset of secondary sex characteristics, girls enter into the third stage which typically includes menarche. By this time, they will have finished their growth spurt and experience a notable broadening of the hips as well as an adult fat distribution. Additionally, breast development is complete and hair in both the pubic region and armpits (axillary hair) will be darker and more widespread. In comparison to girls, it can be tricky to define when exactly sexual development in boys begins.

For boys, puberty typically takes around 5 years to finish, as opposed to just years for girls (menarche). By this point in time, they have already experienced their growth spurt and there are evident changes in their body shape – wider hips and fat distribution is more adult-like. Breast development will also be completed by this stage. In boys, four stages in development can be correlated with the curve of general body growth at adolescence. The initial sign of sexual maturation in boys usually is the &quot;fat spurt&quot;. The maturing boy gains weight and becomes almost chubby, with a somewhat feminine fat distribution. This probably occurs because estrogen production by the Leydig cells in the testes is stimulated before the more abundant Sertoli cells begin to produce significant amounts of testosterone. During this stage, boys may appear obese and somewhat awkward physically. Approximately 1 year after the scrotum begins to increase in size, stage II can be seen. During this time, there is a redistribution of subcutaneous fat and the start of pubic hair growth. Following 8 to 12 months of the peak velocity in height gain, stage III ensues. This period is marked by an obvious widenening of hips with a more adult-like fat distribution and full development of the breasts. All together, these three stages culminate in a complete growth spurt for most individuals. At this time, axillary hair appears and facial hair appears on the upper lip only. A spurt in muscle growth also occurs, along with a continued decrease in subcutaneous fat and an obviously harder and more angular body form. Pubic hair distribution appears more adult but has not yet spread to the medial area of the thighs. The penis and scrotum are near adult size. Stage IV for boys, which occurs anywhere from 15 to 24 months after stage III, is difficult to pinpoint. At this time, the spurt of growth in height ends. There is facial hair on the chin and the upper lip, adult distribution and color of pubic and axillary hair, and a further increase in muscular strength.

The adolescent growth spurt is a rapid increase in the individual&#x27;s height and weight during puberty resulting from the simultaneous release of growth hormones, thyroid hormones, and androgens. Males experience their growth spurt about two years later, on average, than females. During their peak height velocity (the time of most rapid growth), adolescents grow at a growth rate nearly identical to that of a toddler—about 10.3 cm (4 inches) per year for males and 9 cm (3.5 inches) per year for females. In addition to changes in height, adolescents also experience a significant increase in weight (Marshall, 1978). The weight gained during adolescence constitutes nearly half of one&#x27;s adult body weight. Teenage and early adult males may continue to gain natural muscle growth even after puberty.

The accelerated growth in different body parts happens at different times, but for all adolescents, it has a fairly regular sequence. The first places to grow are the extremities—the head, hands and feet—followed by the arms and legs, then the torso and shoulders. This non-uniform growth is one reason why an adolescent body may seem out of proportion.

During puberty, bones become harder and more brittle. At the conclusion of puberty, the ends of the long bones close during the process called epiphysis. There can be ethnic differences in these skeletal changes. For example, in the United States, bone density increases significantly more among black than white adolescents, which might account for decreased likelihood of black women developing osteoporosis and having fewer bone fractures there.

Another set of significant physical changes during puberty happen in bodily distribution of fat and muscle. This process is different for females and males. Before puberty, there are nearly no sex differences in fat and muscle distribution; during puberty, boys grow muscle much faster than girls, although both sexes experience rapid muscle development. In contrast, though both sexes experience an increase in body fat, the increase is much more significant for girls. Frequently, the increase in fat for girls happens in their years just before puberty. The ratio between muscle and fat among post-pubertal boys is around three to one, while for girls it is about five to four. This may help explain sex differences in athletic performance.

Pubertal development also affects circulatory and respiratory systems as an adolescents&#x27; heart and lungs increase in both size and capacity. These changes lead to increased strength and tolerance for exercise. Sex differences are apparent as males tend to develop &quot;larger hearts and lungs, higher systolic blood pressure, a lower resting heart rate, a greater capacity for carrying oxygen to the blood, a greater power for neutralizing the chemical products of muscular exercise, higher blood hemoglobin and more red blood cells&quot;.

Despite some genetic sex differences, environmental factors play a large role in biological changes during adolescence. For example, girls tend to reduce their physical activity in preadolescence and may receive inadequate nutrition from diets that often lack important nutrients, such as iron. These environmental influences, in turn, affect female physical development.

===Reproduction-related changes===
Primary sex characteristics are those directly related to the sex organs. In males, the first stages of puberty involve growth of the testes and scrotum, followed by growth of the penis. At the time that the penis develops, the seminal vesicles, the prostate, and the bulbourethral gland also enlarge and develop. The first ejaculation of seminal fluid generally occurs about one year after the beginning of accelerated penis growth, although this is often determined culturally rather than biologically, since for many boys the first ejaculation occurs as a result of masturbation. Boys are generally fertile before they have an adult appearance.

In females, changes in the primary sex characteristics involve growth of the uterus, vagina, and other aspects of the reproductive system. Menarche, the beginning of menstruation, is a relatively late development which follows a long series of hormonal changes. Generally, a girl is not fully fertile until several years after menarche, as regular ovulation follows menarche by about two years. Unlike males, therefore, females usually appear physically mature before they are capable of becoming pregnant.

Changes in secondary sex characteristics include every change that is not directly related to sexual reproduction. In males, these changes involve appearance of pubic, facial, and body hair, deepening of the voice, roughening of the skin around the upper arms and thighs, and increased development of the sweat glands. In females, secondary sex changes involve elevation of the breasts, widening of the hips, development of pubic and underarm hair, widening of the areolae, and elevation of the nipples. The changes in secondary sex characteristics that take place during puberty are often referred to in terms of five Tanner stages, named after the British pediatrician who devised the categorization system.

===Changes in the brain===
The human brain is not finished developing by the time a person reaches puberty, or even finishes it. The frontal lobe of the brain has been known to shape itself well into one&#x27;s 30s. Neuroscientists often cannot agree precisely on when this developmental period ends or if there is an exact age for the end of brain development. Below the age of about roughly 30, the human brain has been implicated in human behavior and social immaturity. However, there has been no empirical study indicating a causal relationship with the development of the prefrontal cortex in adolescence and into early adulthood with any irrational behaviors. The brain reaches 90% of its adult size by six years of age. Thus, the brain does not grow in size much during adolescence.

Over the course of adolescence, the amount of white matter in the brain increases linearly, while the amount of grey matter in the brain follows an inverted-U pattern. Through a process called synaptic pruning, unnecessary neuronal connections in the brain are eliminated and the amount of grey matter is pared down. However, this does not mean that the brain loses functionality; rather, it becomes more efficient due to increased myelination (insulation of axons) and the reduction of unused pathways.

The first areas of the brain to be pruned are those involving primary functions, such as motor and sensory areas. The areas of the brain involved in more complex processes lose matter later in development. These include the lateral and prefrontal cortices, among other regions. Some of the most developmentally significant changes in the brain occur in the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in decision making and cognitive control, as well as other higher cognitive functions. During adolescence, myelination and synaptic pruning in the prefrontal cortex increases, improving the efficiency of information processing, and neural connections between the prefrontal cortex and other regions of the brain are strengthened. This leads to better evaluation of risks and rewards, as well as improved control over impulses. Specifically, developments in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are important for controlling impulses and planning ahead, while development in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex is important for decision making. Changes in the orbitofrontal cortex are important for evaluating rewards and risks.

Three neurotransmitters that play important roles in adolescent brain development are glutamate, dopamine and serotonin. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter. During the synaptic pruning that occurs during adolescence, most of the neural connections that are pruned contain receptors for glutamate or other excitatory neurotransmitters. Because of this, by early adulthood the synaptic balance in the brain is more inhibitory than excitatory.

Dopamine is associated with pleasure and attuning to the environment during decision-making. During adolescence, dopamine levels in the limbic system increase and input of dopamine to the prefrontal cortex increases. The balance of excitatory to inhibitory neurotransmitters and increased dopamine activity in adolescence may have implications for adolescent risk-taking and vulnerability to boredom (see Cognitive development below).

Serotonin is a neuromodulator involved in regulation of mood and behavior. Development in the limbic system plays an important role in determining rewards and punishments and processing emotional experience and social information. Changes in the levels of the neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin in the limbic system make adolescents more emotional and more responsive to rewards and stress. The corresponding increase in emotional variability also can increase adolescents&#x27; vulnerability. The effect of serotonin is not limited to the limbic system: Several serotonin receptors have their gene expression change dramatically during adolescence, particularly in the human frontal and prefrontal cortex.

==Cognitive development==
Adolescence is a time of rapid cognitive development. Piaget describes adolescence as the stage of life in which the individual&#x27;s thoughts start taking more of an abstract form and the egocentric thoughts decrease, allowing the individual to think and reason in a wider perspective. A combination of behavioural and fMRI studies have demonstrated development of executive functions, that is, cognitive skills that enable the control and coordination of thoughts and behaviour, which are generally associated with the prefrontal cortex. The thoughts, ideas and concepts developed at this period of life greatly influence one&#x27;s future life, playing a major role in character and personality formation.

Biological changes in brain structure and connectivity within the brain interact with increased experience, knowledge, and changing social demands to produce rapid cognitive growth (see Changes in the brain above). The age at which particular changes take place varies between individuals, but the changes discussed below begin at puberty or shortly after that and some skills continue to develop as the adolescent ages. The dual systems model proposes a maturational imbalance between development of the socioemotional system and cognitive control systems in the brain that contribute to impulsivity and other behaviors characteristic of adolescence. Some studies like the ABCD Study are researching on the baseline of adolescent cognitive development.

===Theoretical perspectives===
There are at least two major approaches to understanding cognitive change during adolescence. One is the constructivist view of cognitive development. Based on the work of Piaget, it takes a quantitative, state-theory approach, hypothesizing that adolescents&#x27; cognitive improvement is relatively sudden and drastic. The second is the information-processing perspective, which derives from the study of artificial intelligence and attempts to explain cognitive development in terms of the growth of specific components of the thinking process.

===Improvements in cognitive ability===
By the time individuals have reached ages 12–14 or so their critical thinking and decision-making competency are comparable to those of adults. These improvements occur in five areas during adolescence:
# Attention: Improvements are seen in selective attention, the process by which one focuses on one stimulus while tuning out another. Divided attention, the ability to pay attention to two or more stimuli at the same time, also improves.
# Memory: Improvements are seen in both working memory and long-term memory.
# Processing speed: Adolescents think more quickly than children. Processing speed improves sharply between age five and middle adolescence; it then begins to level off at age 14/15 and does not appear to change between late adolescence and adulthood.
# Organization: Adolescents are more aware of their thought processes and can use mnemonic devices and other strategies to think more efficiently.
# Metacognition: Improved knowledge of their own thinking patterns increase self-control and social insight.

Studies newer than 2005 indicate that the brain is changing in efficiency well past its twenties, a &#x27;point of maturity&#x27; in the twenties is somewhat arbitrary as many important parts of the brain are noted to be mature by 14 or 15, making &#x27;maturity&#x27; hard to define and has often been disagreed with.

Prefrontal cortex pruning has been recorded to level off by age 14 or 15, and has been seen to continue as late as into the sixth decade of life. White matter is recorded to increase up until around the age of 45, and then it is lost via progressive aging.

===Hypothetical and abstract thinking===
Adolescents&#x27; thinking is less bound to concrete events than that of children: they can contemplate possibilities outside the realm of what currently exists. One manifestation of the adolescent&#x27;s increased facility with thinking about possibilities is the improvement of skill in deductive reasoning, which leads to the development of hypothetical thinking. This provides the ability to plan ahead, see the future consequences of an action and to provide alternative explanations of events. It also makes adolescents more skilled debaters, as they can reason against a friend&#x27;s or parent&#x27;s assumptions. Adolescents also develop a more sophisticated understanding of probability.

The appearance of more systematic, abstract thinking is another notable aspect of cognitive development during adolescence. For example, adolescents find it easier than children to comprehend the sorts of higher-order abstract logic inherent in puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies. Their increased facility permits them to appreciate the ways in which language can be used to convey multiple messages, such as satire, metaphor, and sarcasm. (Children younger than age nine often cannot comprehend sarcasm at all.) This also permits the application of advanced reasoning and logical processes to social and ideological matters such as interpersonal relationships, politics, philosophy, religion, morality, friendship, faith, fairness, and honesty.

===Metacognition===
A third gain in cognitive ability involves thinking about thinking itself, a process referred to as metacognition. It often involves monitoring one&#x27;s own cognitive activity during the thinking process. Adolescents&#x27; improvements in knowledge of their own thinking patterns lead to better self-control and more effective studying. It is also relevant in social cognition, resulting in increased introspection, self-consciousness, and intellectualization (in the sense of thought about one&#x27;s own thoughts, rather than the Freudian definition as a defense mechanism). Adolescents are much better able than children to understand that people do not have complete control over their mental activity. Being able to introspect may lead to two forms of adolescent egocentrism, which results in two distinct problems in thinking: the imaginary audience and the personal fable. These likely peak at age fifteen, along with self-consciousness in general.

Related to metacognition and abstract thought, perspective-taking involves a more sophisticated theory of mind. Adolescents reach a stage of social perspective-taking in which they can understand how the thoughts or actions of one person can influence those of another person, even if they personally are not involved.

===Relativistic thinking===
Compared to children, adolescents are more likely to question others&#x27; assertions, and less likely to accept facts as absolute truths. Through experience outside the family circle, they learn that rules they were taught as absolute are in fact relativistic. They begin to differentiate between rules instituted out of common sense—not touching a hot stove—and those that are based on culturally relative standards (codes of etiquette, not dating until a certain age), a delineation that younger children do not make. This can lead to a period of questioning authority in all domains.

===Risk-taking===
Because most injuries sustained by adolescents are related to risky behavior (alcohol consumption and drug use, reckless or distracted driving, unprotected sex), a great deal of research has been done on the cognitive and emotional processes underlying adolescent risk-taking. In addressing this question, it is important to distinguish whether adolescents are more likely to engage in risky behaviors (prevalence), whether they make risk-related decisions similarly or differently than adults (cognitive processing perspective), or whether they use the same processes but value different things and thus arrive at different conclusions.

The behavioral decision-making theory proposes that adolescents and adults both weigh the potential rewards and consequences of an action. However, research has shown that adolescents seem to give more weight to rewards, particularly social rewards, than do adults.

Research seems to favor the hypothesis that adolescents and adults think about risk in similar ways, but hold different values and thus come to different conclusions. Some have argued that there may be evolutionary benefits to an increased propensity for risk-taking in adolescence. For example, without a willingness to take risks, teenagers would not have the motivation or confidence necessary to leave their family of origin. In addition, from a population perspective, there is an advantage to having a group of individuals willing to take more risks and try new methods, counterbalancing the more conservative elements more typical of the received knowledge held by older adults.

Risk-taking may also have reproductive advantages: adolescents have a newfound priority in sexual attraction and dating, and risk-taking is required to impress potential mates. Research also indicates that baseline sensation seeking may affect risk-taking behavior throughout the lifespan. Given the potential consequences, engaging in sexual behavior is somewhat risky, particularly for adolescents. Having unprotected sex, using poor birth control methods (e.g. withdrawal), having multiple sexual partners, and poor communication are some aspects of sexual behavior that increase individual and/or social risk.

Aspects of adolescents&#x27; lives that are correlated with risky sexual behavior include higher rates of parental abuse, and lower rates of parental support and monitoring.

=== Inhibition ===
Related to their increased tendency for risk-taking, adolescents show impaired behavioral inhibition, including deficits in extinction learning. This has important implications for engaging in risky behavior such as unsafe sex or illicit drug use, as adolescents are less likely to inhibit actions that may have negative outcomes in the future. This phenomenon also has consequences for behavioral treatments based on the principle of extinction, such as cue exposure therapy for anxiety or drug addiction. It has been suggested that impaired inhibition, specifically extinction, may help to explain adolescent propensity to relapse to drug-seeking even following behavioral treatment for addiction.

==Psychological development==

The formal study of adolescent psychology began with the publication of G. Stanley Hall&#x27;s &quot;Adolescence&quot; in 1904. Hall, who was the first president of the American Psychological Association, defined adolescence to be the period of life from ages 14 to 24, and viewed it primarily as a time of internal turmoil and upheaval (). This understanding of youth was based on two then-new ways of understanding human behavior: Darwin&#x27;s evolutionary theory and Freud&#x27;s psychodynamic theory. He believed that adolescence was a representation of our human ancestors&#x27; phylogenetic shift from being primitive to being civilized. Hall&#x27;s assertions stood relatively uncontested until the 1950s when psychologists such as Erik Erikson and Anna Freud started to formulate their theories about adolescence. Freud believed that the psychological disturbances associated with youth were biologically based and culturally universal while Erikson focused on the dichotomy between identity formation and role fulfillment. Even with their different theories, these three psychologists agreed that adolescence was inherently a time of disturbance and psychological confusion. The less turbulent aspects of adolescence, such as peer relations and cultural influence, were left largely ignored until the 1980s. From the &#x27;50s until the &#x27;80s, the focus of the field was mainly on describing patterns of behavior as opposed to explaining them.

Jean Macfarlane founded the University of California, Berkeley&#x27;s Institute of Human Development, formerly called the Institute of Child Welfare, in 1927. The institute was instrumental in initiating studies of healthy development, in contrast to previous work that had been dominated by theories based on pathological personalities. The studies looked at human development during the Great Depression and World War II, unique historical circumstances under which a generation of children grew up. The Oakland Growth Study, initiated by Harold Jones and Herbert Stolz in 1931, aimed to study the physical, intellectual, and social development of children in the Oakland area. Data collection began in 1932 and continued until 1981, allowing the researchers to gather longitudinal data on the individuals that extended past adolescence into adulthood. Jean Macfarlane launched the Berkeley Guidance Study, which examined the development of children in terms of their socioeconomic and family backgrounds. These studies provided the background for Glen Elder in the 1960s to propose a life course perspective of adolescent development. Elder formulated several descriptive principles of adolescent development. The principle of historical time and place states that an individual&#x27;s development is shaped by the period and location in which they grow up. The principle of the importance of timing in one&#x27;s life refers to the different impact that life events have on development based on when in one&#x27;s life they occur. The idea of linked lives states that one&#x27;s development is shaped by the interconnected network of relationships of which one is a part and the principle of human agency asserts that one&#x27;s life course is constructed via the choices and actions of an individual within the context of their historical period and social network.

In 1984, the Society for Research on Adolescence (SRA) became the first official organization dedicated to the study of adolescent psychology. Some of the issues first addressed by this group include: the nature versus nurture debate as it pertains to adolescence; understanding the interactions between adolescents and their environment; and considering culture, social groups, and historical context when interpreting adolescent behavior.

Evolutionary biologists like Jeremy Griffith have drawn parallels between adolescent psychology and the developmental evolution of modern humans from hominid ancestors as a manifestation of ontogeny recapitulating phylogeny.

==Social development==

===Identity development===
Identity development is a stage in the adolescent life cycle. For most, the search for identity begins in the adolescent years. During these years, adolescents are more open to &#x27;trying on&#x27; different behaviours and appearances to discover who they are. In an attempt to find their identity and discover who they are, adolescents are likely to cycle through a number of identities to find one that suits them best. Developing and maintaining identity (in adolescent years) is a difficult task due to multiple factors such as family life, environment, and social status. Empirical studies suggest that this process might be more accurately described as identity development, rather than formation, but confirms a normative process of change in both content and structure of one&#x27;s thoughts about the self. The two main aspects of identity development are self-clarity and self-esteem. Since choices made during adolescent years can influence later life, high levels of self-awareness and self-control during mid-adolescence will lead to better decisions during the transition to adulthood. Researchers have used three general approaches to understanding identity development: self-concept, sense of identity, and self-esteem. The years of adolescence create a more conscientious group of young adults. Adolescents pay close attention and give more time and effort to their appearance as their body goes through changes. Unlike children, teens put forth an effort to look presentable (1991). The environment in which an adolescent grows up also plays an important role in their identity development. Studies done by the American Psychological Association have shown that adolescents with a less privileged upbringing have a more difficult time developing their identity.

====Self-concept====

The idea of self-concept is known as the ability of a person to have opinions and beliefs that are defined confidently, consistent and stable. Early in adolescence, cognitive developments result in greater self-awareness, greater awareness of others and their thoughts and judgments, the ability to think about abstract, future possibilities, and the ability to consider multiple possibilities at once. As a result, adolescents experience a significant shift from the simple, concrete, and global self-descriptions typical of young children; as children, they defined themselves by physical traits whereas adolescents define themselves based on their values, thoughts, and opinions.

Adolescents can conceptualize multiple &quot;possible selves&quot; that they could become and long-term possibilities and consequences of their choices. Exploring these possibilities may result in abrupt changes in self-presentation as the adolescent chooses or rejects qualities and behaviors, trying to guide the actual self toward the ideal self (who the adolescent wishes to be) and away from the feared self (who the adolescent does not want to be). For many, these distinctions are uncomfortable, but they also appear to motivate achievement through behavior consistent with the ideal and distinct from the feared possible selves.

Further distinctions in self-concept, called &quot;differentiation,&quot; occur as the adolescent recognizes the contextual influences on their own behavior and the perceptions of others, and begin to qualify their traits when asked to describe themselves. Differentiation appears fully developed by mid-adolescence. Peaking in the 7th-9th grades, the personality traits adolescents use to describe themselves refer to specific contexts, and therefore may contradict one another. The recognition of inconsistent content in the self-concept is a common source of distress in these years (see Cognitive dissonance), but this distress may benefit adolescents by encouraging structural development.

====Sense of identity====
Egocentrism in adolescents forms a self-conscious desire to feel important in their peer groups and enjoy social acceptance. Unlike the conflicting aspects of self-concept, identity represents a coherent sense of self stable across circumstances and including past experiences and future goals. Everyone has a self-concept, whereas Erik Erikson argued that not everyone fully achieves identity. Erikson&#x27;s theory of stages of development includes the identity crisis in which adolescents must explore different possibilities and integrate different parts of themselves before committing to their beliefs. He described the resolution of this process as a stage of &quot;identity achievement&quot; but also stressed that the identity challenge &quot;is never fully resolved once and for all at one point in time&quot;. Adolescents begin by defining themselves based on their crowd membership. &quot;Clothes help teens explore new identities, separate from parents, and bond with peers.&quot; Fashion has played a major role when it comes to teenagers &quot;finding their selves&quot;; Fashion is always evolving, which corresponds with the evolution of change in the personality of teenagers. Adolescents attempt to define their identity by consciously styling themselves in different manners to find what best suits them. Trial and error in matching both their perceived image and the image others respond to and see, allows for the adolescent to grasp an understanding of who they are.

Just as fashion is evolving to influence adolescents so is the media. &quot;Modern life takes place amidst a never-ending barrage of flesh on screens, pages, and billboards.&quot; This barrage consciously or subconsciously registers into the mind causing issues with self-image a factor that contributes to an adolescence sense of identity. Researcher James Marcia developed the current method for testing an individual&#x27;s progress along these stages. His questions are divided into three categories: occupation, ideology, and interpersonal relationships. Answers are scored based on the extent to which the individual has explored and the degree to which he has made commitments. The result is classification of the individual into a) identity diffusion in which all children begin, b) Identity Foreclosure in which commitments are made without the exploration of alternatives, c) Moratorium, or the process of exploration, or d) Identity Achievement in which Moratorium has occurred and resulted in commitments.

Research since reveals self-examination beginning early in adolescence, but identity achievement rarely occurring before age 18. The freshman year of college influences identity development significantly, but may actually prolong psychosocial moratorium by encouraging reexamination of previous commitments and further exploration of alternate possibilities without encouraging resolution. For the most part, evidence has supported Erikson&#x27;s stages: each correlates with the personality traits he originally predicted. Studies also confirm the impermanence of the stages; there is no final endpoint in identity development.

====Environment and identity====
An adolescent&#x27;s environment plays a huge role in their identity development. While most adolescent studies are conducted on white, middle class children, studies show that the more privileged upbringing people have, the more successfully they develop their identity. The forming of an adolescent&#x27;s identity is a crucial time in their life. It has been recently found that demographic patterns suggest that the transition to adulthood is now occurring over a longer span of years than was the case during the middle of the 20th century. Accordingly, youth, a period that spans late adolescence and early adulthood, has become a more prominent stage of the life course. This, therefore, has caused various factors to become important during this development. So many factors contribute to the developing social identity of an adolescent from commitment, to coping devices, to social media. All of these factors are affected by the environment an adolescent grows up in. A child from a more privileged upbringing is exposed to more opportunities and better situations in general. An adolescent from an inner city or a crime-driven neighborhood is more likely to be exposed to an environment that can be detrimental to their development. Adolescence is a sensitive period in the development process, and exposure to the wrong things at that time can have a major effect on future decisions. While children that grow up in nice suburban communities are not exposed to bad environments they are more likely to participate in activities that can benefit their identity and contribute to a more successful identity development.

====Sexual orientation and identity====
Sexual orientation has been defined as &quot;an erotic inclination toward people of one or more genders, most often described as sexual or erotic attractions&quot;. In recent years, psychologists have sought to understand how sexual orientation develops during adolescence. Some theorists believe that there are many different possible developmental paths one could take, and that the specific path an individual follows may be determined by their sex, orientation, and when they reached the onset of puberty.

In 1989, Troiden proposed a four-stage model for the development of homosexual sexual identity. The first stage, known as sensitization, usually starts in childhood, and is marked by the child&#x27;s becoming aware of same-sex attractions. The second stage, identity confusion, tends to occur a few years later. In this stage, the youth is overwhelmed by feelings of inner turmoil regarding their sexual orientation, and begins to engage in sexual experiences with same-sex partners. In the third stage of identity assumption, which usually takes place a few years after the adolescent has left home, adolescents begin to come out to their family and close friends, and assumes a self-definition as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. In the final stage, known as commitment, the young adult adopts their sexual identity as a lifestyle. Therefore, this model estimates that the process of coming out begins in childhood, and continues through the early to mid 20s. This model has been contested, and alternate ideas have been explored in recent years.

In terms of sexual identity, adolescence is when most gay/lesbian and transgender adolescents begin to recognize and make sense of their feelings. Many adolescents may choose to come out during this period of their life once an identity has been formed; many others may go through a period of questioning or denial, which can include experimentation with both homosexual and heterosexual experiences. A study of 194 lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths under the age of 21 found that having an awareness of one&#x27;s sexual orientation occurred, on average, around age 10, but the process of coming out to peers and adults occurred around age 16 and 17, respectively. Coming to terms with and creating a positive LGBT identity can be difficult for some youth for a variety of reasons. Peer pressure is a large factor when youth who are questioning their sexuality or gender identity are surrounded by heteronormative peers and can cause great distress due to a feeling of being different from everyone else. While coming out can also foster better psychological adjustment, the risks associated are real. Indeed, coming out in the midst of a heteronormative peer environment often comes with the risk of ostracism, hurtful jokes, and even violence. Because of this, statistically the suicide rate amongst LGBT adolescents is up to four times higher than that of their heterosexual peers due to bullying and rejection from peers or family members.

====Self-esteem====
The final major aspect of identity formation is self-esteem. Self-esteem is defined as one&#x27;s thoughts and feelings about one&#x27;s self-concept and identity. Most theories on self-esteem state that there is a grand desire, across all genders and ages, to maintain, protect and enhance their self-esteem. Contrary to popular belief, there is no empirical evidence for a significant drop in self-esteem over the course of adolescence. &quot;Barometric self-esteem&quot; fluctuates rapidly and can cause severe distress and anxiety, but baseline self-esteem remains highly stable across adolescence. The validity of global self-esteem scales has been questioned, and many suggest that more specific scales might reveal more about the adolescent experience.
Girls are most likely to enjoy high self-esteem when engaged in supportive relationships with friends, the most important function of friendship to them is having someone who can provide social and moral support. Girls suffer from low self-esteem when they fail to win friends&#x27; approval or cannot find someone with whom to share common activities and common interests. In contrast, boys are more concerned with establishing and asserting their independence and defining their relation to authority. As such, they are more likely to derive high self-esteem from their ability to successfully influence their friends; on the other hand, the lack of romantic competence, for example, failure to win or maintain the affection of the opposite or same-sex (depending on sexual orientation), is the major contributor to low self-esteem in adolescent boys. Due to the fact that both men and women happen to have a low self-esteem after ending a romantic relationship, they are prone to other symptoms that is caused by this state. Depression and hopelessness are only two of the various symptoms and it is said that women are twice as likely to experience depression and men are three to four times more likely to commit suicide (Mearns, 1991; Ustun &amp; Sartorius, 1995).

===Relationships===

====In general====
The relationships adolescents have with their peers, family, and members of their social sphere play a vital role in the social development of an adolescent. As an adolescent&#x27;s social sphere develops rapidly as they distinguish the differences between friends and acquaintances, they often become heavily emotionally invested in friends. This is not harmful; however, if these friends expose an individual to potentially harmful situations, this is an aspect of peer pressure. Adolescence is a critical period in social development because adolescents can be easily influenced by the people they develop close relationships with. This is the first time individuals can truly make their own decisions, which also makes this a sensitive period. Relationships are vital in the social development of an adolescent due to the extreme influence peers can have over an individual. These relationships become significant because they begin to help the adolescent understand the concept of personalities, how they form and why a person has that specific type of personality. &quot;The use of psychological comparisons could serve both as an index of the growth of an implicit personality theory and as a component process accounting for its creation. In other words, by comparing one person&#x27;s personality characteristics to another&#x27;s, we would be setting up the framework for creating a general theory of personality (and, ... such a theory would serve as a useful framework for coming to understand specific persons).&quot; This can be likened to the use of social comparison in developing one&#x27;s identity and self-concept, which includes ones personality, and underscores the importance of communication, and thus relationships, in one&#x27;s development. In social comparison we use reference groups, with respect to both psychological and identity development. These reference groups are the peers of adolescents. This means that who the teen chooses/accepts as their friends and who they communicate with on a frequent basis often makes up their reference groups and can therefore have a huge impact on who they become. Research shows that relationships have the largest affect over the social development of an individual.

====Family====
Adolescence marks a rapid change in one&#x27;s role within a family. Young children tend to assert themselves forcefully, but are unable to demonstrate much influence over family decisions until early adolescence, when they are increasingly viewed by parents as equals. The adolescent faces the task of increasing independence while preserving a caring relationship with his or her parents. When children go through puberty, there is often a significant increase in parent–child conflict and a less cohesive familial bond. Arguments often concern minor issues of control, such as curfew, acceptable clothing, and the adolescent&#x27;s right to privacy, which adolescents may have previously viewed as issues over which their parents had complete authority. Parent-adolescent disagreement also increases as friends demonstrate a greater impact on one another, new influences on the adolescent that may be in opposition to parents&#x27; values. Social media has also played an increasing role in adolescent and parent disagreements. While parents never had to worry about the threats of social media in the past, it has become a dangerous place for children. While adolescents strive for their freedoms, the unknowns to parents of what their child is doing on social media sites is a challenging subject, due to the increasing amount of predators on social media sites. Many parents have very little knowledge of social networking sites in the first place and this further increases their mistrust. An important challenge for the parent–adolescent relationship is to understand how to enhance the opportunities of online communication while managing its risks. Although conflicts between children and parents increase during adolescence, these are just relatively minor issues. Regarding their important life issues, most adolescents still share the same attitudes and values as their parents.

During childhood, siblings are a source of conflict and frustration as well as a support system. Adolescence may affect this relationship differently, depending on sibling gender. In same-sex sibling pairs, intimacy increases during early adolescence, then remains stable. Mixed-sex siblings pairs act differently; siblings drift apart during early adolescent years, but experience an increase in intimacy starting at middle adolescence. Sibling interactions are children&#x27;s first relational experiences, the ones that shape their social and self-understanding for life. Sustaining positive sibling relations can assist adolescents in a number of ways. Siblings are able to act as peers, and may increase one another&#x27;s sociability and feelings of self-worth. Older siblings can give guidance to younger siblings, although the impact of this can be either positive or negative depending on the activity of the older sibling.

A potential important influence on adolescence is change of the family dynamic, specifically divorce. With the divorce rate up to about 50%, divorce is common and adds to the already great amount of change in adolescence. Custody disputes soon after a divorce often reflect a playing out of control battles and ambivalence between parents. Divorce usually results in less contact between the adolescent and their noncustodial parent. In extreme cases of instability and abuse in homes, divorce can have a positive effect on families due to less conflict in the home. However, most research suggests a negative effect on adolescence as well as later development. A recent study found that, compared with peers who grow up in stable post-divorce families, children of divorce who experience additional family transitions during late adolescence, make less progress in their math and social studies performance over time. Another recent study put forth a new theory entitled the adolescent epistemological trauma theory, which posited that traumatic life events such as parental divorce during the formative period of late adolescence portend lifelong effects on adult conflict behavior that can be mitigated by effective behavioral assessment and training. A parental divorce during childhood or adolescence continues to have a negative effect when a person is in his or her twenties and early thirties. These negative effects include romantic relationships and conflict style, meaning as adults, they are more likely to use the styles of avoidance and competing in conflict management.

Despite changing family roles during adolescence, the home environment and parents are still important for the behaviors and choices of adolescents. Adolescents who have a good relationship with their parents are less likely to engage in various risk behaviors, such as smoking, drinking, fighting, and/or unprotected sexual intercourse.
In addition, parents influence the education of adolescence. A study conducted by Adalbjarnardottir and Blondal (2009) showed that adolescents at the age of 14 who identify their parents as authoritative figures are more likely to complete secondary education by the age of 22—as support and encouragement from an authoritative parent motivates the adolescence to complete schooling to avoid disappointing that parent.

====Peers====
Peer groups are essential to social and general development. Communication with peers increases significantly during adolescence and peer relationships become more intense than in other stages and more influential to the teen, affecting both the decisions and choices being made. High quality friendships may enhance children&#x27;s development regardless of the characteristics of those friends. As children begin to bond with various people and create friendships, it later helps them when they are adolescent and sets up the framework for adolescence and peer groups.
Peer groups are especially important during adolescence, a period of development characterized by a dramatic increase in time spent with peers and a decrease in adult supervision. Adolescents also associate with friends of the opposite sex much more than in childhood and tend to identify with larger groups of peers based on shared characteristics. It is also common for adolescents to use friends as coping devices in different situations. A three-factor structure of dealing with friends including avoidance, mastery, and nonchalance has shown that adolescents use friends as coping devices with social stresses.

Communication within peer groups allows adolescents to explore their feelings and identity as well as develop and evaluate their social skills. Peer groups offer members the opportunity to develop social skills such as empathy, sharing, and leadership. Adolescents choose peer groups based on characteristics similarly found in themselves. By utilizing these relationships, adolescents become more accepting of who they are becoming. Group norms and values are incorporated into an adolescent&#x27;s own self-concept. Through developing new communication skills and reflecting upon those of their peers, as well as self-opinions and values, an adolescent can share and express emotions and other concerns without fear of rejection or judgment. Peer groups can have positive influences on an individual, such as on academic motivation and performance. However, while peers may facilitate social development for one another they may also hinder it. Peers can have negative influences, such as encouraging experimentation with drugs, drinking, vandalism, and stealing through peer pressure. Susceptibility to peer pressure increases during early adolescence, peaks around age 14, and declines thereafter. Further evidence of peers hindering social development has been found in Spanish teenagers, where emotional (rather than solution-based) reactions to problems and emotional instability have been linked with physical aggression against peers. Both physical and relational aggression are linked to a vast number of enduring psychological difficulties, especially depression, as is social rejection. Because of this, bullied adolescents often develop problems that lead to further victimization. Bullied adolescents are more likely to both continue to be bullied and to bully others in the future. However, this relationship is less stable in cases of cyberbullying, a relatively new issue among adolescents.

Adolescents tend to associate with &quot;cliques&quot; on a small scale and &quot;crowds&quot; on a larger scale. During early adolescence, adolescents often associate in cliques, exclusive, single-sex groups of peers with whom they are particularly close. Despite the common notion that cliques are an inherently negative influence, they may help adolescents become socially acclimated and form a stronger sense of identity. Within a clique of highly athletic male-peers, for example, the clique may create a stronger sense of fidelity and competition. Cliques also have become somewhat a &quot;collective parent&quot;, i.e. telling the adolescents what to do and not to do. Towards late adolescence, cliques often merge into mixed-sex groups as teenagers begin romantically engaging with one another. These small friend groups then break down further as socialization becomes more couple-oriented. On a larger scale, adolescents often associate with &quot;crowds&quot;, groups of individuals who share a common interest or activity. Often, crowd identities may be the basis for stereotyping young people, such as jocks or nerds. In large, multi-ethnic high schools, there are often ethnically determined crowds. Adolescents use online technology to experiment with emerging identities and to broaden their peer groups, such as increasing the amount of friends acquired on Facebook and other social media sites. Some adolescents use these newer channels to enhance relationships with peers however there can be negative uses as well such as cyberbullying, as mentioned previously, and negative impacts on the family.

====Romance and sexual activity====
Romantic relationships tend to increase in prevalence throughout adolescence. By age 15, 53% of adolescents have had a romantic relationship that lasted at least one month over the course of the previous 18 months. In a 2008 study conducted by YouGov for Channel 4, 20% of 14−17-year-olds surveyed revealed that they had their first sexual experience at 13 or under in the United Kingdom. A 2002 American study found that those aged 15–44 reported that the average age of first sexual intercourse was 17.0 for males and 17.3 for females. The typical duration of relationships increases throughout the teenage years as well. This constant increase in the likelihood of a long-term relationship can be explained by sexual maturation and the development of cognitive skills necessary to maintain a romantic bond (e.g. caregiving, appropriate attachment), although these skills are not strongly developed until late adolescence. Long-term relationships allow adolescents to gain the skills necessary for high-quality relationships later in life and develop feelings of self-worth. Overall, positive romantic relationships among adolescents can result in long-term benefits. High-quality romantic relationships are associated with higher commitment in early adulthood and are positively associated with self-esteem, self-confidence, and social competence. For example, an adolescent with positive self-confidence is likely to consider themselves a more successful partner, whereas negative experiences may lead to low confidence as a romantic partner. Adolescents often date within their demographic in regards to race, ethnicity, popularity, and physical attractiveness. However, there are traits in which certain individuals, particularly adolescent girls, seek diversity. While most adolescents date people approximately their own age, boys typically date partners the same age or younger; girls typically date partners the same age or older.

Some researchers are now focusing on learning about how adolescents view their own relationships and sexuality; they want to move away from a research point of view that focuses on the problems associated with adolescent sexuality. College Professor Lucia O&#x27;Sullivan and her colleagues found that there were no significant gender differences in the relationship events adolescent boys and girls from grades 7–12 reported. Most teens said they had kissed their partners, held hands with them, thought of themselves as being a couple and told people they were in a relationship. This means that private thoughts about the relationship as well as public recognition of the relationship were both important to the adolescents in the sample. Sexual events (such as sexual touching, sexual intercourse) were less common than romantic events (holding hands) and social events (being with one&#x27;s partner in a group setting). The researchers state that these results are important because the results focus on the more positive aspects of adolescents and their social and romantic interactions rather than focusing on sexual behavior and its consequences.

Adolescence marks a time of sexual maturation, which manifests in social interactions as well. While adolescents may engage in casual sexual encounters (often referred to as hookups), most sexual experience during this period of development takes place within romantic relationships. Adolescents can use technologies and social media to seek out romantic relationships as they feel it is a safe place to try out dating and identity exploration. From these social media encounters, a further relationship may begin. Kissing, hand holding, and hugging signify satisfaction and commitment. Among young adolescents, &quot;heavy&quot; sexual activity, marked by genital stimulation, is often associated with violence, depression, and poor relationship quality. This effect does not hold true for sexual activity in late adolescence that takes place within a romantic relationship. Some research suggest that there are genetic causes of early sexual activity that are also risk factors for delinquency, suggesting that there is a group who are at risk for both early sexual activity and emotional distress. For older adolescents, though, sexual activity in the context of romantic relationships was actually correlated with lower levels of deviant behavior after controlling for genetic risks, as opposed to sex outside of a relationship (hook-ups).

Dating violence can occur within adolescent relationships. When surveyed, 12–25% of adolescents reported having experienced physical violence in the context of a relationship while a quarter to a third of adolescents reported having experiencing psychological aggression. This reported aggression includes hitting, throwing things, or slaps, although most of this physical aggression does not result in a medical visit. Physical aggression in relationships tends to decline from high school through college and young adulthood. In heterosexual couples, there is no significant difference between the rates of male and female aggressors, unlike in adult relationships.

Female adolescents from minority populations are at increased risk for intimate partner violence (IPV). Recent research findings suggest that a substantial portion of young urban females are at high risk for being victims of multiple forms of IPV. Practitioners diagnosing depression among urban minority teens should assess for both physical and non-physical forms of IPV, and early detection can help to identify youths in need of intervention and care. Similarly to adult victims, adolescent victims do not readily disclose abuse, and may seek out medical care for problems not directly related to incidences of IPV. Therefore, screening should be a routine part of medical treatment for adolescents regardless of chief complaint. Many adults discount instances of IPV in adolescents or believe they do not occur because relationships at young ages are viewed as &quot;puppy love,&quot; however, it is crucial that adults take IPV in adolescents seriously even though often policy falls behind.

In contemporary society, adolescents also face some risks as their sexuality begins to transform. While some of these, such as emotional distress (fear of abuse or exploitation) and sexually transmitted infections/diseases (STIs/STDs), including HIV/AIDS, are not necessarily inherent to adolescence, others such as teenage pregnancy (through non-use or failure of contraceptives) are seen as social problems in most western societies. One in four sexually active teenagers will contract an STI. Adolescents in the United States often chose &quot;anything but intercourse&quot; for sexual activity because they mistakenly believe it reduces the risk of STIs. Across the country, clinicians report rising diagnoses of herpes and human papillomavirus (HPV), which can cause genital warts, and is now thought to affect 15 percent of the teen population. Girls 15 to 19 have higher rates of gonorrhea than any other age group. One-quarter of all new HIV cases occur in those under the age of 21. Multrine also states in her article that according to a March survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, eighty-one percent of parents want schools to discuss the use of condoms and contraception with their children. They also believe students should be able to be tested for STIs. Furthermore, teachers want to address such topics with their students. But, although 9 in 10 sex education instructors across the country believe that students should be taught about contraceptives in school, over one quarter report receiving explicit instructions from school boards and administrators not to do so. According to anthropologist Margaret Mead, the turmoil found in adolescence in Western society has a cultural rather than a physical cause; they reported that societies where young women engaged in free sexual activity had no such adolescent turmoil.

==Culture==
There are certain characteristics of adolescent development that are more rooted in culture than in human biology or cognitive structures. Culture has been defined as the &quot;symbolic and behavioral inheritance received from the past that provides a community framework for what is valued&quot;. Culture is learned and socially shared, and it affects all aspects of an individual&#x27;s life. Social responsibilities, sexual expression, and belief system development, for instance, are all things that are likely to vary by culture. Furthermore, distinguishing characteristics of youth, including dress, music and other uses of media, employment, art, food and beverage choices, recreation, and language, all constitute a youth culture. For these reasons, culture is a prevalent and powerful presence in the lives of adolescents, and therefore we cannot fully understand today&#x27;s adolescents without studying and understanding their culture. However, &quot;culture&quot; should not be seen as synonymous with nation or ethnicity. Many cultures are present within any given country and racial or socioeconomic group. Furthermore, to avoid ethnocentrism, researchers must be careful not to define the culture&#x27;s role in adolescence in terms of their own cultural beliefs.

In his short book &quot;The Teenage Consumer&quot; published in July 1959, the British market research pioneer Mark Abrams identified the emergence of a new economic group of people aged 13–25. Compared to children, people in this age range had more money, more discretion on how they chose to spend it, and greater mobility through the advent of the motor car. Compared to adults, people in this age range had fewer responsibilities and therefore made different choices on how to spend their money. These unique characteristics of this new economic group presented challenges and opportunities to advertisers. Mark Abrams coined the term &quot;teenager&quot; to describe this group of consumers aged 13–25.

In Britain, teenagers first came to public attention during the Second World War, when there were fears of juvenile delinquency. By the 1950s, the media presented teenagers in terms of generational rebellion. The exaggerated moral panic among politicians and the older generation was typically belied by the growth in intergenerational cooperation between parents and children. Many working-class parents, enjoying newfound economic security, eagerly took the opportunity to encourage their teens to enjoy more adventurous lives. Schools were falsely portrayed as dangerous blackboard jungles under the control of rowdy kids. The media distortions of the teens as too affluent, and as promiscuous, delinquent, counter-cultural rebels do not reflect the actual experiences of ordinary young adults, particularly young women.

===Autonomy===
The degree to which adolescents are perceived as autonomous beings varies widely by culture, as do the behaviors that represent this emerging autonomy. Psychologists have identified three main types of autonomy: emotional independence, behavioral autonomy, and cognitive autonomy. Emotional autonomy is defined in terms of an adolescent&#x27;s relationships with others, and often includes the development of more mature emotional connections with adults and peers. Behavioral autonomy encompasses an adolescent&#x27;s developing ability to regulate his or her own behavior, to act on personal decisions, and to self-govern. Cultural differences are especially visible in this category because it concerns issues of dating, social time with peers, and time-management decisions. Cognitive autonomy describes the capacity for an adolescent to partake in processes of independent reasoning and decision-making without excessive reliance on social validation. Converging influences from adolescent cognitive development, expanding social relationships, an increasingly adultlike appearance, and the acceptance of more rights and responsibilities enhance feelings of autonomy for adolescents. Proper development of autonomy has been tied to good mental health, high self-esteem, self-motivated tendencies, positive self-concepts, and self-initiating and regulating behaviors. Furthermore, it has been found that adolescents&#x27; mental health is best when their feelings about autonomy match closely with those of their parents.

A questionnaire called the teen timetable has been used to measure the age at which individuals believe adolescents should be able to engage in behaviors associated with autonomy. This questionnaire has been used to gauge differences in cultural perceptions of adolescent autonomy, finding, for instance, that White parents and adolescents tend to expect autonomy earlier than those of Asian descent. It is, therefore, clear that cultural differences exist in perceptions of adolescent autonomy, and such differences have implications for the lifestyles and development of adolescents. In sub-Saharan African youth, the notions of individuality and freedom may not be useful in understanding adolescent development. Rather, African notions of childhood and adolescent development are relational and interdependent.

===Social roles and responsibilities===
The lifestyle of an adolescent in a given culture is profoundly shaped by the roles and responsibilities he or she is expected to assume. The extent to which an adolescent is expected to share family responsibilities is one large determining factor in normative adolescent behavior. For instance, adolescents in certain cultures are expected to contribute significantly to household chores and responsibilities. Household chores are frequently divided into self-care tasks and family-care tasks. However, specific household responsibilities for adolescents may vary by culture, family type, and adolescent age. Some research has shown that adolescent participation in family work and routines has a positive influence on the development of an adolescent&#x27;s feelings of self-worth, care, and concern for others.

In addition to the sharing of household chores, certain cultures expect adolescents to share in their family&#x27;s financial responsibilities. According to family economic and financial education specialists, adolescents develop sound money management skills through the practices of saving and spending money, as well as through planning ahead for future economic goals. Differences between families in the distribution of financial responsibilities or provision of allowance may reflect various social background circumstances and intrafamilial processes, which are further influenced by cultural norms and values, as well as by the business sector and market economy of a given society. For instance, in many developing countries it is common for children to attend fewer years of formal schooling so that, when they reach adolescence, they can begin working.

While adolescence is a time frequently marked by participation in the workforce, the number of adolescents in the workforce is much lower now than in years past as a result of increased accessibility and perceived importance of formal higher education. For example, half of all 16-year-olds in China were employed in 1980, whereas less than one fourth of this same cohort were employed in 1990.

Furthermore, the amount of time adolescents spend on work and leisure activities varies greatly by culture as a result of cultural norms and expectations, as well as various socioeconomic factors. American teenagers spend less time in school or working and more time on leisure activities—which include playing sports, socializing, and caring for their appearance—than do adolescents in many other countries. These differences may be influenced by cultural values of education and the amount of responsibility adolescents are expected to assume in their family or community.

Time management, financial roles, and social responsibilities of adolescents are therefore closely connected with the education sector and processes of career development for adolescents, as well as to cultural norms and social expectations. In many ways, adolescents&#x27; experiences with their assumed social roles and responsibilities determine the length and quality of their initial pathway into adult roles.

===Belief system development===
Adolescence is frequently characterized by a transformation of an adolescent&#x27;s understanding of the world, the rational direction towards a life course, and the active seeking of new ideas rather than the unquestioning acceptance of adult authority. An adolescent begins to develop a unique belief system through his or her interaction with social, familial, and cultural environments. While organized religion is not necessarily a part of every adolescent&#x27;s life experience, youth are still held responsible for forming a set of beliefs about themselves, the world around them, and whatever higher powers they may or may not believe in. This process is often accompanied or aided by cultural traditions that intend to provide a meaningful transition to adulthood through a ceremony, ritual, confirmation, or rite of passage.

===Sexuality===
Many cultures define the transition into adultlike sexuality by specific biological or social milestones in an adolescent&#x27;s life. For example, menarche (the first menstrual period of a female), or semenarche (the first ejaculation of a male) are frequent sexual defining points for many cultures. In addition to biological factors, an adolescent&#x27;s sexual socialization is highly dependent upon whether their culture takes a restrictive or permissive attitude toward teen or premarital sexual activity. In the United States specifically, adolescents are said to have &quot;raging hormones&quot; that drive their sexual desires. These sexual desires are then dramatized regarding teen sex and seen as &quot;a site of danger and risk; that such danger and risk is a source of profound worry among adults&quot;. There is little to no normalization regarding teenagers having sex in the U.S., which causes conflict in how adolescents are taught about sex education. There is a constant debate about whether abstinence-only sex education or comprehensive sex education should be taught in schools and this stems back to whether or not the country it is being taught in is permissive or restrictive. Restrictive cultures overtly discourage sexual activity in unmarried adolescents or until an adolescent undergoes a formal rite of passage. These cultures may attempt to restrict sexual activity by separating males and females throughout their development, or through public shaming and physical punishment when sexual activity does occur. In less restrictive cultures, there is more tolerance for displays of adolescent sexuality, or of the interaction between males and females in public and private spaces. Less restrictive cultures may tolerate some aspects of adolescent sexuality, while objecting to other aspects. For instance, some cultures find teenage sexual activity acceptable but teenage pregnancy highly undesirable. Other cultures do not object to teenage sexual activity or teenage pregnancy, as long as they occur after marriage. In permissive societies, overt sexual behavior among unmarried teens is perceived as acceptable, and is sometimes even encouraged. Regardless of whether a culture is restrictive or permissive, there are likely to be discrepancies in how females versus males are expected to express their sexuality. Cultures vary in how overt this double standard is—in some it is legally inscribed, while in others it is communicated through social convention. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth face much discrimination through bullying from those unlike them and may find telling others that they are gay to be a traumatic experience. The range of sexual attitudes that a culture embraces could thus be seen to affect the beliefs, lifestyles, and societal perceptions of its adolescents.

===Legal issues, rights and privileges===
====General issues====

Adolescence is a period frequently marked by increased rights and privileges for individuals. While cultural variation exists for legal rights and their corresponding ages, considerable consistency is found across cultures. Furthermore, since the advent of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989 (children here defined as under 18), almost every country in the world (except the U.S. and South Sudan) has legally committed to advancing an anti-discriminatory stance towards young people of all ages. This includes protecting children against unchecked child labor, enrollment in the military, prostitution, and pornography.
In many societies, those who reach a certain age (often 18, though this varies) are considered to have reached the age of majority and are legally regarded as adults who are responsible for their actions. People below this age are considered minors or children. A person below the age of majority may gain adult rights through legal emancipation.

The legal working age in Western countries is usually 14 to 16, depending on the number of hours and type of employment under consideration. Many countries also specify a minimum school leaving age, at which a person is legally allowed to leave compulsory education. This age varies greatly cross-culturally, spanning from 10 to 18, which further reflects the diverse ways formal education is viewed in cultures around the world.

In most democratic countries, a citizen is eligible to vote at age 18. In a minority of countries, the voting age is as low as 16 (for example, Brazil), and at one time was as high as 25 in Uzbekistan.

The age of consent to sexual activity varies widely between jurisdictions, ranging from 12 to 20 years, as does the age at which people are allowed to marry. Specific legal ages for adolescents that also vary by culture are enlisting in the military, gambling, and the purchase of alcohol, cigarettes or items with parental advisory labels.
The legal coming of age often does not correspond with the sudden realization of autonomy; many adolescents who have legally reached adult age are still dependent on their guardians or peers for emotional and financial support. Nonetheless, new legal privileges converge with shifting social expectations to usher in a phase of heightened independence or social responsibility for most legal adolescents.

====Alcohol and illicit drug use====

=====Prevalence=====
Following a steady decline beginning in the late 1990s up through the mid-2000s and a moderate increase in the early 2010s, illicit drug use among adolescents has roughly plateaued in the U.S. Aside from alcohol, marijuana is the most commonly indulged drug habit during adolescent years. Data collected by the National Institute on Drug Abuse shows that between the years of 2015 and 2018, past year marijuana usage among 8th graders declined from 11.8% to 10.5%; among 10th grade students, usage rose from 25.4% to 27.50%; and among 12th graders, usage rose slightly from 34.9% to 35.9%. Additionally, while the early 2010s saw a surge in the popularity of MDMA, usage has stabilized with 2.2% of 12th graders using MDMA in the past year in the U.S. The heightened usage of ecstasy most likely ties in at least to some degree with the rising popularity of rave culture.

One significant contribution to the increase in teenage substance abuse is an increase in the availability of prescription medication. With an increase in the diagnosis of behavioral and attentional disorders for students, taking pharmaceutical drugs such as Vicodin and Adderall for pleasure has become a prevalent activity among adolescents: 9.9% of high school seniors report having abused prescription drugs within the past year.

In the U.S., teenage alcohol use rose in the late 2000s and is currently stable at a moderate level. Out of a polled body of U.S. students age 12–18, 8.2% of 8th graders reported having been on at least one occasion having consumed alcohol within the previous month; for 10th graders, the number was 18.6%, and for 12th graders, 30.2%. More drastically, cigarette smoking has become a far less prevalent activity among American middle- and high-school students; in fact, a greater number of teens now smoke marijuana than smoke cigarettes, with one recent study showing a respective 23.8% versus 43.6% of surveyed high school seniors. Recent studies have shown that male late adolescents are far more likely to smoke cigarettes rather than females. The study indicated that there was a discernible gender difference in the prevalence of smoking among the students. The finding of the study shows that more males than females began smoking when they were in primary and high schools whereas most females started smoking after high school. This may be attributed to recent changing social and political views towards marijuana; issues such as medicinal use and legalization have tended towards painting the drug in a more positive light than historically, while cigarettes continue to be vilified due to associated health risks.

Different drug habits often relate to one another in a highly significant manner. It has been demonstrated that adolescents who drink at least to some degree may be as much as sixteen times more likely than non-drinkers to use illicit drugs.

=====Social influence=====

Peer acceptance and social norms gain a significantly greater hand in directing behavior at the onset of adolescence; as such, the alcohol and illegal drug habits of teens tend to be shaped largely by the substance use of friends and other classmates. In fact, studies suggest that more significantly than actual drug norms, an individual&#x27;s perception of the illicit drug use by friends and peers is highly associated with his or her own habits in substance use during both middle and high school, a relationship that increases in strength over time. Whereas social influences on alcohol use and marijuana use tend to work directly in the short term, peer and friend norms on smoking cigarettes in middle school have a profound effect on one&#x27;s own likelihood to smoke cigarettes well into high school. Perhaps the strong correlation between peer influence in middle school and cigarette smoking in high school may be explained by the addictive nature of cigarettes, which could lead many students to continue their smoking habits from middle school into late adolescence.

=====Demographic factors=====
Until mid-to-late adolescence, boys and girls show relatively little difference in drinking motives. Distinctions between the reasons for alcohol consumption of males and females begin to emerge around ages 14–15; overall, boys tend to view drinking in a more social light than girls, who report on average a more frequent use of alcohol as a coping mechanism. The latter effect appears to shift in late adolescence and onset of early adulthood (20–21 years of age); however, despite this trend, age tends to bring a greater desire to drink for pleasure rather than coping in both boys and girls.

Drinking habits and the motives behind them often reflect certain aspects of an individual&#x27;s personality; in fact, four dimensions of the Five-Factor Model of personality demonstrate associations with drinking motives (all but &#x27;Openness&#x27;). Greater enhancement motives for alcohol consumption tend to reflect high levels of extraversion and sensation-seeking in individuals; such enjoyment motivation often also indicates low conscientiousness, manifesting in lowered inhibition and a greater tendency towards aggression. On the other hand, drinking to cope with negative emotional states correlates strongly with high neuroticism and low agreeableness. Alcohol use as a negative emotion control mechanism often links with many other behavioral and emotional impairments, such as anxiety, depression, and low self-esteem.

Research has generally shown striking uniformity across different cultures in the motives behind teen alcohol use. Social engagement and personal enjoyment appear to play a fairly universal role in adolescents&#x27; decision to drink throughout separate cultural contexts. Surveys conducted in Argentina, Hong Kong, and Canada have each indicated the most common reason for drinking among adolescents to relate to pleasure and recreation; 80% of Argentinian teens reported drinking for enjoyment, while only 7% drank to improve a bad mood. The most prevalent answers among Canadian adolescents were to &quot;get in a party mood,&quot; 18%; &quot;because I enjoy it,&quot; 16%; and &quot;to get drunk,&quot; 10%. In Hong Kong, female participants most frequently reported drinking for social enjoyment, while males most frequently reported drinking to feel the effects of alcohol.

===Media===

====Body image====

Much research has been conducted on the psychological ramifications of body image on adolescents. Modern day teenagers are exposed to more media on a daily basis than any generation before them. As such, modern day adolescents are exposed to many representations of ideal, societal beauty. The concept of a person being unhappy with their own image or appearance has been defined as &quot;body dissatisfaction&quot;. In teenagers, body dissatisfaction is often associated with body mass, low self-esteem, and atypical eating patterns that can result in health procedures. Scholars continue to debate the effects of media on body dissatisfaction in teens.

====Media profusion====

Because exposure to media has increased over the past decade, adolescents&#x27; use of computers, cell phones, stereos and televisions to gain access to various mediums of popular culture has also increased. Almost all American households have at least one television, more than three-quarters of all adolescents&#x27; homes have access to the Internet, and more than 90% of American adolescents use the Internet at least occasionally. As a result of the amount of time adolescents spend using these devices, their total media exposure is high. In the last decade, the amount of time that adolescents spend on the computer has greatly increased. Online activities with the highest rates of use among adolescents are video games (78% of adolescents), email (73%), instant messaging (68%), social networking sites (65%), news sources (63%), music (59%), and videos (57%).

====Social networking====

In the 2000s, social networking sites proliferated and a high proportion of adolescents used them. As of 2012, 73% of 12–17 year olds reported having at least one social networking profile; two-thirds (68%) of teens texted every day, half (51%) visited social networking sites daily, and 11% sent or received tweets at least once every day. More than a third (34%) of teens visited their main social networking site several times a day. One in four (23%) teens were &quot;heavy&quot; social media users, meaning they used at least two different types of social media each and every day.

Although research has been inconclusive, some findings have indicated that electronic communication negatively affects adolescents&#x27; social development, replaces face-to-face communication, impairs their social skills, and can sometimes lead to unsafe interaction with strangers. A 2015 review reported that &quot;adolescents lack awareness of strategies to cope with cyberbullying, which has been consistently associated with an increased likelihood of depression.&quot; Furthermore, in 2020, 32% of adolescent girls that use Instagram reported feeling worse about their body image after using the platform. Studies have shown differences in the ways the internet negatively impacts adolescents&#x27; social functioning. Online socializing tends to make girls particularly vulnerable, while socializing in Internet cafés seems only to affect boys&#x27; academic achievement. However, other research suggests that Internet communication brings friends closer and is beneficial for socially anxious teens, who find it easier to interact socially online.

===Transitions into adulthood===
A broad way of defining adolescence is the transition from child-to-adulthood. According to Hogan &amp; Astone (1986), this transition can include markers such as leaving school, starting a full-time job, leaving the home of origin, getting married, and becoming a parent for the first time. However, the time frame of this transition varies drastically by culture. In some countries, such as the United States, adolescence can last nearly a decade, but in others, the transition—often in the form of a ceremony—can last for only a few days.

Some examples of social and religious transition ceremonies that can be found in the U.S., as well as in other cultures around the world, are Confirmation, Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, Quinceañeras, sweet sixteens, cotillions, and débutante balls. In other countries, initiation ceremonies play an important role, marking the transition into adulthood or the entrance into adolescence. This transition may be accompanied by obvious physical changes, which can vary from a change in clothing to tattoos and scarification. Furthermore, transitions into adulthood may also vary by gender, and specific rituals may be more common for males or for females. This illuminates the extent to which adolescence is, at least in part, a social construction; it takes shape differently depending on the cultural context, and may be enforced more by cultural practices or transitions than by universal chemical or biological physical changes.

==Promoting positive changes in adolescents==
At the decision-making point of their lives, youth are susceptible to drug addiction, sexual abuse, peer pressure, violent crimes and other illegal activities. Developmental Intervention Science (DIS) is a fusion of the literature of both developmental and intervention sciences. This association conducts youth interventions that mutually assist both the needs of the community as well as psychologically stranded youth by focusing on risky and inappropriate behaviors while promoting positive self-development along with self-esteem among adolescents.

==Criticism==
The concept of adolescence has been criticized by experts, such as Robert Epstein, who state that an undeveloped brain is not the main cause of teenagers&#x27; turmoils. Some have criticized the concept of adolescence because it is a relatively recent phenomenon in human history created by modern society, and have been highly critical of what they view as the infantilization of young adults in American society. In an article for &quot;Scientific American&quot;, Robert Epstein and Jennifer Ong state that &quot;American-style teen turmoil is absent in more than 100 cultures around the world, suggesting that such mayhem is not biologically inevitable. Second, the brain itself changes in response to experiences, raising the question of whether adolescent brain characteristics are the cause of teen tumult or rather the result of lifestyle and experiences.&quot; David Moshman has also stated in regards to adolescence that brain research &quot;is crucial for a full picture, but it does not provide an ultimate explanation.&quot;

Other critics of the concept of adolescence do point at individual differences in brain growth rate, citing that some (though not all) early teens still have infantile undeveloped corpus callosums, concluding that &quot;the adult in *every* adolescent&quot; is too generalizing. These people tend to support the notion that a more interconnected brain makes more precise distinctions (citing Pavlov&#x27;s comparisons of conditioned reflexes in different species) and that there is a non-arbitrary threshold at which distinctions become sufficiently precise to correct assumptions afterward as opposed to being ultimately dependent on exterior assumptions for communication. They argue that this threshold is the one at which an individual is objectively capable of speaking for himself or herself, as opposed to culturally arbitrary measures of &quot;maturity&quot; which often treat this ability as a sign of &quot;immaturity&quot; merely because it leads to questioning of authorities. These people also stress the low probability of the threshold being reached at a birthday, and instead advocate non-chronological emancipation at the threshold of afterward correction of assumptions. They sometimes cite similarities between &quot;adolescent&quot; behavior and KZ syndrome (inmate behavior in adults in prison camps) such as aggression being explainable by oppression and &quot;immature&quot; financial or other risk behavior being explainable by a way out of captivity being more worth to captive people than any incremental improvement in captivity, and argue that this theory successfully predicted remaining &quot;immature&quot; behavior after reaching the age of majority by means of longer-term traumatization. In this context, they refer to the fallibility of official assumptions about what is good or bad for an individual, concluding that paternalistic &quot;rights&quot; may harm the individual. They also argue that since it never took many years to move from one group to another to avoid inbreeding in the paleolithic, evolutionary psychology is unable to account for a long period of &quot;immature&quot; risk behavior.

==See also==

* Adolescent medicine
* Adolescent sleep
* Children and adolescents in the United States
* Clique
* Emerging adulthood and early adulthood
* Ephebophilia – a sexual preference in which an adult is primarily or exclusively sexually attracted to mid to late adolescents
* Fear of youth
* Student voice
* Suitable age and discretion
* Timeline of young people&#x27;s rights in the United Kingdom
* Timeline of young people&#x27;s rights in the United States
* Young adult fiction
* Young adult (psychology)
* Young worker safety and health
* Youth

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="0" end="11" title="Adolescence" label="Adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="42" end="50" title="Developmental biology" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="55" end="68" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="69" end="80" title="Human development (biology)" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="126" end="133" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="137" end="146" title="adulthood" label="adulthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="179" end="194" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q125768347" start="240" end="247" title="Teenager (word)" label="teenage"/>
<link wikidata="Q719723" start="375" end="389" title="preadolescence" label="preadolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="1132" end="1140" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q224513" start="1266" end="1276" title="precocious puberty" label="precocious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516012" start="1281" end="1296" title="delayed puberty" label="delayed puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="1459" end="1470" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="1475" end="1486" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="1555" end="1563" title="Hormones" label="Hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784017" start="1988" end="2016" title="secondary sex characteristic" label="secondary sex characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q352045" start="2058" end="2075" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s apple" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="2104" end="2110" title="breast" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q193818" start="2142" end="2146" title="hips" label="hips"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="2245" end="2260" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="2288" end="2296" title="Hormone" label="hormonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="2376" end="2382" title="gonads" label="gonads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="2560" end="2572" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="2613" end="2621" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339221" start="2730" end="2742" title="gynecomastia" label="gynecomastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422812" start="2766" end="2777" title="sex hormone" label="sex hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="2805" end="2812" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847641" start="2815" end="2826" title="Facial hair" label="Facial hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="3036" end="3045" title="moustache" label="moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786531" start="3733" end="3743" title="spermarche" label="spermarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="3755" end="3766" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="3824" end="3832" title="menarche" label="menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="5380" end="5389" title="Cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="5394" end="5412" title="Social change" label="social development"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="5910" end="5925" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="5936" end="5952" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="6301" end="6308" title="Alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="6313" end="6323" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q476112" start="9909" end="9915" title="human height" label="height"/>
<link wikidata="Q422106" start="10002" end="10017" title="thyroid hormone" label="thyroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="10024" end="10033" title="androgens" label="androgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801229" start="11146" end="11155" title="epiphysis" label="epiphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="11400" end="11412" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="12232" end="12243" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="12248" end="12259" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="13215" end="13224" title="sex organ" label="sex organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="13381" end="13396" title="seminal vesicle" label="seminal vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="13403" end="13411" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q120463" start="13421" end="13440" title="bulbourethral gland" label="bulbourethral gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="13941" end="13949" title="Menarche" label="Menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784017" start="14321" end="14349" title="secondary sex characteristic" label="secondary sex characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188641" start="14805" end="14813" title="Nipple" label="nipples."/>
<link wikidata="Q1340426" start="14929" end="14942" title="Tanner scale" label="Tanner stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="15859" end="15871" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="15925" end="15936" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124069" start="16006" end="16022" title="synaptic pruning" label="synaptic pruning"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="16245" end="16251" title="myelin" label="myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="16554" end="16564" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="16715" end="16730" title="decision making" label="decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="17444" end="17460" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="17524" end="17533" title="Glutamic acid" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="17535" end="17543" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="17548" end="17557" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="17889" end="17897" title="Dopamine" label="Dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="18025" end="18038" title="limbic system" label="limbic system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18294" end="18315" title="#Cognitive development" label="Cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="18325" end="18334" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="18616" end="18625" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="19119" end="19125" title="Jean Piaget" label="Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="19386" end="19390" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="19432" end="19451" title="executive functions" label="executive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="19587" end="19604" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19962" end="19982" title="#Changes in the brain" label="Changes in the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997552" start="20201" end="20219" title="dual systems model" label="dual systems model"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845645" start="20450" end="20460" title="ABCD Study" label="ABCD Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q857647" start="20667" end="20686" title="constructivism (learning theory)" label="constructivist view"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="20734" end="20740" title="Jean Piaget" label="Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q750843" start="20901" end="20935" title="Information processing (psychology)" label="information-processing perspective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21392" end="21411" title="Attention#Selective attention" label="selective attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="21488" end="21505" title="Attention" label="Divided attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="21632" end="21646" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="21651" end="21667" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126970" start="22070" end="22083" title="Metacognition" label="Metacognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="23086" end="23105" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q191035" start="23933" end="23940" title="sarcasm" label="sarcasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126970" start="24369" end="24382" title="metacognition" label="metacognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="24672" end="24685" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q238372" start="24687" end="24705" title="self-consciousness" label="self-consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911348" start="25108" end="25126" title="imaginary audience" label="imaginary audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170579" start="25135" end="25149" title="personal fable" label="personal fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="25257" end="25273" title="abstraction" label="abstract thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="25324" end="25338" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q73822" start="27991" end="28008" title="sensation seeking" label="sensation seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990601" start="28451" end="28472" title="risky sexual behavior" label="risky sexual behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385098" start="28709" end="28728" title="Extinction (psychology)" label="extinction learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q309675" start="29389" end="29404" title="G. Stanley Hall" label="G. Stanley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="29486" end="29520" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="29680" end="29685" title="youth" label="youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="29734" end="29748" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="29750" end="29783" title="Darwinism" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s evolutionary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="29801" end="29821" title="Psychodynamics" label="psychodynamic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q58074" start="30057" end="30069" title="Erik Erikson" label="Erik Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="30074" end="30084" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095779" start="30309" end="30327" title="identity formation" label="identity formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973840" start="30776" end="30791" title="Jean Macfarlane" label="Jean Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="30804" end="30838" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="31165" end="31181" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31186" end="31198" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973840" start="31631" end="31646" title="Jean Macfarlane" label="Jean Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485542" start="31826" end="31836" title="Glen Elder (sociologist)" label="Glen Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811049" start="31863" end="31886" title="life course approach" label="life course perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="32472" end="32484" title="human agency" label="human agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="32853" end="32874" title="nature versus nurture" label="nature versus nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181407" start="33119" end="33134" title="Jeremy Griffith" label="Jeremy Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q32384" start="33280" end="33313" title="Recapitulation theory" label="ontogeny recapitulating phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095779" start="34027" end="34047" title="Identity formation" label="identity development"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="34997" end="35031" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910672" start="35336" end="35357" title="cognitive development" label="cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36170" end="36176" title="self-discrepancy theory#Actual" label="actual"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36193" end="36198" title="self-discrepancy theory#Ideal" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="36845" end="36863" title="personality traits" label="personality traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="37084" end="37104" title="Cognitive dissonance" label="Cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q463910" start="37215" end="37226" title="Egocentrism" label="Egocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58074" start="37547" end="37559" title="Erik Erikson" label="Erik Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q983472" start="37635" end="37656" title="Erikson&amp;#x27;s stages of psychosocial development" label="stages of development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354876" start="37670" end="37685" title="identity crisis" label="identity crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157093" start="38092" end="38108" title="Crowds (adolescence)" label="crowd membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="39237" end="39263" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="42059" end="42077" title="Sexual orientation" label="Sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165905" start="43626" end="43641" title="sexual identity" label="sexual identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449779" start="43684" end="43695" title="transgender youth" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="43792" end="43800" title="coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404005" start="43907" end="43918" title="Questioning (sexuality and gender)" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="44325" end="44329" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="44479" end="44494" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="44513" end="44528" title="Heteronormativity" label="heteronormative"/>
<link wikidata="Q210297" start="44896" end="44908" title="suicide rate" label="suicide rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="45128" end="45139" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="47619" end="47632" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="50042" end="50058" title="right to privacy" label="right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="51307" end="51316" title="childhood" label="childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q638532" start="52456" end="52463" title="Child custody" label="Custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="54138" end="54156" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194193" start="55163" end="55173" title="Peer group" label="Peer group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551393" start="55762" end="55775" title="social stress" label="social stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="57229" end="57237" title="Assault" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191685" start="57242" end="57263" title="relational aggression" label="relational aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="57361" end="57377" title="social rejection" label="social rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q494348" start="57631" end="57644" title="cyberbullying" label="cyberbullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112542" start="57860" end="57867" title="Adolescent cliques" label="cliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q997848" start="58804" end="58809" title="Jock (athlete)" label="jocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q650031" start="58813" end="58817" title="nerd" label="nerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="59344" end="59366" title="Intimate relationship" label="Romantic relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470929" start="59588" end="59594" title="YouGov" label="YouGov"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="59599" end="59608" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="60057" end="60074" title="sexual maturity" label="sexual maturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q442358" start="62570" end="62594" title="casual sex" label="casual sexual encounters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001125" start="63427" end="63438" title="juvenile delinquency" label="delinquency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386352" start="63788" end="63803" title="Dating abuse" label="Dating violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153528" start="64528" end="64553" title="intimate partner violence" label="intimate partner violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="65638" end="65669" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="65702" end="65710" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="65772" end="65789" title="teenage pregnancy" label="teenage pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="66173" end="66179" title="Herpes simplex" label="herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="66184" end="66204" title="human papillomavirus" label="human papillomavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721589" start="66524" end="66548" title="Kaiser Family Foundation" label="Kaiser Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="66820" end="66833" title="sex education" label="sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="67072" end="67085" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="68032" end="68045" title="youth culture" label="youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="68452" end="68465" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="70340" end="70348" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364815" start="73805" end="73814" title="Allowance (money)" label="allowance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="75918" end="75931" title="belief system" label="belief system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="76441" end="76456" title="rite of passage" label="rite of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="76623" end="76631" title="menarche" label="menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786531" start="76677" end="76687" title="semenarche" label="semenarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049950" start="77163" end="77171" title="Adolescent sexuality" label="teen sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="77431" end="77444" title="sex education" label="sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370501" start="77487" end="77516" title="abstinence-only sex education" label="abstinence-only sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324092" start="77520" end="77547" title="comprehensive sex education" label="comprehensive sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300625" start="77946" end="77960" title="Public humiliation" label="public shaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="78468" end="78485" title="teenage pregnancy" label="teenage pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="78951" end="78968" title="social convention" label="social convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="79939" end="79950" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="80126" end="80141" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="80170" end="80176" title="adults" label="adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="80253" end="80259" title="Minor (law)" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266011" start="80338" end="80356" title="Emancipation of minors" label="legal emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517628" start="80363" end="80380" title="legal working age" label="legal working age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432367" start="80538" end="80556" title="school leaving age" label="school leaving age"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="80604" end="80624" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory education"/>
<link wikidata="Q338753" start="80833" end="80849" title="Voting age" label="eligible to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="80980" end="80990" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="80997" end="81011" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196585" start="81109" end="81149" title="marriageable age" label="age at which people are allowed to marry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="81274" end="81281" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="82012" end="82021" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973751" start="82110" end="82142" title="National Institute on Drug Abuse" label="National Institute on Drug Abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="82458" end="82462" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="82657" end="82669" title="Rave" label="rave culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="82728" end="82743" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="82782" end="82805" title="Prescription drug" label="prescription medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q378132" start="86560" end="86577" title="Big Five personality traits" label="Five-Factor Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="86994" end="87010" title="negative emotion" label="negative emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733239" start="88239" end="88249" title="body image" label="body image"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="88660" end="88671" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="91146" end="91159" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557657" start="91320" end="91336" title="Social anxiety" label="socially anxious"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="92111" end="92123" title="Confirmation" label="Confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="92125" end="92144" title="Bar and Bat Mitzvah" label="Bar and Bat Mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519234" start="92147" end="92158" title="Quinceañera" label="Quinceañera"/>
<link wikidata="Q256611" start="92161" end="92175" title="Sweet sixteen (birthday)" label="sweet sixteens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998594" start="92177" end="92186" title="cotillion" label="cotillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780030" start="92193" end="92202" title="débutante" label="débutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344102" start="93574" end="93588" title="Robert Epstein" label="Robert Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150704" start="93869" end="93884" title="infantilization" label="infantilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="93946" end="93965" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q310486" start="94496" end="94536" title="Correlation does not imply causation" label="does not provide an ultimate explanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="94725" end="94740" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="94937" end="94943" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="94966" end="94984" title="conditioned reflex" label="conditioned reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q900634" start="95029" end="95052" title="critical phenomena" label="non-arbitrary threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="96211" end="96226" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q192600" start="96302" end="96313" title="fallibility" label="fallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q58434" start="96399" end="96412" title="paternalism" label="paternalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="96570" end="96581" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="96583" end="96606" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368243" start="96702" end="96721" title="Adolescent medicine" label="Adolescent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739836" start="96724" end="96740" title="Adolescent sleep" label="Adolescent sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741944" start="96743" end="96788" title="Children and adolescents in the United States" label="Children and adolescents in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662634" start="96791" end="96797" title="Clique" label="Clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370791" start="96800" end="96838" title="Emerging adulthood and early adulthood" label="Emerging adulthood and early adulthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q595012" start="96841" end="96853" title="Ephebophilia" label="Ephebophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076315" start="96970" end="96983" title="Fear of youth" label="Fear of youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627905" start="96986" end="96999" title="Student voice" label="Student voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635545" start="97002" end="97029" title="Suitable age and discretion" label="Suitable age and discretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806478" start="97032" end="97092" title="Timeline of young people&amp;#x27;s rights in the United Kingdom" label="Timeline of young people&amp;#x27;s rights in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806479" start="97095" end="97154" title="Timeline of young people&amp;#x27;s rights in the United States" label="Timeline of young people&amp;#x27;s rights in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="97157" end="97176" title="Young adult fiction" label="Young adult fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156455" start="97179" end="97203" title="Young adult (psychology)" label="Young adult (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058572" start="97206" end="97236" title="Young worker safety and health" label="Young worker safety and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="97239" end="97244" title="Youth" label="Youth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83870" wikidata="Q8411" url="?curid=83870" title="1956 Summer Olympics">
<text>The 1956 Summer Olympics, officially the Games of the XVI Olympiad and officially branded as Melbourne 1956, were an international multi-sport event held in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, from 22 November to 8 December 1956, with the exception of the equestrian events, which were held in Stockholm, Sweden, in June 1956.

These Games were the first to be staged in the Southern Hemisphere and Oceania, as well as the first to be held outside Europe and North America. Melbourne is the most southerly city ever to host the Olympics. Due to the Southern Hemisphere&#x27;s seasons being different from those in the Northern Hemisphere, the 1956 Games did not take place at the usual time of year, because of the need to hold the events during the warmer weather of the host&#x27;s spring/summer (which corresponds to the Northern Hemisphere&#x27;s autumn/winter), resulting in the only summer games ever to be held in November and December. Australia hosted the Games for a second time in 2000 in Sydney, New South Wales, and will host them again in 2032 in Brisbane, Queensland.

The Olympic equestrian events could not be held in Melbourne due to Australia&#x27;s strict quarantine regulations, so they were held in Stockholm five months earlier. This was the second time the Olympics were not held entirely in one country, the first being the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium, with some events taking place in Amsterdam, Netherlands. Despite uncertainties and various complications encountered during the preparations, the 1956 Games went ahead in Melbourne as planned and turned out to be a success. Started during the 1956 Games was the &quot;Parade of Athletes&quot; at the closing ceremonies.

Nine teams boycotted the Games for various reasons. Four teams (Egypt, Iraq, Cambodia and Lebanon) boycotted in response to the Suez Crisis, in which Egypt was invaded by Israel, France and the United Kingdom. Four teams (the Netherlands, Spain, Liechtenstein and Switzerland) boycotted in response to the Soviet invasion of Hungary, and the People&#x27;s Republic of China&#x27;s boycott was in response to a dispute with the Republic of China over the right to represent China. The Soviet Union won the most gold and overall medals at these Games.

One of the most notable events of the games was a controversial water polo match between the Soviet Union and the defending champions, Hungary. The Soviet Union had recently suppressed an anti-authoritarian revolution in Hungary and violence broke out between the teams during the match, resulting in numerous injuries. When Hungary&#x27;s Ervin Zádor suffered bleeding after being punched by Soviet Union&#x27;s Valentin Prokopov, spectators attempted to join the violence, but they were blocked by police. The match was cancelled, with Hungary being declared the winner because they were in the lead.

==Host city selection==
Melbourne was selected as the host city over bids from Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Montreal, Los Angeles, Detroit, Chicago, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and San Francisco at the 43rd IOC Session in Rome, Italy on 28 April 1949. Mexico City, Montreal and Los Angeles would eventually be selected to host the 1968, 1976 and 1984 Summer Olympics respectively.

==Prelude==
Many members of the IOC were skeptical about Melbourne as an appropriate site. Its location in the Southern Hemisphere was a major concern since the reversal of seasons would mean the Games must be held during the northern winter. The November–December schedule was thought likely to inconvenience athletes from the Northern Hemisphere, who were accustomed to resting during their winter. 

Notwithstanding these concerns, the field of candidates eventually narrowed to two Southern Hemisphere cities, these being Melbourne and Buenos Aires, Argentina. Melbourne was selected, in 1949, to host the 1956 Olympics by a one-vote margin. The first sign of trouble was the revelation that Australian equine quarantine would prevent the country from hosting the equestrian events. Stockholm was selected as the alternative site, so equestrian competition began on 10 June, five and a half months before the rest of the Olympic Games were to open.

The above problems of the Melbourne Games were compounded by bickering over financing among Australian politicians. Eventually, in March 1953, the State Government accepted a £2 million loan from the Commonwealth Government to build the Olympic Village, which would accommodate up to 6,000 people, in Heidelberg West. After the Olympics, the houses in the village were handed back to the Housing Commission for general public housing.

At one point, IOC President Avery Brundage suggested that Rome, which was to host the 1960 Games, was so far ahead of Melbourne in preparations that it might be ready as a replacement site in 1956. Constructing of the sporting venues was given priority over the athlete&#x27;s village. The village was designed as a whole new suburb with semi-detached houses and flats, the first village that both sexes could cohabitate the same buildings instead of gender designated sections.

As late as April 1955, Brundage, who was presiding over the Olympics for the first time, was still doubtful about Melbourne and was not satisfied by an inspection trip to the city. Construction was well under way by then, thanks to a $4.5 million federal loan to Victoria, but it was behind schedule. He still held out the possibility that Rome might have to step in.

By the beginning of 1956, though, it was obvious that Melbourne would be ready for the Olympics.

==Participation and boycotts==

Egypt, Iraq, Cambodia and Lebanon announced that they would not participate in the Olympics in response to the Suez Crisis when Egypt was invaded by Israel, the United Kingdom, and France.

The Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland and Liechtenstein boycotted the event in protest of the Soviet Union&#x27;s crushing of the Hungarian Revolution.

The People&#x27;s Republic of China chose to boycott the event because the Republic of China had been allowed to compete.

Athletes from both East and West Germany competed together as a combined team (a display of unity that was repeated in 1960 and 1964, but was then discontinued).

Although the number of countries participating (67) was almost the same as in 1952 (69), the number of athletes competing dropped sharply, from 4,925 to 3,342. (This figure does not include the 158 athletes from 29 countries who took part in the Stockholm equestrian competition.)

==Events==
Once underway, the Games progressed smoothly, and came to be known as the &quot;Friendly Games&quot;. Betty Cuthbert, an 18-year-old from Sydney, won the 100 and 200 metre sprint races and ran an exceptional final leg in the 4 x 100 metre relay to overcome Great Britain&#x27;s lead and claim her third gold medal, becoming known as the &quot;Golden Girl&quot;. The veteran Shirley Strickland repeated her 1952 win in the 80 metre hurdles and was also part of the winning 4 x 100 metre relay team, bringing her career Olympic medal total to seven: three golds, a silver, and three bronze medals.

Australia also triumphed in swimming. They won all of the freestyle races, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s, and collected a total of eight gold, four silver and two bronze medals. Murray Rose became the first male swimmer to win two freestyle events(and a total three events) since Johnny Weissmuller in 1924, while Dawn Fraser won gold medals in the 100 metre freestyle and as the leadoff swimmer in the 4 x 100 metre relay team.

The men&#x27;s track and field events were dominated by the United States. They not only won 15 of the 24 events, they swept four of them and took first and second place in five others. Bobby Morrow led the way with gold medals in the 100 and 200 metre sprints and the 4 x 100 metre relay. Tom Courtney barely overtook Great Britain&#x27;s Derek Johnson in the 800 metre run, then collapsed from the exertion and needed medical attention.

Ireland&#x27;s Ronnie Delany ran an outstanding 53.8 over the last 400 metres to win the 1,500 metre run(also Ireland&#x27;s last gold medal in track events), in which favourite John Landy of Australia finished third.

There was a major upset, marred briefly by controversy, in the 3,000 metre steeplechase. Little-known Chris Brasher of Great Britain finished well ahead of the field, but the judges disqualified him for interfering with Norway&#x27;s Ernst Larsen, and they announced Sándor Rozsnyói of Hungary as the winner. Brasher&#x27;s appeal was supported by Larsen, Rozsnyói, and fourth-place finisher Heinz Laufer of Germany. Subsequently, the decision was reversed and Brasher became the first Briton to win a gold medal in track and field since 1936.

Soviet runner Vladimir Kuts won two golds by winning both the 5,000-metre and 10,000-metre events.

Only two world records were set in track and field. Mildred McDaniel, the first American woman to win gold in the sport, set a high jump record of , and Egil Danielsen of Norway overcame blustery conditions with a remarkable javelin throw of .

Throughout the Olympics, Hungarian athletes were cheered by fans from Australia and other countries. Many of them gathered in the boxing arena when thirty-year-old Laszlo Papp of Hungary won a record third gold medal by beating José Torres for the light-middleweight championship.

A few days later, the crowd was with the Hungarian water polo team in its hotly contested and emotionally charged match against the Soviet Union which took place against the background of the Soviet invasion of Hungary. The game became rough and, when a Hungarian was forced to leave the pool with a bleeding wound above his eye, a riot almost broke out. The police restored order and the game was called early, with Hungary leading , and the Hungarians went on to win the gold medal.

In a much publicized Olympic romance, American hammer throw champion Hal Connolly would marry Czechoslovak discus throw champion, Olga Fikotová. After moving to the United States, Olga wanted to continue representing Czechoslovakia, but the Czechoslovak Olympic Committee would not allow her to do so. Thereafter, as Olga Connolly, she took part in every Olympics until 1972 competing for the U.S. She was the flag bearer for the U.S. team at the 1972 Summer Olympics.

The India men&#x27;s national field hockey team won its sixth consecutive Olympic gold.

Despite the international tensions of 1956—or perhaps because of them—a young Melburnian, John Ian Wing, came up with a new idea for the closing ceremony. Instead of marching as separate teams, behind their national flags, the athletes mingled together as they paraded into and around the arena for a final appearance before the spectators. It was the start of an Olympic tradition that has been followed ever since.

==Olympic torch relay==

The Olympic flame was relayed to Melbourne after being lit at Olympia on 2 November 1956.

Greek runners took the flame from Olympia to Athens. The flame was then transferred to a miner&#x27;s lamp, flown by a Qantas Super Constellation aircraft, &quot;Southern Horizon&quot; to Darwin, Northern Territory.

A Royal Australian Air Force English Electric Canberra jet bomber transported the flame to Cairns, Queensland, where it arrived on 9 November 1956 and the Mayor of Cairns, Alderman W.J. Fulton, lit the first torch with the torch design was identical to the one used for the 1948 London Games (except for the engraved city name and year).

The first runner was Con Verevis, a local man of Greek parentage. The flame was relayed down the east coast of Australia using die cast aluminium torches weighing about 3 pounds (1.8 kg).

The flame arrived in Melbourne on 22 November 1956, the day of the opening ceremony and The flame was lit at the Olympic stadium by Ron Clarke, who accidentally burned his arm in the process.

While the Olympic flame was being carried to Sydney, an Australian veterinary student named Barry Larkin carried a fake Olympic Flame and fooled the mayor of Sydney.

==Television==
The Olympics were first televised during the 1936 games to a domestic audience in Berlin. The 1956 Winter Olympics in Cortina d&#x27;Ampezzo were broadcast internationally with the organising committee giving the television rights gratis. While there was much interest in the games overseas, no international television or newsreel rights were awarded, as the Melbourne organising committee requested licensing payments for the broadcasting rights. However, domestic rights to the games were hastily agreed by the then three Melbourne stations, GTV9, HSV7 and ABV2, only a week before the opening ceremony. The three Sydney stations, TCN9, ATN7 and ABN2, syndicated the Melbourne coverage. Television in Australia was new having its beginnings in September 1956, so for many Australians, their first glimpse of television was Olympic broadcasts. Around five thousand television sets were in Australia by the time of the Games, so the domestic audience largely watched the games at community halls and at Ampol petrol stations.

==Sports==
The 1956 Summer Olympics featured 17 different sports encompassing 23 disciplines, and medals were awarded in 151 events (145 events in Melbourne and 6 equestrian events in Stockholm). In the list below, the number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.
*Aquatics
**
*
*
*
**Road 
**Track 
**Dressage 
**Eventing 
**Show jumping 
*
*
*
*
*
**Freestyle 
**Greco-Roman 
===Demonstration sports===
* 

==Venues==
;Ballarat
*Lake Wendouree – Canoeing, Rowing

;Melbourne
*Broadmeadows – Cycling (road)
*Hockey Field – Field hockey
*Melbourne Cricket Ground – Athletics, Field hockey (final), Football (final)
*Oaklands Hunt Club – Modern pentathlon (riding, running)
*Olympic Park Stadium – Football
*Port Phillip Bay – Sailing
*Royal Australian Air Force, Laverton Air Base – Shooting (shotgun)
*Royal Exhibition Building – Basketball (final), Modern pentathlon (fencing), Weightlifting, Wrestling
*St Kilda Town Hall – Fencing
*Swimming/Diving Stadium (Olympic Pool) – Diving, Modern pentathlon (swimming), Swimming, Water polo
*Velodrome – Cycling (track)
*West Melbourne Stadium – Basketball, Boxing, Gymnastics
*Williamstown – Modern pentathlon (shooting), Shooting (pistol, rifle)

;Stockholm
*Lill-Jansskogen – Equestrian (eventing)
*Olympic Stadium – Equestrian (dressage, eventing, jumping)
*Ulriksdal – Equestrian (eventing)

==Participating National Olympic Committees==
A total of 67 nations competed in the 1956 Olympics. Eight countries made their Olympic debuts: Cambodia (only competed in the equestrian events in Stockholm), Ethiopia, Fiji, Kenya, Liberia, Federation of Malaya, North Borneo (modern-day Sabah of Malaysia), and Uganda. Athletes from East Germany and West Germany competed together as the United Team of Germany, an arrangement that would last until 1968.

For the first time, the team of Republic of China effectively represented only Taiwan.

Five nations competed in the equestrian events in Stockholm, but did not attend the Games in Melbourne. Cambodia, Egypt and Lebanon did not compete in Melbourne due to a boycott regarding the Suez Crisis, whilst the Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland all boycotted the Melbourne Olympics in protest at the Soviet invasion of Hungary.

Nations that returned to the games in this edition included Afghanistan and Colombia. 

Nations that participated in the previous games in Helsinki 1952 but was absent in Melbourne 1956 included the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Liechtenstein, Netherlands Antilles, Saar. Saar joined West Germany in 1957.

Puerto Rico is an unincorporated territory and commonwealth of the United States. Bahamas, Bermuda, Fiji, Gold Coast, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Kenya, Nigeria, Malaya, North Borneo, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda and British Guyana was all part of the British Empire. 

=== Number of athletes by National Olympic Committees ===

==Medal count==

These are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1956 Games.

;Key
 Host nation (Australia). John Ian Wing of Australia was also presented with a bronze medal, not included in the above table, for suggesting the closing ceremony have athletes as one nation.

==See also==

*2005 Summer Deaflympics
*2006 Commonwealth Games

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="4" end="24" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="41" end="66" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="Games of the XVI Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="93" end="107" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="Melbourne 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q167170" start="131" end="148" title="multi-sport event" label="multi-sport event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="157" end="166" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="168" end="176" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="178" end="187" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909448" start="252" end="269" title="Equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="equestrian events"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="290" end="299" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="371" end="390" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="395" end="402" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="988" end="992" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="996" end="1002" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1004" end="1019" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31039462" start="1049" end="1053" title="2032 Summer Olympics" label="2032"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1057" end="1065" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="1067" end="1077" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872175" start="1172" end="1194" title="Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service" label="quarantine regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8128" start="1345" end="1365" title="1920 Summer Olympics" label="1920 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1369" end="1376" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1378" end="1385" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1420" end="1442" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam, Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="1836" end="1847" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1858" end="1863" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1879" end="1885" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1887" end="1893" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1902" end="1916" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="2014" end="2040" title="Soviet invasion of Hungary" label="Soviet invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2050" end="2081" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="2135" end="2152" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q462135" start="2192" end="2204" title="Soviet Union at the Olympics" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q657631" start="2309" end="2339" title="Blood in the Water match" label="controversial water polo match"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2394" end="2401" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="2447" end="2476" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="anti-authoritarian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q704459" start="2599" end="2610" title="Ervin Zádor" label="Ervin Zádor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340271" start="2672" end="2689" title="Valentin Prokopov" label="Valentin Prokopov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="2942" end="2954" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203407" start="3067" end="3078" title="IOC Session" label="IOC Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="3191" end="3195" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="3197" end="3201" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="3206" end="3226" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="3274" end="3277" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="3570" end="3589" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="3782" end="3794" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3796" end="3805" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589335" start="4343" end="4359" title="Victoria State Government" label="State Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="4396" end="4419" title="Australian Government" label="Commonwealth Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q866623" start="4433" end="4448" title="Olympic Village" label="Olympic Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698734" start="4497" end="4512" title="Heidelberg West, Victoria" label="Heidelberg West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916103" start="4584" end="4602" title="Housing Commission of Victoria" label="Housing Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="4660" end="4674" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="5722" end="5733" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5893" end="5905" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="5929" end="5949" title="Hungarian Revolution, 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5956" end="5987" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6027" end="6044" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="6094" end="6098" title="East Germany" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6103" end="6107" title="West Germany" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q31657" start="6139" end="6152" title="United Team of Germany" label="combined team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="6194" end="6198" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="6203" end="6207" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q166534" start="6633" end="6647" title="Betty Cuthbert" label="Betty Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q230954" start="6905" end="6923" title="Shirley Strickland" label="Shirley Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362362" start="7304" end="7315" title="Murray Rose" label="Murray Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q151284" start="7406" end="7424" title="Johnny Weissmuller" label="Johnny Weissmuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q229040" start="7440" end="7451" title="Dawn Fraser" label="Dawn Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694748" start="7675" end="7680" title="Podium sweep" label="swept"/>
<link wikidata="Q345673" start="7742" end="7754" title="Bobby Morrow" label="Bobby Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q611481" start="7846" end="7858" title="Tom Courtney" label="Tom Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q202524" start="7896" end="7909" title="Derek Johnson (athlete)" label="Derek Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q734288" start="8011" end="8024" title="Ronnie Delany" label="Ronnie Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353311" start="8174" end="8184" title="John Landy" label="John Landy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728956" start="8317" end="8330" title="Chris Brasher" label="Chris Brasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q947492" start="8449" end="8461" title="Ernst Larsen" label="Ernst Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688987" start="8482" end="8497" title="Sándor Rozsnyói" label="Sándor Rozsnyói"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600556" start="8607" end="8619" title="Heinz Laufer" label="Heinz Laufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q462135" start="8760" end="8766" title="USSR at the Summer Olympics" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61235" start="8774" end="8787" title="Vladimir Kuts" label="Vladimir Kuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q269630" start="8912" end="8928" title="Mildred McDaniel" label="Mildred McDaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q735819" start="9013" end="9027" title="Egil Danielsen" label="Egil Danielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q296473" start="9269" end="9280" title="Laszlo Papp" label="Laszlo Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685019" start="9333" end="9344" title="José Torres (boxer)" label="José Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q657631" start="9501" end="9506" title="Blood in the Water match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="9579" end="9605" title="1956 Hungarian Revolution" label="Soviet invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869204" start="9920" end="9941" title="Athletics at the 1956 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s hammer throw" label="hammer throw champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q464679" start="9942" end="9954" title="Hal Connolly" label="Hal Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628557" start="9980" end="10001" title="Athletics at the 1956 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s discus throw" label="discus throw champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47085" start="10003" end="10016" title="Olga Fikotová" label="Olga Fikotová"/>
<link wikidata="Q53292029" start="10114" end="10144" title="Czechoslovak Olympic Committee" label="Czechoslovak Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620498" start="10283" end="10312" title="List of flag bearers for the United States at the Olympics" label="flag bearer for the U.S. team"/>
<link wikidata="Q931527" start="10347" end="10390" title="India men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team" label="India men&amp;#x27;s national field hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240713" start="10522" end="10535" title="John Ian Wing" label="John Ian Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="10879" end="10892" title="Olympic flame" label="Olympic flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="10937" end="10944" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="11011" end="11017" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q902796" start="11055" end="11072" title="Davy lamp" label="miner&amp;#x27;s lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="11085" end="11091" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418274" start="11092" end="11111" title="Super Constellation" label="Super Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="11154" end="11180" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="11185" end="11211" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="11212" end="11237" title="English Electric Canberra" label="English Electric Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="11274" end="11292" title="Cairns, Queensland" label="Cairns, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="11457" end="11474" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 London Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325511" start="11649" end="11657" title="Die casting" label="die cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q549365" start="11843" end="11853" title="Ron Clarke" label="Ron Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499585" start="11971" end="11989" title="veterinary surgeon" label="veterinary student"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401142" start="11996" end="12008" title="1956 Olympic flame hoax" label="Barry Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="12131" end="12141" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9632" start="12180" end="12200" title="1956 Winter Olympics" label="1956 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514763" start="12631" end="12635" title="GTV_(Australian_TV_station)" label="GTV9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755670" start="12637" end="12641" title="HSV_(TV_station)" label="HSV7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650431" start="12646" end="12650" title="ABV_(TV_station)" label="ABV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669731" start="12720" end="12724" title="TCN" label="TCN9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654744" start="12726" end="12730" title="ATN" label="ATN7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650348" start="12735" end="12739" title="ABN_(TV_station)" label="ABN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q502813" start="12776" end="12799" title="Television in Australia" label="Television in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="13090" end="13095" title="Ampol" label="Ampol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256116" start="13561" end="13575" title="Lake Wendouree" label="Lake Wendouree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972237" start="13608" end="13620" title="Broadmeadows, Victoria" label="Broadmeadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811880" start="13639" end="13651" title="Melbourne Sports and Entertainment Precinct" label="Hockey Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="13668" end="13692" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="Melbourne Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074081" start="13746" end="13764" title="Oaklands Hunt Club" label="Oaklands Hunt Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847793" start="13804" end="13824" title="Olympic Park Stadium (Melbourne)" label="Olympic Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="13837" end="13853" title="Port Phillip Bay" label="Port Phillip Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551483" start="13865" end="13910" title="RAAF Williams" label="Royal Australian Air Force, Laverton Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q695935" start="13933" end="13958" title="Royal Exhibition Building" label="Royal Exhibition Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593915" start="14036" end="14054" title="St Kilda Town Hall" label="St Kilda Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811879" start="14066" end="14089" title="Melbourne Sports and Entertainment Center" label="Swimming/Diving Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811880" start="14167" end="14176" title="Melbourne Sports and Entertainment Precinct" label="Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445710" start="14196" end="14218" title="Festival Hall, Melbourne" label="West Melbourne Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012058" start="14253" end="14265" title="Williamstown, Victoria" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547932" start="14336" end="14351" title="Lill-Jansskogen" label="Lill-Jansskogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q727078" start="14377" end="14392" title="Stockholm Olympic Stadium" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879918" start="14437" end="14446" title="Ulriksdal dirt course" label="Ulriksdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="14614" end="14622" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909448" start="14645" end="14662" title="Equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="equestrian events"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="14678" end="14686" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="14688" end="14692" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="14694" end="14699" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="14701" end="14708" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="14710" end="14730" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="14732" end="14744" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="14757" end="14762" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="14766" end="14774" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="14781" end="14787" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="14803" end="14815" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="14820" end="14832" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q31657" start="14858" end="14880" title="United Team of Germany" label="United Team of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="15005" end="15011" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q909448" start="15043" end="15060" title="Equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="equestrian events"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="15118" end="15126" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15128" end="15133" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="15138" end="15145" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="15206" end="15217" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922246" start="15230" end="15241" title="Netherlands at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q578869" start="15243" end="15248" title="Spain at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150581" start="15253" end="15264" title="Switzerland at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="15320" end="15346" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Soviet invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="15409" end="15420" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="15425" end="15433" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15548" end="15579" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="15581" end="15594" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="15596" end="15616" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="15618" end="15622" title="Saar Protectorate" label="Saar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="15659" end="15670" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15726" end="15739" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="15741" end="15748" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="15750" end="15757" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="15759" end="15763" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="15765" end="15775" title="Ghana" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="15777" end="15786" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="15788" end="15795" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="15797" end="15802" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="15804" end="15811" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="15813" end="15819" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="15821" end="15833" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="15835" end="15844" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="15846" end="15865" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="15867" end="15873" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="15878" end="15892" title="British Guyana" label="British Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="15913" end="15927" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240713" start="16104" end="16117" title="John Ian Wing" label="John Ian Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875877" start="16285" end="16308" title="2005 Summer Deaflympics" label="2005 Summer Deaflympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q659207" start="16310" end="16333" title="2006 Commonwealth Games" label="2006 Commonwealth Games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83872" wikidata="Q271891" url="?curid=83872" title="Ixion">
<text>In Greek mythology, Ixion ( ; ) was king of the Lapiths, the most ancient tribe of Thessaly.

==Family==
Ixion was the son of Ares, or Leonteus, or Antion and Perimele, or the notorious evildoer Phlegyas, whose name connotes &quot;fiery&quot;. Pirithous was his son (or stepson, if Zeus were his father, as Zeus claims to Hera in &quot;Iliad&quot; 14).

==Background==
Ixion married Dia, a daughter of Eioneus, and promised his father-in-law a valuable present. However, he did not pay the bride price, so Deioneus stole some of Ixion&#x27;s horses in retaliation. Ixion concealed his resentment and invited his father-in-law to a feast at Larissa. When Deioneus arrived, Ixion pushed him into a bed of burning coals and wood. These circumstances are secondary to the fact of Ixion&#x27;s primordial act of murder; it could be accounted for quite differently: in the &quot;Greek Anthology&quot;, among a collection of inscriptions from a temple in Cyzicus, is an epigrammatic description of Ixion slaying Phorbas and Polymelos, who had slain his mother, Megara, the &quot;great one&quot;.

Ixion went mad, defiled by his act; the neighboring princes were so offended by this act of treachery and violation of &quot;xenia&quot; that they refused to perform the rituals that would cleanse Ixion of his guilt (see &quot;catharsis&quot;). Thereafter, Ixion lived as an outlaw and was shunned. By killing his father-in-law, Ixion was reckoned the first man guilty of kin-slaying in Greek mythology.

This act alone would warrant Ixion a terrible punishment, but Zeus took pity on Ixion and brought him to Olympus and introduced him at the table of the gods. Instead of being grateful, Ixion grew lustful for Hera, Zeus&#x27;s wife, a further violation of guest–host relations. Zeus found out about his intentions and made a cloud in the shape of Hera, which became known as Nephele (from &quot;nephos&quot; &quot;cloud&quot;) and tricked Ixion into coupling with it. From the union of Ixion and the false-Hera cloud came Imbros or Centauros, who mated with the Magnesian mares on Mount Pelion, Pindar told, engendering the race of Centaurs, who are called the Ixionidae from their descent.

Ixion was expelled from Olympus and blasted with a thunderbolt. Zeus ordered Hermes to bind Ixion to a winged fiery wheel that was always spinning. Therefore, Ixion was bound to a burning solar wheel for all eternity, at first spinning across the heavens, but in later myth transferred to Tartarus.

Some versions of the myth portray Ixion as being trapped in Hades after his death.

Only when Orpheus played his lyre during his trip to the Underworld to rescue Eurydice did it stop for a while.

==Analysis==
Robert L. Fowler observes that &quot;The details are very odd, the narrative motivation creaks at every juncture ... the myth smacks of aetiology.&quot; He notes that Martin Nilsson suggested an origin in rain-making magic, with which he concurs: &quot;In Ixion&#x27;s case the necessary warning about the conduct of magic has taken the form of blasphemous and dangerous conduct on the part of the first officiant.&quot;

In the fifth century, Pindar&#x27;s Second Pythian Ode () expands on the example of Ixion, applicable to Hiero I of Syracuse, the tyrant of whom the poet sings. Aeschylus, Euripides and Timasitheos each wrote a tragedy of Ixion though none of these accounts have survived.

Ixion was a figure also known to the Etruscans; he is depicted in an engraving on the back of the mirror, bound to an eight-spoked, winged wheel , now in the collection of the British Museum. Whether the Etruscans shared the Ixion figure with Hellenes from early times or whether Ixion figured among those Greek myths that were adapted at later dates to fit the Etruscan world-view is unknown.

==See also==
* Sisyphus
* Wanyūdō

==Notes==
==References==
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1–2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888–1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* John Tzetzes, &quot;Book of Histories&quot;, Books IX–X translated by Jonathan Alexander from the original Greek of T. Kiessling&#x27;s edition of 1826. Online version at theio.com
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot; translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Lucian of Samosata, &quot;Dialogues of the Gods&quot; translated by Fowler, H W and F G. Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 1905. Online version at theoi.com
* Luciani Samosatensis, &quot;Opera. Vol I, Karl Jacobitz&quot;. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1896. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pindar, &quot;The Odes of Pindar including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics&quot;, &quot;Aeneid, and Georgics of Vergil&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Aeneid&quot;. Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo&quot;. Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Strabo, &quot;Geographica&quot; edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.

==Further reading==
* Kerenyi, Karl. &quot;The Gods of the Greeks&quot;. London: Thames &amp; Hudson, 1951 (pp. 158–160).

==External links==

* The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Ixion)
* Gaelle Ginestet, &quot;Ixion&quot; in &quot;A Dictionary of Shakespeare&#x27;s Classical Mythology&quot; (2009–), ed. Yves Peyré. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q271891" start="20" end="25" title="Ixion" label="Ixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="48" end="55" title="Lapiths" label="Lapiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="83" end="91" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="126" end="130" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q22155491" start="135" end="143" title="Leonteus (mythology)" label="Leonteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775067" start="148" end="154" title="Antion" label="Antion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124823290" start="159" end="167" title="Perimele" label="Perimele"/>
<link wikidata="Q831583" start="195" end="203" title="Phlegyas" label="Phlegyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="244" end="253" title="Pirithous" label="Pirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="282" end="286" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q783685" start="383" end="386" title="Dia (mythology)" label="Dia"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="490" end="501" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q178405" start="640" end="647" title="Larissa" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934183" start="873" end="888" title="Greek Anthology" label="Greek Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="948" end="955" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18479157" start="1005" end="1012" title="Phorbas" label="Phorbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q127502349" start="1017" end="1026" title="Polymelus (mythology)" label="Polymelos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1054" end="1060" title="Megara (Greek myth)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306262" start="1215" end="1220" title="Xenia (Greek)" label="xenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156296" start="1317" end="1326" title="catharsis" label="catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1557" end="1561" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="1600" end="1607" title="Mount Olympus" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="1703" end="1707" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306262" start="1750" end="1770" title="Xenia (Greek)" label="guest–host relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q624551" start="1869" end="1876" title="Nephele" label="Nephele"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534686" start="2016" end="2022" title="Imbrus" label="Imbros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606272" start="2026" end="2035" title="Centaurus (Greek mythology)" label="Centauros"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790367" start="2056" end="2065" title="Ancient Magnesia" label="Magnesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334825" start="2075" end="2087" title="Pelion" label="Mount Pelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="2126" end="2133" title="Centaur" label="Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794866" start="2237" end="2248" title="thunderbolt" label="thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="2263" end="2269" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006956" start="2289" end="2307" title="Wheel of fire" label="winged fiery wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="2475" end="2483" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="2546" end="2551" title="Greek underworld" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="2580" end="2587" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208588" start="2648" end="2656" title="Eurydice" label="Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="2832" end="2841" title="Etiology" label="aetiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q321959" start="2863" end="2877" title="Martin P. Nilsson" label="Martin Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3140" end="3146" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335634" start="3223" end="3242" title="Hiero I of Syracuse" label="Hiero I of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="3279" end="3288" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="3290" end="3299" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3304" end="3315" title="Timasitheos" label="Timasitheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="3429" end="3438" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="3568" end="3582" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102561" start="3802" end="3810" title="Sisyphus" label="Sisyphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617220" start="3813" end="3820" title="Wanyūdō" label="Wanyūdō"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="3849" end="3860" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="4162" end="4178" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="4229" end="4252" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="4270" end="4292" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="4667" end="4687" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="4873" end="4885" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="5056" end="5062" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="5173" end="5191" title="Lucian" label="Lucian of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="5776" end="5798" title="Virgil" label="Publius Vergilius Maro"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="6287" end="6293" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="6640" end="6653" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Kerenyi, Karl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83873" wikidata="Q3043296" url="?curid=83873" title="Deioneus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Deioneus (; Ancient Greek: Δηιονεύς means &quot;ravager&quot;) or Deion (; Ancient Greek: ) is a name attributed to the following individuals:

*Deioneus, king of Phocis and son of King Aeolus of Aeolia and Enarete, daughter of Deimachus. He was the brother of Salmoneus, Sisyphus, Cretheus, Perieres, Athamas, Magnes, Calyce, Canace, Alcyone, Pisidice and Perimede. By Diomede, Deioneus became the father of Cephalus, Actor, Aenetus, Phylacus, Asterodia and Philonis. After the death of his brother, Salmoneus, Deioneus took his daughter Tyro into his house, and gave her in marriage to Cretheus.
*Deioneus, the Perrhaebian father of Dia and father-in-law-to-be of Ixion, Deioneus was pushed by him into a bed of flaming coals so that Ixion wouldn&#x27;t have to pay the bride price. Also known as Eioneus.
*Deion, father of Nisus, king of Megara. Otherwise, the latter was called the son of Pandion II or Ares.
*Deioneus, an Oeachalian prince as son of King Eurytus and Antiope or Antioche, and thus brother to Iole, Toxeus, Clytius, Didaeon and Iphitos. He married Perigune, daughter of Sinis, whose father was killed by Theseus.
*Deioneus, one of the sons of Heracles and Megara.

==Notes==
== References ==

*Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Apollonius Rhodius, &quot;Argonautica&quot; translated by Robert Cooper Seaton (1853-1915), R. C. Loeb Classical Library Volume 001. London, William Heinemann Ltd, 1912. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Apollonius Rhodius, &quot;Argonautica&quot;. George W. Mooney. London. Longmans, Green. 1912. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
*Hesiod, &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; from &quot;Homeric Hymns, Epic Cycle, Homerica&quot; translated by Evelyn-White, H G. Loeb Classical Library Volume 57. London: William Heinemann, 1914. Online version at theio.com
*Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot; translated by William Henry Denham Rouse (1863-1950), from the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Nonnus of Panopolis, &quot;Dionysiaca. 3 Vols.&quot; W.H.D. Rouse. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1940–1942. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot; translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pindar, &quot;The Odes of Pindar&quot; including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Plutarch, &quot;Lives&quot; with an English Translation by Bernadotte Perrin. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. London. William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. 1. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043296" start="20" end="28" title="Deioneus" label="Deioneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="32" end="45" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043296" start="86" end="91" title="Deioneus" label="Deion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="183" end="189" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q406388" start="206" end="212" title="Aeolus (son of Hellen)" label="Aeolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247568" start="216" end="222" title="Ancient Thessaly" label="Aeolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48665" start="227" end="234" title="Enarete" label="Enarete"/>
<link wikidata="Q51955223" start="248" end="257" title="Deïmachus (mythology)" label="Deimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131643" start="281" end="290" title="Salmoneus" label="Salmoneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102561" start="292" end="300" title="Sisyphus" label="Sisyphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512492" start="302" end="310" title="Cretheus" label="Cretheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q342343" start="312" end="320" title="Perieres (king of Messenia)" label="Perieres"/>
<link wikidata="Q143880" start="322" end="329" title="Athamas" label="Athamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884324" start="331" end="337" title="Magnes (son of Aeolus)" label="Magnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106945486" start="339" end="345" title="Calyce (mythology)" label="Calyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362409" start="347" end="353" title="Canace" label="Canace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21282358" start="355" end="362" title="Alcyone and Ceyx" label="Alcyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16308145" start="364" end="372" title="Pisidice" label="Pisidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410718" start="377" end="385" title="Perimede (mythology)" label="Perimede"/>
<link wikidata="Q60032010" start="390" end="397" title="Diomede" label="Diomede"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771423" start="429" end="437" title="Cephalus" label="Cephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q557214" start="439" end="444" title="Actor (mythology)" label="Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18018199" start="446" end="453" title="Aenetus (mythology)" label="Aenetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381821" start="455" end="463" title="Phylacus" label="Phylacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627517" start="465" end="474" title="Asterodia" label="Asterodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186128" start="479" end="487" title="Philonis" label="Philonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131643" start="521" end="530" title="Salmoneus" label="Salmoneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126715" start="559" end="563" title="Tyro" label="Tyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512492" start="608" end="616" title="Cretheus" label="Cretheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q835913" start="633" end="642" title="Perrhaebi" label="Perrhaebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q783685" start="655" end="658" title="Dia (mythology)" label="Dia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271891" start="686" end="691" title="Ixion" label="Ixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="792" end="803" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349838" start="819" end="826" title="Eioneus" label="Eioneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136201" start="846" end="851" title="Nisos" label="Nisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="861" end="867" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076578" start="913" end="923" title="Pandion II" label="Pandion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="927" end="931" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558803" start="947" end="957" title="Oechalia (Euboea)" label="Oeachalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q939149" start="980" end="987" title="Eurytus of Oechalia" label="Eurytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29655227" start="992" end="999" title="Antiope (Greek myth)" label="Antiope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1003" end="1011" title="Antioche (mythology)" label="Antioche"/>
<link wikidata="Q744147" start="1033" end="1037" title="Iole" label="Iole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556040" start="1039" end="1045" title="Toxeus" label="Toxeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58337310" start="1047" end="1054" title="Clytius" label="Clytius"/>
<link wikidata="Q105805766" start="1056" end="1063" title="Didaeon" label="Didaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11955875" start="1068" end="1075" title="Iphitos" label="Iphitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022766" start="1088" end="1096" title="Perigune" label="Perigune"/>
<link wikidata="Q843335" start="1110" end="1115" title="Sinis (mythology)" label="Sinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="1144" end="1151" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1183" end="1191" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q929768" start="1196" end="1202" title="Megara (mythology)" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1234" end="1245" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="1546" end="1564" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius Rhodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1907" end="1927" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2288" end="2294" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="2509" end="2528" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2936" end="2945" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3342" end="3348" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3459" end="3465" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3748" end="3756" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83874" wikidata="Q736813" url="?curid=83874" title="Deiphobus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Deiphobus () was a son of Priam and Hecuba. He was a prince of Troy, and the greatest of Priam&#x27;s sons after Hector and Paris. Deiphobus killed four men of fame in the Trojan War.

== Description ==
Deiphobus was described by the chronicler Malalas in his account of the &quot;Chronography&quot; as &quot; above average stature, keen-eyed, somewhat snub-nosed, dark-skinned, flat-faced, brave, good beard&quot;. Meanwhile, in the account of Dares the Phrygian, he was illustrated as &quot;. . .looked like his father [i.e. a handsome face]. He was the man of forceful action&quot;.

== Mythology ==

According to the &quot;Iliad&quot; (books XII, XIV, XXII), in the Trojan War Deiphobus, along with his brother Helenus, led a group of soldiers at the siege of the newly constructed Argive wall and killed many, and wounded the Achaean hero Meriones. As Hector was fleeing Achilles, Athena took the shape of Deiphobus and goaded Hector to make a stand and fight. Hector, thinking it was his brother, listened and threw his spear at Achilles. When the spear missed, Hector turned around to ask his brother for another spear, but &quot;Deiphobus&quot; had vanished. He then looked around for him but he was nowhere to be seen. It was then Hector knew the gods had deceived and forsaken him, and he met his fate at the hand of Achilles. 

Some accounts, such as that of Dictys Cretensis, hold that it was Deiphobus and Paris who ambushed and killed Achilles while luring him to their sister Polyxena. After the death of Paris, Deiphobus was given Helen of Troy as a bride for his deeds in the war, defeating the bid of his other brother, Helenus. Euripides, in &quot;The Trojan Women&quot;, states that the marriage was by force and that Helen felt “bitterly enslaved.” When the Trojan Horse was in the city, Deiphobus accompanied Helen as she walked around the horse, calling out the names of the Greeks within in the voices of their wives. Menelaus and Odysseus had to restrain the men inside from responding. During the sack of Troy, Deiphobus was slain by either Odysseus or Menelaus, and his body was mutilated. Some accounts say it was Helen who killed him, or that she celebrated his death. Most accounts seem to indicate that, unlike her other two husbands, Helen didn&#x27;t love Deiphobus and decided she would rather return to Menelaus.

In Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Deiphobus, horribly mutilated during the sack of Troy, appears to Aeneas in the underworld. He tells him the story of his death, which entails Helen&#x27;s betrayal in signaling Menelaus to Deiphobus&#x27;s bedchamber. While with Aeneas, he begs the gods for revenge against the Greeks.

== Cultural depictions ==
* Deiphobus is a minor character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;. 
* One modern account, &quot;The Luck of Troy&quot; by Roger Lancelyn Green, depicts him as a particularly unpleasant character.
* In the &quot;&quot; episode &quot;Beware Greeks Bearing Gifts,&quot; Deiphobus is the primary villain, portrayed as betraying Troy and murdering Paris in order to win Helen for himself.

== Namesake ==
* 1867 Deiphobus, Trojan asteroid

== See also ==
* List of children of Priam

==Sources==
==References==
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital xLibrary.
*Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Aeneid.&quot; Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q736813" start="20" end="29" title="Deiphobus" label="Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744763" start="39" end="42" title="List of children of Priam" label="son"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="46" end="51" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="56" end="62" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="83" end="87" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="133" end="139" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="144" end="149" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="192" end="202" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="265" end="272" title="John Malalas" label="Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="465" end="483" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="647" end="652" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="690" end="700" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q729332" start="735" end="742" title="Helenus" label="Helenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="851" end="858" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q367819" start="864" end="872" title="Meriones (mythology)" label="Meriones"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="896" end="904" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="906" end="912" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q475001" start="1390" end="1406" title="Dictys Cretensis" label="Dictys Cretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q750236" start="1511" end="1519" title="Polyxena" label="Polyxena"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="1567" end="1580" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729332" start="1658" end="1665" title="Helenus" label="Helenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1667" end="1676" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216943" start="1687" end="1703" title="The Trojan Women" label="The Trojan Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q50193" start="1799" end="1811" title="Trojan Horse" label="Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="1962" end="1970" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="1975" end="1983" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2372" end="2378" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="2392" end="2398" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="2472" end="2478" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2756" end="2775" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="2794" end="2814" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044868" start="2877" end="2897" title="Roger Lancelyn Green" label="Roger Lancelyn Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q144976" start="3157" end="3171" title="1867 Deiphobus" label="1867 Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744763" start="3207" end="3232" title="List of children of Priam" label="List of children of Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="3262" end="3282" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3467" end="3472" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3474" end="3495" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="3833" end="3855" title="Virgil" label="Publius Vergilius Maro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83875" wikidata="Q905162" url="?curid=83875" title="Dido">
<text>Dido ( ; , ), also known as Elissa ( , ), was the legendary founder and first queen of the Phoenician city-state of Carthage (located in Tunisia), in 814 BC. 
In most accounts, she was the queen of the Phoenician city-state of Tyre (located in Lebanon) who fled tyranny to found her own city in northwest Africa.
Known only through ancient Greek and Roman sources, all of which were written well after Carthage&#x27;s founding, her historicity remains uncertain. The oldest references to Dido are attributed to Timaeus, who lived in Taormina in Sicily, and died around 260 BC, which is about five centuries after the date given for the foundation of Carthage.

Timaeus told the legends surrounding the founding of Carthage by Dido in his Sicilian &quot;History&quot;. By his account, Dido founded Carthage in 814 BC, around the same time as the foundation of Rome, and he alluded to the growing conflict between the two cities in his own day. 

Details about Dido&#x27;s character, life, and role in the founding of Carthage are best known from Virgil&#x27;s epic poem, the &quot;Aeneid,&quot; written around 31 BC and published after Virgil’s death, around 19 BC, which tells the legendary story of the Trojan hero Aeneas. Dido is described as a clever and enterprising woman who flees her ruthless and autocratic brother, Pygmalion, after discovering that he was responsible for her husband&#x27;s death. A wise leader, she founds Carthage and makes it prosper.

Dido has been an enduring figure in Western culture and art from the early Renaissance into the 21st century. In the early 20th century, she became a national symbol for Tunisia, and Tunisian women can be poetically described as &quot;Daughters of Dido&quot;.

==Name==

Many names in the legend of Dido are of Punic origin, which suggests that the first Greek authors who mention this story have taken up Phoenician accounts. One suggestion is that &quot;Dido&quot; is an epithet from the same Semitic root as &quot;David&quot;, which means &quot;Beloved&quot;. Others state Didô means &quot;the wanderer&quot;.

According to Marie-Pierre Noël, &quot;Elishat/Elisha&quot; is a name repeatedly attested on Punic votives. It is composed of
* the Punic reflex of &quot;god&quot;, which can mean the remote Phoenician creator god El, or it can be a name for God in Judaism, 
and
* &quot;‐issa&quot;, which could be either &quot;&quot; (), meaning &quot;fire&quot;, or another word for &quot;woman&quot;. 
Other works state that it is the feminine form of El. In Greek it appears as &quot;Theiossô&quot;, which translates Élissa: &quot;el&quot; becoming &quot;theos&quot;.

==Early accounts==
The person of Dido can be traced to references by Roman historians to lost writings of Timaeus of Tauromenium in Sicily (c. 356–260 BC).

Ancient historians gave various dates, both for the foundation of Carthage and the foundation of Rome. Appian, in the beginning of his &quot;Punic Wars&quot;, claims that Carthage was founded by a certain Zorus and Carchedon, but &quot;Zorus&quot; looks like an alternative transliteration of the city name &quot;Tyre,&quot; while &quot;Carchedon&quot; is just the Greek form of &quot;Carthage&quot;. Timaeus made Carchedon&#x27;s wife Elissa the sister of King Pygmalion of Tyre. Archaeological evidence of settlement on the site of Carthage before the last quarter of the 8th century BC has yet to be found. 
That the city is named (&quot;Qart-hadasht&quot;, or &quot;New City&quot;) at least indicates it was a colony.

The only surviving full account before Virgil&#x27;s treatment is that of Virgil&#x27;s contemporary Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus in his &quot;Philippic histories&quot; as rendered in a digest or epitome made by Junianus Justinus in the 3rd century AD.

Justin, quoting or paraphrasing Trogus, states (18.4–6) that a king of Tyre, whom Justin does not name, made his very beautiful daughter Dido and son Pygmalion his joint heirs. But on his death, the people took Pygmalion alone as their ruler, though Pygmalion was yet still a boy. Dido married Acerbas her uncle, who, as priest of Heracles—that is, Melqart—was second in power to King Pygmalion. 
Rumor told that Acerbas had much wealth secretly buried, and King Pygmalion had Acerbas murdered in hopes of gaining this wealth. Dido, desiring to escape Tyre, expressed a wish to move into Pygmalion&#x27;s palace, but she then ordered the attendants whom Pygmalion sent to aid in the move, to throw all Acerbas&#x27; bags of gold into the sea, apparently as an offering to his spirit. In fact, these bags contained only sand. Dido then persuaded the attendants to join her in flight to another land rather than face Pygmalion&#x27;s anger when he discovered what had supposedly become of Acerbas&#x27; wealth. Some senators also joined her in her flight.

The party arrived at Cyprus, where the priest of Jupiter joined the expedition. There, the exiles also seized about eighty young women who were prostituting themselves on the shore, in order to provide wives for the men in the party.

Eventually Dido and her followers arrived on the coast of North Africa, where Dido asked the king Iarbas for a small bit of land for a temporary refuge until she could continue her journeying, only as much land as could be encompassed by an oxhide. They agreed. Dido cut the oxhide into fine strips so that she had enough to encircle an entire nearby hill, which was therefore afterwards named &quot;Byrsa&quot; (&quot;hide&quot;). (This event is commemorated in modern mathematics: The &quot;isoperimetric problem&quot; of enclosing the maximum area within a fixed boundary is often called the &quot;Dido Problem&quot; in modern calculus of variations.) That would become their new home. Many of the locals joined the settlement, and both they and envoys from the nearby Phoenician city of Utica urged the building of a city. In digging the foundations, an ox&#x27;s head was found, indicating a city that would be wealthy but subject to others. In response to this portent, another area of the hill was dug instead, where a horse&#x27;s head was found, indicating that the city would be powerful in war.

But when the new city of Carthage had been established and become prosperous, Iarbas, a native king of the Maxitani or Mauritani (manuscripts differ), demanded Dido for his wife or he would make war on Carthage. Still, she preferred to stay faithful to her first husband, and after creating a ceremonial funeral pyre and sacrificing many victims to his spirit in pretense that this was a final honoring of her first husband in preparation for marriage to Iarbas, Dido ascended the pyre, announced that she would go to her husband as they desired, and then slew herself with her sword. After this self-sacrifice, Dido was deified and was worshipped as long as Carthage endured. In this account, the foundation of Carthage occurred 72 years before the foundation of Rome.

Servius in his commentary on Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot; gives &quot;Sicharbas&quot; as the name of Dido&#x27;s husband in early tradition.

==Historicity and dating==

The oxhide story which explains the name of the hill is most likely of Greek origin since &quot;Byrsa&quot; means &quot;oxhide&quot; in Greek, not in Punic. The name of the hill in Punic was probably just a derivation from Semitic &quot;brt&quot; &quot;fortified place&quot;. But that does not prevent other details in the story from being Carthaginian, albeit still not necessarily historical. Michael Grant in &quot;Roman Myths&quot; (1973) claims that &quot;Dido-Elissa was originally a goddess&quot;, and that she was converted from a goddess into a mortal (if still legendary) queen sometime in the later fifth century BCE by a Greek writer.

Others conjecture that Dido was indeed historical, as described in the following accounts. It is unknown who first combined the story of Dido with the tradition that connected Aeneas either with Rome or with earlier settlements from which Rome traced its origin. A fragment of an epic poem by Gnaeus Naevius who died at Utica in 201 BC includes a passage which might or might not be part of a conversation between Aeneas and Dido. Servius in his commentary (4.682; 5.4) cites Varro (1st century BC ) for a version in which Dido&#x27;s sister Anna killed herself for love of Aeneas.

Evidence for the historicity of Dido (which is a question independent of whether or not she ever met Aeneas) can be associated with evidence for the historicity of others in her family, such as her brother Pygmalion and their grandfather Balazeros. Both of these kings are mentioned, as well as Dido, in the list of Tyrian kings given in Menander of Ephesus&#x27;s list of the kings of Tyre, as preserved in Josephus&#x27;s &quot;Against Apion&quot;, i.18. Josephus ends his quotation of Menander with the sentence &quot;Now, in the seventh year of his [Pygmalion&#x27;s] reign, his sister fled away from him and built the city of Carthage in Libya.&quot;

The Nora Stone, found on Sardinia, has been interpreted by Frank Moore Cross as naming pmy[y]tn or p‘mytn, which is rendered in the Greek tradition as Pygmalion, as the king of the general who was using the stone to record his victory over the local populace. On paleographic grounds, the stone is dated to the 9th century BC. (Cross&#x27;s translation, with a longer discussion of the Nora stone, is found in the Pygmalion article). If Cross&#x27;s interpretation is correct, this presents inscriptional evidence substantiating the existence of a 9th-century-BC king of Tyre named (in Greek) Pygmalion.

Several scholars have identified Baa‘li-maanzer, the king of Tyre who gave tribute to Shalmaneser III in 841 BC, with &quot;Ba‘al-&#x27;azor&quot; (Phoenician form of the name) or &quot;Baal-Eser/Balazeros&quot; (Greek form of the name), Dido&#x27;s grandfather. This lends credibility to the account in Josephus/Menander that names the kings of Tyre from Abibaal and Hiram I down to the time of Pygmalion and Dido.

Another possible reference to Balazeros is found in the &quot;Aeneid&quot;. It was a common ancient practice of using the hypocoristicon or shortened form of the name that included only the divine element, so that the &quot;Belus&quot; that Virgil names as the father of Dido in the &quot;Aeneid&quot; may be a reference to her grandfather, Baal-Eser II/Balazeros. Classicist T. T. Duke suggests that instead it is a hypocoristicon of Mattan I, who was also known as (, &#x27;Gift of the Lord&#x27;).

Even more important than the inscriptional and literary references supporting the historicity of Pygmalion and Dido are chronological considerations that give something of a mathematical demonstration of the veracity of the major feature of the Pygmalion/Dido saga, namely the flight of Dido from Tyre in Pygmalion&#x27;s seventh year, and her eventual founding of the city of Carthage. Classical authors give two dates for the founding of Carthage. The first is that of Pompeius Trogus, mentioned above, that says this took place 72 years before the foundation of Rome. At least as early as the 1st century BC, and then later, the date most commonly used by Roman writers for the founding of Rome was 753 BC. This would place Dido&#x27;s flight in 753 + 72 = 825 BC. Another tradition, that of the Greek historian Timaeus (–260 BC), gives 814 BC for the founding of Carthage. Traditionally most modern scholars have preferred the 814 date. However, the publication of the Shalmaneser text mentioning tribute from Baal-Eser II of Tyre in 841 BC caused a re-examination of this question, since the best texts of Menander/Josephus only allow 22 years from the accession of Baal-Eser/Balazeros until the seventh year of Pygmalion, and measuring back from 814 BC would not allow any overlap of Balazeros with the 841 tribute to Shalmaneser. With the 825 date for the seventh year of Pygmalion, however, Balazeros&#x27;s last year would coincide with 841 BC, the year of the tribute. Additional evidence in favor of the 825 date is found in the statement of Menander, repeated by Josephus as corroborated from Tyrian court records (&quot;Against Apion&quot; i.17,18), that Dido&#x27;s flight (or the founding of Carthage) occurred 143 years and eight months after Hiram of Tyre sent assistance to Solomon for the building of the Temple. Using the 825 date, this Tyrian record would then date the start of Temple construction in 969 or 968 BC, in agreement with the statement in 1 Kings 6:1 that Temple construction began in Solomon&#x27;s fourth regnal year. Solomon&#x27;s fourth year can be calculated as starting in the fall of 968 BC when using the widely accepted date of 931/930 BC for the division of the kingdom after the death of Solomon. These chronological considerations therefore definitely favor the 825 date over the 814 date for Dido&#x27;s departure from Tyre. More than that, the agreement of this date with the timing of the tribute to Shalmaneser and the year when construction of the First Temple began provide evidence for the essential historicity of at least the existence of Pygmalion and Dido as well as their rift in 825 BC that eventually led to the founding of Carthage.

According to J. M. Peñuela, the difference in the two dates for the foundation of Carthage has an explanation if we understand that Dido fled Tyre in 825 BC, but eleven years elapsed before she was given permission by the original inhabitants to build a city on the mainland, years marked by conflict in which the Tyrians first built a small city on an island in the harbor. Additional information about Dido&#x27;s activities after leaving Tyre are found in the Pygmalion article, along with a summary of later scholars who have accepted Peñuela&#x27;s thesis.

If chronological considerations thus help to establish the basic historicity of Dido, they also serve to refute the idea that she could have had any liaison with Aeneas. Aeneas fought in the Trojan War, which is conventionally dated anywhere from the 14th to the 12th centuries BC, far too early for Aeneas to have been alive in the time of Dido. Even with the date of 864 BC that historical revisionist David Rohl gives for the end of the Trojan War, Aeneas would have been about 77 years old when Dido fled Tyre in 825 BC and 88 when she began to build Carthage in 814 (following Peñuela&#x27;s reconstruction), hardly consistent with the romantic intrigues between Dido and Aeneas imagined by Virgil in the &quot;Aeneid&quot;. According to Velleius Paterculus, Cádiz and Utica (roughly meaning &quot;Old Town&quot; opposed to Carthage meaning &quot;New Town&quot;) were founded more than 80 years after the Trojan War and before Carthage which he claimed was founded 65 years before Rome (753 + 65 = 818 BC).

==Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;==

Virgil&#x27;s references in the &quot;Aeneid&quot; generally agree with what Justin&#x27;s epitome of Trogus recorded. Virgil names Belus as Dido&#x27;s father, this Belus sometimes being called Belus II by later commentators to distinguish him from Belus son of Poseidon and Libya in earlier Greek mythology. Classicist T. T. Duke suggests that this is a hypocoristicon of the historical father of Pygmalion and Dido, Mattan I, also known as (, &#x27;Gift of the Lord&#x27;).Virgil (1.343f) adds that the marriage between Dido and Sychaeus, as Virgil calls Dido&#x27;s husband, occurred while her father was still alive. Pygmalion slew Sychaeus secretly due to his wealth and Sychaeus appeared to Dido in a dream in which he told the truth about his death, urged her to flee the country, and revealed to her where his gold was buried. She left with those who hated or feared Pygmalion. None of these details contradicts Justin&#x27;s epitome, but Virgil very much changes the import and many details of the story when he brings Aeneas and his followers to Carthage.

(1.657f) Dido and Aeneas fall in love by the management of Juno and Venus, acting in concert, though for different reasons. (4.198f) When the rumour of the love affair comes to King Iarbas the Gaetulian, &quot;a son of Jupiter Ammon by a raped Garamantian nymph&quot;, Iarbas prays to his father, blaming Dido who has scorned marriage with him yet now takes Aeneas into the country as her lord. (4.222f) Jupiter dispatches Mercury to send Aeneas on his way and the pious Aeneas sadly obeys. Mercury tells Aeneas of all the promising Italian lands and orders Aeneas to get his fleet ready.

(4.450f) Dido can no longer bear to live. (4.474) She has her sister Anna build her a pyre under the pretence of burning all that reminded her of Aeneas, including weapons and clothes that Aeneas had left behind and (what she calls) their bridal bed (though, according to Aeneas, they were never officially married.) (4.584f) When Dido sees Aeneas&#x27; fleet leaving she curses him and his Trojans and proclaims endless hate between Carthage and the descendants of Troy, foreshadowing the Punic Wars. (4.642) Dido ascends the pyre, lies again on the couch which she had shared with Aeneas, and then falls on a sword that Aeneas had given her. (4.666) Those watching let out a cry; Anna rushes in and embraces her dying sister; Juno sends Iris from heaven to release Dido&#x27;s spirit from her body. (5.1) From their ships, Aeneas and his crew see the glow of Dido&#x27;s burning funeral pyre and can only guess what has happened. At least two scholars have argued that the inclusion of the pyre as part of Dido&#x27;s suicide—otherwise unattested in epic and tragedy—alludes to the self-immolation that took the life of Carthage&#x27;s last queen (or the wife of its general Hasdrubal the Boetharch) in 146 BC.

(6.450f) During his journey in the underworld Aeneas meets Dido and tries to excuse himself, but Dido does not deign to look at him. Instead she turns away from Aeneas to a grove where her former husband Sychaeus waits.

Virgil has included most of the motifs from the original: Iarbas who desires Dido against her will, a deceitful explanation for the building of the pyre, and Dido&#x27;s final suicide. In both versions Dido is loyal to her original husband in the end. But whereas the earlier Elissa remained always loyal to her husband&#x27;s memory, Virgil&#x27;s Dido dies as a tortured and repentant woman who has fallen away from that loyalty.

Virgil consistently uses the form &quot;Dido&quot; as nominative, but derivates of &quot;Elissa&quot; for the oblique cases.

==Later Roman tradition==
Letter 7 of Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Heroides&quot; is a fictional letter from Dido to Aeneas written just before she ascends the pyre. The situation is as in Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;. In Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Fasti&quot; (3.545f) Ovid introduced a kind of sequel involving Aeneas and Dido&#x27;s sister Anna. See Anna Perenna.

The Barcids, the family to which Hannibal belonged, claimed descent from a younger brother of Dido according to Silius Italicus in his &quot;Punica&quot; (1.71–7).

The &quot;Augustan History&quot; (&quot;Tyranni Triginta&quot; 27, 30) claims that Zenobia, queen of Palmyra in the late third century, was descended from Cleopatra, Dido and Semiramis.

==Continuing tradition==

In the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, Dante puts the shade of Dido in the second circle of Hell, where she is condemned (on account of her consuming lust) to be blasted for eternity in a fierce whirlwind.

This legend inspired the Renaissance drama &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot; by Christopher Marlowe.

William Shakespeare refers to Dido twelve times in his plays: four times in &quot;The Tempest&quot;, albeit all in one dialogue, twice in &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot;, and also in &quot;Henry VI Part 2&quot;, &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;, &quot;Hamlet&quot;, &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; and, most famously, in &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, in Lorenzo&#x27;s and Jessica&#x27;s mutual wooing:

The story of Dido and Aeneas remained popular throughout the post-Renaissance era and was the basis for many operas, with the libretto by Metastasio, &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot;, proving especially popular with composers throughout the eighteenth century and beyond:

* 1641: &quot;La Didone&quot; by Francesco Cavalli
* 1656: &quot;La Didone&quot; by Andrea Mattioli
* 1689: &quot;Dido and Aeneas&quot; by Henry Purcell
* 1693: &quot;Didon&quot; by Henry Desmarets
* 1707: &quot;Dido, Königin von Carthago&quot; by Christoph Graupner
* 1724: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Domenico Sarro
* 1726: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Leonardo Vinci
* 1740: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Baldassare Galuppi
* 1742: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Johann Adolph Hasse
* 1747: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Niccolò Jommelli
* 1762: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Giuseppe Sarti
* 1770: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Niccolò Piccinni
* 1783: &quot;Didon&quot; by Niccolò Piccinni
* 1823: &quot;Didone abbandonata&quot; by Saverio Mercadante
* 1860: &quot;Les Troyens&quot; by Hector Berlioz
* 2007: &quot;Aeneas and Dido&quot; by James Rolfe (composer)

Also from the 17th century is a ballad inspired by the relationship between Dido and Aeneas. The ballad, often printed on a broadside, is called &quot;The Wandering Prince of Troy&quot;, and it alters the end of the relationship between the two lovers, rethinking Dido&#x27;s final sentiment for Aeneas and rewriting Aeneas&#x27;s visit to the underworld as Dido&#x27;s choice to haunt him.
In 1794 Germany, Charlotte von Stein wrote her own drama named &quot;Dido&quot;, with an autobiographical element—as von Stein had been forsaken by her own lover, the famous Goethe, in a manner which she found reminiscent of Aeneas.

Will Adams&#x27; 2014 thriller &quot;The City of the Lost&quot; assumes that Dido fled only as far as Cyprus and founded a city on the site of modern Famagusta, that she died there and that Carthage was founded later, when Dido&#x27;s followers fled further west after a vengeful expedition arrived from Tyre. In this interpretation, the two flights - from Tyre to Cyprus and from Cyprus to Carthage - were combined in later historical memory and all attributed to Dido. In Adams&#x27; account, the startling discovery of Dido&#x27;s hideout and her well-preserved body happens accidentally during an attempted Coup D&#x27;etat by Turkish Army officers based in Cyprus. 

In another modern interpretation, Dido appears in Sid Meier&#x27;s strategy games &quot;Civilization II&quot; and &quot;Civilization V&quot;, as the leader of the Carthaginian civilization, although she appears alongside Hannibal in the former. In Civilization V, she speaks Phoenician, with a modern Israeli accent. In 2019, Dido was made the leader of Phoenicia in &quot;Civilization VI: Gathering Storm&quot;, with Tyre as its capital and Carthage as an available name for subsequent cities.

In honor of Dido, the asteroid 209 Dido, discovered in 1879, was named after her. Another dedication of Queen Dido is the Mount Dido in Antarctica.

Remembrance of the story of the bull&#x27;s hide and the foundation of Carthage is preserved in mathematics in connection with the Isoperimetric problem which is sometimes called Dido&#x27;s Problem (and similarly the Isoperimetric theorem is sometimes called Dido&#x27;s Theorem). It is sometimes stated in such discussion that Dido caused her thong to be placed as a half circle touching the sea coast at each end (which would add greatly to the area) but the sources mention the thong only and say nothing about the sea.

Carthage was the Roman Republic&#x27;s greatest rival and enemy, and Virgil&#x27;s Dido in part symbolises this. Even though no Rome existed in her day, Virgil&#x27;s Dido curses the future progeny of the Trojans. In Italy during the Fascist administration of the 1920s to 1940s, she was regarded as a rival and sometimes negative figure, perhaps not only as a symbol of Rome&#x27;s nemesis, but because she represented together at least three other unpleasant qualities: her reputation for promiscuity, her &quot;Semitic race&quot;, and for being a symbol of Rome&#x27;s erstwhile rival Carthage. As an example, when the streets of new quarters in Rome were named after the characters of Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, only the name &quot;Dido&quot; did not appear.

Tunisian currency depicting Dido (Elissa) was issued in 2006.

==Notes==
==Selected bibliography==

* H. Akbar Khan, &quot;&quot;Doctissima Dido&quot;: Etymology, Hospitality and the Construction of a Civilized Identity&quot;, 2002.
* Elmer Bagby Atwood, &quot;Two Alterations of Virgil in Chaucer&#x27;s Dido&quot;, 1938.
* S. Conte, &quot;Dido sine veste&quot;, 2005.
* R. S. Conway, &quot;The Place of Dido in History&quot;, 1920.
* F. Della Corte, &quot;La Iuno-Astarte virgiliana&quot;, 1983.
* G. De Sanctis, &quot;Storia dei Romani&quot;, 1916.
* M. Fantar, &quot;Carthage, la prestigieuse cité d&#x27;Elissa&quot;, 1970.
* L. Foucher, &quot;Les Phéniciens à Carthage ou la geste d&#x27;Elissa&quot;, 1978.
* Michael Grant, &quot;Roman Myths&quot;, 1973.
* M. Gras/P. Rouillard/J. Teixidor, &quot;L&#x27;univers phénicien&quot;, 1995.
* H.D. Gray, &quot;Did Shakespeare write a tragedy of Dido?&quot;, 1920.
* G. Herm, &quot;Die Phönizier&quot;, 1974.
* T. Kailuweit, &quot;Dido – Didon – Didone. Eine kommentierte Bibliographie zum Dido-Mythos in Literatur und Musik&quot;, 2005.
* R.C. Ketterer, &quot;The perils of Dido: sorcery and melodrama in Vergil&#x27;s Aeneid IV and Purcell&#x27;s Dido and Aeneas&quot;, 1992.
* R.H. Klausen, &quot;Aeneas und die Penaten&quot;, 1839.
* G. Kowalski, &quot;&quot;, 1929.
* A. La Penna, Didone, in Enciclopedia Virgiliana, II, 1985, 48–57
* F.N. Lees, &quot;Dido Queen of Carthage and The Tempest&quot;, 1964.
* J.-Y. Maleuvre, &quot;Contre-Enquête sur la mort de Didon&quot;, 2003.
* J.-Y. Maleuvre, &quot;La mort de Virgile d’après Horace et Ovide&quot;, 1993;
* L. Mangiacapre, &quot;Didone non è morta&quot;, 1990.
* P.E. McLane, &quot;The Death of a Queen: Spencer&#x27;s Dido as Elizabeth&quot;, 1954.
* O. Meltzer, &quot;Geschichte der Karthager&quot;, 1879.
* A. Michel, &quot;Virgile et la politique impériale: un courtisan ou un philosophe?&quot;, 1971.
* R.C. Monti, &quot;The Dido Episode and the Aeneid: Roman Social and Political Values in the Epic&quot;, 1981.
* S. Moscati, &quot;Chi furono i Fenici. Identità storica e culturale di un popolo protagonista dell&#x27;antico mondo mediterraneo&quot;, 1992.
* R. Neuse, &quot;Book VI as Conclusion to The Faerie Queene&quot;, 1968.
* 
* Adam Parry, &quot;The Two Voices of Virgil&#x27;s Aeneid&quot;, 1963.
* G.K. Paster, &quot;Montaigne, Dido and The Tempest: &quot;How Came That Widow In?&quot;, 1984.
* B. Schmitz, &quot;Ovide, In Ibin: un oiseau impérial&quot;, 2004;
* E. Stampini, &quot;Alcune osservazioni sulla leggenda di Enea e Didone nella letteratura romana&quot;, 1893; 
* A. Ziosi, Didone regina di Cartagine di Christopher Marlowe. Metamorfosi virgiliane nel Cinquecento, 2015;
* A. Ziosi, Didone. La tragedia dell&#x27;abbandono. Variazioni sul mito (Virgilio, Ovidio, Boccaccio, Marlowe, Metastasio, Ungaretti, Brodskij), 2017.

==Primary sources==
*Virgil, &quot;Aeneid i.338–368&quot;
*Justinus, &quot;Epitome Historiarum philippicarum Pompei Trogi xviii.4.1–6, 8&quot;

==External links==

Selected English texts 
* (Contains Justin (18.3–6) relating the early story of Elissa in full.)
* Translation of Virgil&#x27;s works including the &quot;Aeneid&quot; by A. S. Kline
* Ovid&#x27;s imagined letter from Dido to Aeneas, trans. Miceal F. Vaughan (See also Ovid.)
* Appian, &quot;The Punic Wars&quot;, chapter 1 (See also Appian.)
* Dido, Queen of Carthage , original text, modernization, and discussion of Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;Legend of Dido&quot;
* &quot;The Tragedy of Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;, by Christopher Marlowe (and Thomas Nashe?). (See also Christopher Marlowe.)
Commentary
* Greek Mythology Link: Dido
* Queen Dido: Didone Liberata (Mostly about a new four-act play by Salvatore Conte; it contains also a confutation of the well-known suicide into a subjective vision of Aeneas and his &quot;comites&quot; – 4.664, followed by Dido&#x27;s catabasis)
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (about 900 images related to the Aeneid – Dido appears in Books I and IV)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="0" end="4" title="Dido" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="28" end="34" title="Dido" label="Elissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="91" end="100" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="116" end="124" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="137" end="144" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="227" end="231" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="244" end="251" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="332" end="345" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="350" end="355" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q367298" start="511" end="518" title="Timaeus (historian)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199952" start="533" end="541" title="Taormina" label="Taormina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="545" end="551" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1045" end="1051" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="1059" end="1063" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="1080" end="1086" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1204" end="1210" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="1216" end="1222" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879787" start="1324" end="1333" title="Pygmalion of Tyre" label="Pygmalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1540" end="1551" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853208" start="1635" end="1642" title="Tunisian nationalism" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="1776" end="1781" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="1960" end="1972" title="Semitic root" label="Semitic root"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="1982" end="1987" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="2171" end="2176" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="2292" end="2294" title="El (deity)" label="El"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2309" end="2334" title="names of God in Judaism#El" label="a name for God in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="2724" end="2737" title="lost writings" label="lost writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="2895" end="2901" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879787" start="3254" end="3271" title="Pygmalion of Tyre" label="Pygmalion of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q316119" start="3616" end="3638" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="3721" end="3738" title="Junianus Justinus" label="Junianus Justinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="3763" end="3769" title="Justin (historian)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="3834" end="3838" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q367565" start="4057" end="4064" title="Acerbas" label="Acerbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="4094" end="4102" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="4112" end="4119" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="4867" end="4874" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655701" start="5151" end="5157" title="Iarbas" label="Iarbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q617417" start="5546" end="5567" title="isoperimetric problem" label="isoperimetric problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="5683" end="5705" title="calculus of variations" label="calculus of variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="5825" end="5834" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166523" start="5844" end="5849" title="Utica, Tunisia" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="6472" end="6476" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="6931" end="6938" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="6980" end="6986" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="7255" end="7260" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="7328" end="7335" title="Semitic root" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351047" start="7500" end="7513" title="Michael Grant (author)" label="Michael Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212667" start="8046" end="8060" title="Gnaeus Naevius" label="Gnaeus Naevius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="8184" end="8191" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="8229" end="8234" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175868" start="8674" end="8693" title="Menander of Ephesus" label="Menander of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="8744" end="8752" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q331135" start="8766" end="8779" title="Against Apion" label="Against Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q643314" start="8997" end="9007" title="Nora Stone" label="Nora Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343665" start="9052" end="9069" title="Frank Moore Cross" label="Frank Moore Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q211928" start="9684" end="9699" title="Shalmaneser III" label="Shalmaneser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561954" start="9784" end="9803" title="Baal-Eser II" label="Baal-Eser/Balazeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603889" start="9954" end="9961" title="Abibaal" label="Abibaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q467115" start="9966" end="9973" title="Hiram I" label="Hiram I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="10137" end="10151" title="hypocoristicon" label="hypocoristicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="10380" end="10390" title="Classicist" label="Classicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q888557" start="10450" end="10458" title="Mattan I" label="Mattan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316119" start="10988" end="11003" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus" label="Pompeius Trogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367298" start="11332" end="11339" title="Timaeus (historian)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q331135" start="12150" end="12163" title="Against Apion" label="Against Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q467115" start="12276" end="12281" title="Hiram I" label="Hiram"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="12309" end="12316" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="13938" end="13944" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="13967" end="13977" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q94111" start="14180" end="14190" title="David Rohl" label="David Rohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="14472" end="14478" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q316098" start="14519" end="14538" title="Velleius Paterculus" label="Velleius Paterculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="14540" end="14545" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166523" start="14550" end="14555" title="Utica, Tunisia" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q743216" start="15022" end="15030" title="Belus II" label="Belus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q617753" start="15077" end="15082" title="Belus (Egyptian)" label="Belus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="15090" end="15098" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129914" start="15103" end="15108" title="Libya (mythology)" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="15120" end="15135" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="15183" end="15197" title="hypocoristicon" label="hypocoristicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q888557" start="15246" end="15254" title="Mattan I" label="Mattan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q367565" start="15359" end="15367" title="Sychaeus" label="Sychaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="15954" end="15958" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="15963" end="15968" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655701" start="16077" end="16083" title="Iarbas" label="Iarbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="16139" end="16150" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="16318" end="16325" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="16757" end="16763" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="16951" end="16955" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="16975" end="16985" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q184570" start="17224" end="17228" title="Iris (mythology)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q543827" start="17662" end="17685" title="Hasdrubal the Boetharch" label="Hasdrubal the Boetharch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233197" start="18463" end="18475" title="oblique case" label="oblique case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="18517" end="18521" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q539796" start="18816" end="18828" title="Anna Perenna" label="Anna Perenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q808280" start="18835" end="18842" title="Barcids" label="Barcids"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="18864" end="18872" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316123" start="18943" end="18958" title="Silius Italicus" label="Silius Italicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="19006" end="19022" title="Augustan History" label="Augustan History"/>
<link wikidata="Q189705" start="19079" end="19086" title="Zenobia" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="19097" end="19104" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="19151" end="19160" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q103960" start="19171" end="19180" title="Semiramis" label="Semiramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="19222" end="19235" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192097" start="19399" end="19408" title="whirlwind" label="whirlwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q857989" start="19460" end="19483" title="Dido, Queen of Carthage (play)" label="Dido, Queen of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="19493" end="19512" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="19515" end="19534" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="19597" end="19608" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="19659" end="19675" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236216" start="19701" end="19716" title="Henry VI Part 2" label="Henry VI Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="19730" end="19750" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="19764" end="19770" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="19784" end="19800" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="19814" end="19844" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="19880" end="19902" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q29473" start="20101" end="20111" title="Metastasio" label="Metastasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027260" start="20119" end="20137" title="Didone abbandonata" label="Didone abbandonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974804" start="20248" end="20257" title="Didone (opera)" label="La Didone"/>
<link wikidata="Q108062" start="20267" end="20284" title="Francesco Cavalli" label="Francesco Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q746646" start="20348" end="20363" title="Dido and Aeneas" label="Dido and Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="20373" end="20386" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274228" start="20401" end="20406" title="Didon (Desmarets)" label="Didon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345283" start="20416" end="20431" title="Henry Desmarets" label="Henry Desmarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q115067" start="20482" end="20500" title="Christoph Graupner" label="Christoph Graupner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237262" start="20543" end="20557" title="Domenico Sarro" label="Domenico Sarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29577" start="20600" end="20614" title="Leonardo Vinci" label="Leonardo Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q208338" start="20657" end="20675" title="Baldassare Galuppi" label="Baldassare Galuppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164732" start="20718" end="20737" title="Johann Adolph Hasse" label="Johann Adolph Hasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q312891" start="20780" end="20796" title="Niccolò Jommelli" label="Niccolò Jommelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707035" start="20811" end="20829" title="Didone abbandonata (Sarti)" label="Didone abbandonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q455199" start="20839" end="20853" title="Giuseppe Sarti" label="Giuseppe Sarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q310687" start="20896" end="20912" title="Niccolò Piccinni" label="Niccolò Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884071" start="20927" end="20932" title="Didon (Piccinni)" label="Didon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313980" start="21001" end="21019" title="Saverio Mercadante" label="Saverio Mercadante"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="21034" end="21045" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="21055" end="21069" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142381" start="21109" end="21131" title="James Rolfe (composer)" label="James Rolfe (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="21165" end="21171" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="21257" end="21266" title="broadside (music)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209979" start="21284" end="21312" title="The Wandering Prince of Troy" label="The Wandering Prince of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q64201" start="21541" end="21560" title="Charlotte von Stein" label="Charlotte von Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="21698" end="21704" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="21749" end="21755" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="21780" end="21788" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="21860" end="21866" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193190" start="21908" end="21917" title="Famagusta" label="Famagusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="22369" end="22385" title="Coup D&amp;#x27;etat" label="Coup D&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954282" start="22389" end="22401" title="Turkish Army" label="Turkish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q92616" start="22480" end="22489" title="Sid Meier" label="Sid Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q845290" start="22518" end="22533" title="Civilization II" label="Civilization II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385" start="22550" end="22564" title="Civilization V" label="Civilization V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385" start="22678" end="22692" title="Civilization V" label="Civilization V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="22784" end="22793" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22803" end="22835" title="Civilization VI: Gathering Storm" label="Civilization VI: Gathering Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q147462" start="22957" end="22965" title="209 Dido" label="209 Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246713" start="23048" end="23058" title="Mount Dido" label="Mount Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="23062" end="23072" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q617417" start="23206" end="23227" title="Isoperimetry" label="Isoperimetric problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="23617" end="23631" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="23817" end="23856" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Italy during the Fascist administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="24108" end="24132" title="Semitic people" label="&amp;quot;Semitic race&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602" start="24371" end="24388" title="Tunisian dinar" label="Tunisian currency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24606" end="24624" title="Elmer Bagby Atwood" label="Elmer Bagby Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349703" start="24743" end="24755" title="R. S. Conway" label="R. S. Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q21524298" start="26620" end="26630" title="Adam Parry" label="Adam Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="27429" end="27435" title="Junianus Justinus" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27563" end="27574" title="A. S. Kline" label="A. S. Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="27661" end="27665" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="27726" end="27732" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="27811" end="27818" title="Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="27961" end="27980" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83877" wikidata="Q194517" url="?curid=83877" title="Enema">
<text>An enema, also known as a clyster, is the rectal administration of a fluid by injection into the lower bowel via the anus. The word &quot;enema&quot; can also refer to the liquid injected, as well as to a device for administering such an injection.

In standard medicine, the most frequent uses of enemas are to relieve constipation and for bowel cleansing before a medical examination or procedure; also, they are employed as a lower gastrointestinal series (also called a barium enema), to treat traveler&#x27;s diarrhea, as a vehicle for the administration of food, water or medicine, as a stimulant to the general system, as a local application and, more rarely, as a means of reducing body temperature, as treatment for encopresis, and as a form of rehydration therapy (proctoclysis) in patients for whom intravenous therapy is not applicable.

== Medical usage ==

The principal medical usages of enemas are:

=== Bowel cleansing ===
==== Acute treatments ====
As bowel stimulants, enemas are employed for the same purposes as orally administered laxatives: to relieve constipation; to treat fecal impaction; to empty the colon prior to a medical procedure such as a colonoscopy. When oral laxatives are not indicated or are not sufficiently effective, enemas may be a sensible and necessary measure.

A large volume enema can be given to cleanse as much of the colon as possible of feces. However, a low enema is generally useful only for stool in the rectum, not in the intestinal tract.

Such enemas&#x27; mechanism consists of the volume of the liquid causing a rapid expansion of the intestinal tract in conjunction with, in the case of certain solutions, irritation of the intestinal mucosa which stimulates peristalsis and lubricates the stool to encourage a bowel movement. An enema&#x27;s efficacy depends on several factors including the volume injected and the temperature and the contents of the infusion. In order for the enema to be effective the patient should retain the solution for five to ten minutes, as tolerated. or, as some nursing textbooks recommend, for five to fifteen minutes or as long as possible.

===== Large volume enemas =====

For emptying the entire colon as much as feasible deeper and higher enemas are utilized to reach large sections of the colon. The colon dilates and expands when a large volume of liquid is injected into it, and the colon reacts to that sudden expansion with general contractions, peristalsis, propelling its contents toward the rectum.

Soapsuds enema is a frequently used synonym for a large volume enema (although soap is not necessary for effectivity).

For relieving occasional constipation, a large volume enema may be used in a home setting, although for recurring or severe cases of constipation medical care may be required.

====== Water-based solutions ======

Plain water can be used, simply functioning mechanically to expand the colon, thus prompting evacuation.

Normal saline is least irritating to the colon. Like plain water, it simply functions mechanically to expand the colon, but having a neutral concentration gradient, it neither draws electrolytes from the body, as happens with plain water, nor draws water into the colon, as occurs with phosphates. Thus, a salt water solution can be used when a longer period of retention is desired, such as to soften an impaction.

Castile soap is commonly added because its irritation of the colon&#x27;s lining increases the urgency to defecate. However, liquid handsoaps and detergents should not be used.

Glycerol is a specific bowel mucosa irritant serving to induce peristalsis via a hyperosmotic effect. It is used in a dilute solution, e.g., 5%.

====== Other solutions ======

Equal parts of milk and molasses heated together to slightly above normal body temperature have been used. Neither the milk sugars and proteins nor the molasses are absorbed in the lower intestine, thus keeping the water from the enema in the intestine. Studies have shown that milk and molasses enemas have a low complication rate when used in the emergency department and are safe and effective with minimal side effects.

Mineral oil functions as a lubricant and stool softener, but may have side effects including rectal skin irritation and leakage of oil.

===== Micro-enemas =====
====== ATC codes for drugs for constipation — enemas ======
:A06AG01 Sodium phosphate
:A06AG02 Bisacodyl
:A06AG03 Dantron, including combinations
:A06AG04 Glycerol
:A06AG06 Oil
:A06AG07 Sorbitol
:A06AG10 Docusate sodium, including combinations
:A06AG11 Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate, including combinations
:A06AG20 Combinations

====== Single substance solutions ======
&quot;In alphabetical order&quot;

* Arachis oil (peanut oil) enema is useful for softening stools which are impacted higher than the rectum.
* Bisacodyl stimulates enteric nerves to cause colonic contractions.
* Dantron is a stimulant drug and stool softener used alone or in combinations in enemas. Considered to be a carcinogen its use is limited, e.g., restricted in the UK to patients who already have a diagnosis of terminal cancer and not used at all in the USA.
* Docusate
* Glycerol has a hyperosmotic effect and can be used as a small-volume (2–10 ml) enema (or suppository).
* Mineral oil is used as a lubricant because most of the ingested material is excreted in the stool rather than being absorbed by the body.
* Sodium phosphate. Also known by the brand name Fleet. Available at drugstores; usually self-administered. Buffered sodium phosphate solution draws additional water from the bloodstream into the colon to increase the effectiveness of the enema. But it can be rather irritating to the colon, causing intense cramping or &quot;griping.&quot; Fleet enemas usually causes a bowel movement in 1 to 5 minutes. Known adverse effects.
* Sorbitol pulls water into the large intestines causing distention, thereby stimulating the normal forward movement of the bowels. Sorbitol is found in some dried fruits and may contribute to the laxative effects of prunes. and is available for taking orally as a laxative. As an enema for constipation, the recommended adult dose is 120 mL of 25-30% solution, administered once. Note that Sorbitol is an ingredient of the MICROLAX Enema.

====== Compounded from multiple ingredients ======
&quot;In alphabetical order of the original brand names&quot;

Klyx contains docusate sodium 1 mg/mL and sorbitol solution (70%)(crystallising) 357 mg/mL and is used for faecal impaction or constipation or for colon evacuation prior medical procedures, developed by Ferring B.V.

Micralax (not to be confused with MICROLAX®)

MICROLAX® (not to be confused with Micralax) combines the action of sodium citrate, a peptidising agent which can displace bound water present in the faeces, with sodium alkyl sulphoacetate, a wetting agent, and with glycerol, an anal mucosa irritant and hyperosmotic. However, also sold under the name &quot;Micralax&quot;, is a preparation containing sorbitol rather than glycerol; which was initially tested in preparation for sigmoidoscopy.

Micolette Micro-enema® contains 45 mg sodium lauryl sulphoacetate, 450 mg per 5 ml sodium citrate BP, and 625 mg glycerol BP and is a small volume stimulant enema suitable where large-volume enemas are contra-indicated.

==== Chronic treatments ====
===== Transanal irrigation =====

&quot;TAI&quot;, also termed &quot;retrograde irrigation&quot;, is designed to assist evacuation using a water enema as a treatment for persons with bowel dysfunction, including fecal incontinence or constipation, especially obstructed defecation. By regularly emptying the bowel using transanal irrigation, controlled bowel function is often re-established to a high degree, thus enabling development of a consistent bowel routine. Its effectiveness varies considerably, some individuals experiencing complete control of incontinence but others reporting little or no benefit.

An international consensus on when and how to use transanal irrigation for people with bowel problems was published in 2013, offering practitioners a clear, comprehensive and simple guide to practice for the emerging therapeutic area of transanal irrigation.

The term &quot;retrograde irrigation&quot; distinguishes this procedure from the Malone antegrade continence enema, where irrigation fluid is introduced into the colon proximal to the anus via a surgically created irrigation port.

===== Bowel management =====

Patients who have a bowel disability, a medical condition which impairs control of defecation, e.g., fecal incontinence or constipation, can use bowel management techniques to choose a predictable time and place to evacuate. Without bowel management, such persons might either suffer from the feeling of not getting relief, or they might soil themselves.

While simple techniques might include a controlled diet and establishing a toilet routine, a daily enema can be taken to empty the colon, thus preventing unwanted and uncontrolled bowel movements that day.

=== Contrast (X-ray) ===

In a lower gastrointestinal series an enema that may contain barium sulfate powder or a water-soluble contrast agent is used in the radiological imaging of the bowel. Called a &quot;barium enema&quot;, such enemas are sometimes the only practical way to &quot;view&quot; the colon in a relatively safe manner.

Failure to expel all of the barium may cause constipation or possible impaction and a patient who has no bowel movement for more than two days or is unable to pass gas rectally should promptly inform a physician and may require an enema or laxative.

=== Medication administration ===

The administration of substances into the bloodstream. This may be done in situations where it is undesirable or impossible to deliver a medication by mouth, such as antiemetics given to reduce nausea (though not many antiemetics are delivered by enema). Additionally, several anti-angiogenic agents, which work better without digestion, can be safely administered via a gentle enema.

The topical administration of medications into the rectum, such as corticosteroids and mesalazine used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Administration by enema avoids having the medication pass through the entire gastrointestinal tract, therefore simplifying the delivery of the medication to the affected area and limiting the amount that is absorbed into the bloodstream.

Rectal corticosteroid enemas are sometimes used to treat mild or moderate ulcerative colitis. They also may be used along with systemic (oral or injection) corticosteroids or other medicines to treat severe disease or mild to moderate disease that has spread too far to be treated effectively by medicine inserted into the rectum alone.

=== Inhibiting pathological defecation ===
* Traveller&#x27;s diarrhea&#x27;s symptoms treated with an enema of sodium butyrate, organic acids, and A-300 silicon dioxide can be successfully decreased with lack of observed side effects.
* Shigellosis treatment benefits from adjunct therapy with butyrate enemas, promoting healing of the rectal mucosa and inflammation, but not helping in clinical recovery from shigellosis. Use of an 80 ml of a sodium butyrate isotonic enema administered every 12 hours has been studied and found effective.

=== Other ===
* There have been a few cases in remote or rural settings, where rectal fluids have been used to rehydrate a person. Benefits include not needing to use sterile fluids.
* Introducing healthy bacterial flora through infusion of stool, known as a fecal microbiota transplant, was first performed in 1958 employing retention enemas. Enemas remained the most common method until 1989, when alternative means of administration were developed. As of 2013, colonoscope implantation has been preferred over fecal enemas because by using the former method, the entire colon and ileum can be inoculated, but enemas reach only to the splenic flexure.
* A patient unable to be fed otherwise can be nourished by an enteral administration of predigested foods, which is known as a nutrient enema. This treatment is ancient, dating back at least to the second century CE when documented by Galen, and commonly used in the Middle Ages, remaining a common technique in 19th century, and as recently as 1941 the U. S. military&#x27;s manual for hospital diets prescribes their use. Nutrient enemas have been superseded in modern medical care by tube feeding and intravenous feeding.
* Enemas have been used around the time of childbirth; however, there is no evidence that this practice is beneficial and it is now discouraged.

== Adverse effects ==

Improper administration of an enema can cause electrolyte imbalance (with repeated enemas) or ruptures to the bowel or rectal tissues which can be unnoticed as the rectum is insensitive to pain, resulting in internal bleeding. However, these occurrences are rare in healthy, sober adults. Internal bleeding or rupture may leave the individual exposed to infections from intestinal bacteria. Blood resulting from tears in the colon may not always be visible, but can be distinguished if the feces are unusually dark or have a red hue. If intestinal rupture is suspected, medical assistance should be obtained immediately. Frequent use of enemas can cause laxative dependency.

The enema tube and solution may stimulate the vagus nerve, which may trigger an arrhythmia such as bradycardia.

Enemas should not be used if there is an undiagnosed abdominal pain since the peristalsis of the bowel can cause an inflamed appendix to rupture.

There are arguments both for and against colonic irrigation in people with diverticulitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn&#x27;s disease, severe or internal hemorrhoids or tumors in the rectum or colon, and its usage is not recommended soon after bowel surgery (unless directed by one&#x27;s health care provider). Regular treatments should be avoided by people with heart disease or kidney failure. Colonics are inappropriate for people with bowel, rectal or anal pathologies where the pathology contributes to the risk of bowel perforation.

Recent research has shown that ozone water, which is sometimes used in enemas, can immediately cause microscopic colitis.

A recent case series of 11 patients with five deaths illustrated the danger of phosphate enemas in high-risk patients.

== History ==

=== Etymology ===

&quot;Enema&quot; entered the English language c. 1675 from Latin in which, in the 15th century, it was first used in the sense of a rectal injection, from Greek ἔνεμα (énema), &quot;injection&quot;, itself from ἐνιέναι (enienai) &quot;to send in, inject&quot;, from ἐν (en), &quot;in&quot; + ἱέναι (hienai), &quot;to send, throw&quot;.

&quot;Clyster&quot; entered the English language in the late 14th century from Old French or Latin, from Greek κλυστήρ (klyster), &quot;syringe&quot;, itself from κλύζειν (klyzein), &quot;to wash out&quot;, also spelled &quot;glister&quot; in the 18th century. It is a generally archaic word used more particularly for enemas administered using a &quot;clyster syringe&quot;.

=== Ancient and medieval ===
==== Africa ====

The first mention of the enema in medical literature is in the Ancient Egyptian Ebers Papyrus ( BCE). One of the many types of medical specialists was a Nery-Pehuyt, the Shepherd of the Anus. Many medications were administered by enemas. There was a Keeper of the Royal Rectum who may have primarily been the pharaoh&#x27;s enema maker. The god Thoth, according to Egyptian mythology, invented the enema.

In parts of Africa the calabash gourd is used traditionally to administer enemas. On the Ivory Coast the narrow neck of the gourd filled with water is inserted the patient&#x27;s rectum and the contents are then injected by means of an attendant&#x27;s forcible oral inflation, or, alternatively, a patient may self-administer the enema by using suction to create a negative pressure in the gourd, placing a finger at the opening, and then upon anal insertion, removing the finger to allow atmospheric pressure to effect the flow. In South Africa, Bhaca people used an ox horn to administer enemas. Along the upper Congo River an enema apparatus is made by making a hole in one end of the gourd for filling it, and using a resin to attach a hollow cane to the gourd&#x27;s neck. The cane is inserted into the anus of the patient who is in a posture that allows gravity to effect infusion of the fluid.

==== Americas ====

The Olmec from their middle preclassic period (10th through 7th centuries BCE) through the Spanish Conquest used trance-inducing substances ceremonially, and these were ingested via, among other routes, enemas administered using jars.

As further described below in religious rituals, the Maya in their late classic age (7th through 10th centuries CE) used enemas for, at least, ritual purposes, Mayan sculpture and ceramics from that period depicting scenes in which, injected by syringes made of gourd and clay, ritual hallucinogenic enemas were taken. In the Xibalban court of the God D, whose worship included ritual cult paraphernal, the Maya illustrated the use of a characteristic enema bulb syringe by female attendants administering clysters ritually.

For combating illness and discomfort of the digestive tract, the Mayan also employed enemas, as documented during the colonial period, e.g., in the Florentine Codex.

The indigenous peoples of North America employed tobacco smoke enemas to stimulate respiration, injecting the smoke using a rectal tube.

A rubber bag connected with a conical nozzle, at an early period, was in use among the indigenous peoples of South America as an enema syringe, and the rubber enema bag with a connecting tube and ivory tip remained in use by them while in Europe a syringe was still the usual means for conducting an enema.

==== Asia ====

In Babylonia, by 600 BCE, enemas were in use, although it appears that initially they were in use because of a belief that the demon of disease would, by means of an enema, be driven out of the body. Babylonian and Assyrian tablets c. 600 BCE bear cuneiform inscriptions referring to enemas.

In China, c. 200 CE, Zhang Zhongjing was the first to employ enemas. &quot;Secure a large pig&#x27;s bile and mix with a small quantity of vinegar. Insert a bamboo tube three or four inches long into the rectum and inject the mixture&quot; are his directions, according to Wu Lien-teh.

In India, in the fifth century BCE, Sushruta enumerates the enema syringe among 121 surgical instruments described. Early Indian physicians&#x27; enema apparatus consisted of a tube of bamboo, ivory, or horn attached to the scrotum of a deer, goat, or ox.

In Persia, Avicenna (980–1037 A. D.) is credited with the introduction of the &quot;clyster-purse&quot; or collapsible portion of an enema outfit made from ox skin or silk cloth and emptied by squeezing with the hands.

==== Europe ====

Hippocrates (460–370 BCE) frequently mentions enemas, e.g., &quot;if the previous food which the patient has recently eaten should not have gone down, give an enema if the patient be strong and in the prime of life, but if he be weak, a suppository should be administered, should the bowels be not well moved on their own accord.&quot;

In the first century BCE the Greek physician Asclepiades of Bithynia wrote &quot;Treatment consists merely of three elements: drink, food, and the enema&quot;. Also, he contended that indigestion is caused by particles of food that are too big and his prescribed treatment was proper amounts of food and wine followed by an enema which would remove the improper food doing the damage.

In the second century CE the Greek physician Soranus prescribed, among other techniques, enemas as a safe abortion method, and the Greek philosopher Celsus recommended an enema of pearl barley in milk or rose oil with butter as a nutrient for those with dysentery and unable to eat, and also Galen mentions enemas in several contexts.

In medieval times appear the first illustrations of enema equipment in the Western world, a clyster syringe consisting of a tube attached to a pump action bulb made of a pig bladder.
A simple piston syringe clyster was in use from the 15th through 19th centuries. This device had its rectal nozzle connected to a syringe with a plunger rather than to a bulb.

=== Modern Western ===

Beginning in the 17th century enema apparatus was chiefly designed for self-administration at home and many were French as enemas enjoyed wide usage in France.

In 1694 François Mauriceau in his early-modern treatise, &quot;The Diseases of Women with Child,&quot; records that both midwives and man-midwives commonly administered clysters to labouring mothers just prior to their delivery.

Clysters were administered for symptoms of constipation and, with more questionable effectiveness, stomach aches and other illnesses.

In 1753 an enema bag prepared from a pig&#x27;s or beef&#x27;s bladder attached to a tube was described by Johann Jacob Woyts as an alternative to a syringe.

In the 18th century Europeans began emulating the indigenous peoples of North America&#x27;s use of tobacco smoke enemas to resuscitate drowned people. Tobacco resuscitation kits consisting of a pair of bellows and a tube were provided by the Royal Humane Society of London and placed at various points along the Thames. Furthermore, these enemas came to be employed for headaches, respiratory failure, colds, hernias, abdominal cramps, typhoid fever, and cholera outbreaks.

Clysters were a favourite medical treatment in the bourgeoisie and nobility of the Western world up to the 19th century. As medical knowledge was fairly limited at the time, purgative clysters were used for a wide variety of ailments, the foremost of which were stomach aches and constipation.

According to the duc de Saint-Simon, clysters were so popular at the court of King Louis XIV of France that the duchess of Burgundy had her servant give her a clyster in front of the King (her modesty being preserved by an adequate posture) before going to the comedy. However, he also mentions the astonishment of the King and Mme de Maintenon that she should take it before them.

In the 19th century many new types of enema administration equipment were devised. Devices allowing gravity to infuse the solution, like those mentioned above used by South American indigenous people and like the enema bag described by Johann Jacob Woyts, came into common use. These consist of a nozzle at the end of a hose which connects a reservoir, either a bucket or a rubber bag, which is filled with liquid and held or hung above the recipient.

In the early 20th century the disposable microenema, a squeeze bottle, was invented by Charles Browne Fleet.

== Society and culture ==

=== Alternative medicine ===

==== Relatively benign ====

===== Colonic irrigation =====

The term &quot;colonic irrigation&quot; is commonly used in gastroenterology to refer to the practice of introducing water through a colostomy or a surgically constructed conduit as a treatment for constipation. The Food and Drug Administration has ruled that colonic irrigation equipment is not approved for sale for the purpose of general well-being and has taken action against many distributors of this equipment, including a Warning Letter.

===== Colon cleansing =====
The same term is also used in alternative medicine where it may involve the use of substances mixed with water in order to detoxify the body. Practitioners believe the accumulation of fecal matter in the large intestine leads to ill health. This resurrects the old medical concept of &quot;autointoxication&quot; which was orthodox doctrine up to the end of the 19th century but which has now been discredited.

=====Kellogg&#x27;s enemas=====

In the late 19th century Dr. John Harvey Kellogg made sure that the bowel of each and every patient was plied with water, from above and below. His favorite device was an enema machine (&quot;just like one I saw in Germany&quot;) that could run fifteen gallons of water through a person&#x27;s bowel in a matter of seconds. Every water enema was followed by a pint of yogurt—half was eaten, the other half was administered by enema &quot;thus planting the protective germs where they are most needed and may render most effective service.&quot; The yogurt served to replace &quot;the intestinal flora&quot; of the bowel, creating what Kellogg claimed was a completely clean intestine.

==== Dangerous ====

===== Bleach enemas =====

Chlorine dioxide enemas have been fraudulently marketed as a medical treatment, primarily for autism. This has resulted, for example, in a six-year-old boy needing to have his colon removed and a colostomy bag fitted, complaints to the FDA reporting life-threatening reactions, and even death.

Proponents falsely claim that administering autistic children these enemas results in the expulsion of parasitic worms (&quot;rope worms&quot;), which actually are fragments of damaged intestinal epithelium that are misinterpreted as being human pathogens. Oral and rectal use of the solution has also been promoted as a cure for HIV, malaria, viral hepatitis, influenza, common colds, acne, cancer, Parkinson&#x27;s, and much more.

Chlorine dioxide is a potent and toxic bleach that is relabeled for &quot;medicinal purposes&quot; to a variety of brand names including, but not limited, to MMS, Miracle Mineral Supplement, and CD protocol. For oral use, the doses recommended on the labeling can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and potentially life-threatening dehydration.

No clinical trials have been performed to test the health claims made for chlorine dioxide, which originate from former Scientologist Jim Humble in his 2006 self-published book, &quot;The Miracle Mineral Solution of the 21st Century&quot; and from anecdotal reports. The name MMS was coined by Humble. Sellers sometimes describe MMS as a water purifier so as to circumvent medical regulations. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies rejected &quot;in the strongest terms&quot; reports by promoters of MMS that they had used the product to fight malaria.

===== Coffee enemas =====
Well documented as having no proven benefits and considered by medical authorities as rash and potentially dangerous is an enema of coffee.

A coffee enema can cause numerous maladies including infections, sepsis (including campylobacter sepsis), severe electrolyte imbalance, colitis, polymicrobial enteric sepsis, proctocolitis, salmonella, brain abscess, and heart failure,

and deaths related to coffee enemas have been documented.

Gerson therapy includes administering enemas of coffee, as well as of castor oil and sometimes of hydrogen peroxide or of ozone.

Some proponents of alternative medicine have claimed that coffee enemas have an anti-cancer effect by &quot;detoxifying&quot; metabolic products of tumors but there is no medical scientific evidence to support this.

=== Recreational usage ===

==== Pleasure ====

Enjoyment of enemas is known as klismaphilia, which medically is classified as a paraphilia. A person with klismaphilia is a &quot;klismaphile&quot;.

Both women and men may enjoy sexual enema play, heterosexually and homosexually, experiencing sexual arousal from enemas which they find gratifying or sensual and which can be an auxiliary to, or even a substitute for, genital sexual activity.

Klismaphiles may perceive pleasure from a large, water-distended belly, or the feeling of internal pressure. An enema fetish may include sexual attraction to the involved equipment, processes, environments, situations, or scenarios, Klismaphiles can gain satisfaction of enemas through fantasies, by actually receiving or giving one, or through the process of eliminating steps to being administered one (e.g., under the pretence of being constipated).

That some women use enemas while masturbating was documented by Alfred Kinsey in &quot;Sexual Behavior in the Human Female&quot;: &quot;There were still other masturbatory techniques which were regularly or occasionally employed by some 11 percent of the females in the sample... Douches, streams of running water, vibrators, urethral insertions, enemas, other anal insertions, sado-masochistic activity, and still other methods were occasionally employed, but none of them in any appreciable number of cases.&quot;

==== Other sexually related uses ====
Besides klismaphilia, the intrinsic enjoyment of enemas, there are other uses of enemas in sexual play.

===== BDSM =====

Enemas are sometimes used in sadomasochistic activities for erotic humiliation or for physical discomfort.

===== Rectal douching =====

Another sexual use for enemas is to empty the rectum as a prelude to other anal sexual activities such as anal sex, possibly reducing risk of infection.

This is different from klismaphilia, in which the enema is enjoyed for itself and as a part of sexual arousal and gratification.

Rectal douching is a common practice among people who take a receptive role in anal sex although rectal douching before anal sex may increase the risk of transferring HIV, hepatitis B, and other diseases.

==== Intoxication ====

Noting that deaths have been reported from alcohol poisoning via enemas, an alcohol enema can be used to very quickly instill alcohol into the bloodstream, absorbed through the membranes of the colon. However, great care must be taken as to the amount of alcohol used. Only a small amount is needed as the intestine absorbs the alcohol far more quickly than the stomach.

Preceding an enema for administration of drugs or alcohol, a cleansing enema may first be used for cleaning the colon to help increase the rate of absorption.

=== Religious rituals ===

All across Mesoamerica ritual enemas were employed to consume psychoactive substances, e.g., balché, alcohol, tobacco, peyote, and other hallucinogenic drugs and entheogens, most notably by the Maya, thus attaining more intense trance states more quickly, and Mayan classic-period sculpture and ceramics depict hallucinogenic enemas used in rituals. Some tribes continue the practice in the present day.

With historical roots in the Indian subcontinent, enemas in Ayurveda, called Basti or Vasti, form part of Panchakarma procedure in which herbal medicines are introduced rectally.

=== Punitive usage ===

Enemas have also been forcibly applied as a means of punishment.

Political dissenters in post-independence Argentina were given enemas of chili pepper and turpentine. Turpentine enemas are very harsh purgatives.

In the Guantanamo Bay Detention Camp, the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture documented instances of enemas being used by the Central Intelligence Agency in order to ensure &quot;total control&quot; over detainees. Enemas, officials said, are uncomfortable and degrading, The CIA forced nutrient enema on detainees who attempted hunger strikes, documenting &quot;With head lower than torso … sloshing up the large intestines … [what] I infer is that you get a tube up as you can … We used the largest Ewal tube we had&quot; wrote an officer, and &quot;violent enemas&quot; is how a detainee described what he received.

=== In arts and literature ===
==== Written literature ====

In the Dionysus&#x27; satyr play &quot;Limos&quot;, Silenus attempts to give an enema to Heracles.

In Cervantes&#x27; &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, a narrative to Sancho includes “The Knight of the Sun ... bound hand and foot ... was administered a clyster of snow water and sand that almost disracted him&quot;

In the 17th century, satirists made physicians a favorite target, resembling Molière&#x27;s caricature whose prescription for anything was &quot;clyster, bleed, purge,&quot; or &quot;purge, bleed, clyster&quot;.

In Molière&#x27;s play &quot;The Imaginary Invalid&quot;, Argan, a severe hypochondriac, is addicted to enemas as indicated by such lines as when Bĕralde asks, &quot;Can&#x27;t you be one moment without a purge?&quot;

In Grace Metalious&#x27;s novel &quot;Peyton Place&quot;, the town doctor tells of &quot;a young boy with the worst case of dehydration I ever saw. It came from getting too many enemas that he didn&#x27;t need. Sex, with a capital S-E-X.&quot;. As a teenager, the boy enjoys receiving enemas from his mother.

In Flora Rheta Schreiber&#x27;s book &quot;Sybil&quot;, Sybil&#x27;s psychiatrist asks her &quot;What&#x27;s Mama been doing to you, dear?...I know she gave you the enemas.&quot;

==== Film ====

In &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;, during flight training astronaut Alan Shepard retains a barium enema, given two floors away from a toilet, embarrassedly riding a public elevator wearing a hospital gown and holding the enema bag with its tip still inserted in him.

&quot;Water Power&quot; is a Pornographic film by Gerard Damiano loosely based on the real-life exploits of Michael H. Kenyon, an American criminal who pleaded guilty to a decade-long series of armed robberies of female victims, some of which involved sexual assaults in which he would give them enemas.

==== Song ====

The lyrics of Frank Zappa&#x27;s song &quot;The Illinois Enema Bandit&quot; are concerned with Michael H. Kenyon&#x27;s sexual assaults which included administering involuntary enemas.

The album cover of Enema of the State by blink-182 features a nurse who seems to be preparing to give a medical procedure. 

==== Monument ====

A brass statue of a syringe enema bulb held aloft by three cherubs stands in front of the &quot;Mashuk&quot; spa in the settlement of Zheleznovodsk in Russia. Inspired by the 15th century Renaissance painter Botticelli, it was created by a local artist who commented that &quot;An enema is an unpleasant procedure as many of us may know. But when cherubs do it, it&#x27;s all right.&quot; When unveiled on 19 June 2008, posted on one of the spa&#x27;s wall was a banner declaring &quot;Let&#x27;s beat constipation and sloppiness with enemas.&quot; The spa lying in the Caucasus Mountains region, known for dozens of spas that routinely treat digestive and other complaints with enemas of mineral spring water, the director commented &quot;An enema is almost a symbol of our region.&quot; It is the only known monument to the enema.
== See also ==

* Bowel management
* Dry enema
* Fecal microbiota transplant
* Harris flush (sin. carminative enema)
* Murphy drip
* Nutrient enema
* Tobacco smoke enema
* Transanal irrigation

== References ==
Sources
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="3" end="8" title="Enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="26" end="33" title="Enema" label="clyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q419892" start="42" end="63" title="rectal administration" label="rectal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="97" end="108" title="Large intestine" label="lower bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="117" end="121" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549149" start="429" end="458" title="lower gastrointestinal series" label="lower gastrointestinal series"/>
<link wikidata="Q138885" start="498" end="522" title="Travelers&amp;#x27; diarrhea" label="traveler&amp;#x27;s diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q653027" start="725" end="735" title="encopresis" label="encopresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156403" start="754" end="773" title="Management of dehydration" label="rehydration therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="810" end="829" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenous therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="970" end="975" title="bowel" label="bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="1053" end="1061" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="1075" end="1087" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477327" start="1098" end="1113" title="fecal impaction" label="fecal impaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="1173" end="1184" title="colonoscopy" label="colonoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="1696" end="1702" title="mucosa" label="mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2448" end="2459" title="Peristalsis#Large intestine" label="peristalsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2945" end="2958" title="saline (medicine)#Normal" label="Normal saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="3127" end="3138" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302590" start="3362" end="3374" title="Castile soap" label="Castile soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="3540" end="3548" title="Glycerol" label="Glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="3621" end="3640" title="Osmotic laxative" label="hyperosmotic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="4066" end="4086" title="emergency department" label="emergency department"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="4142" end="4153" title="Mineral oil" label="Mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q409501" start="4373" end="4389" title="Trisodium phosphate" label="Sodium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417874" start="4399" end="4408" title="Bisacodyl" label="Bisacodyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221244" start="4418" end="4425" title="Dantron" label="Dantron"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="4459" end="4467" title="Glycerol" label="Glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="4477" end="4480" title="Oil" label="Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="4490" end="4498" title="Sorbitol" label="Sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815334" start="4508" end="4523" title="Docusate sodium" label="Docusate sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275949" start="4557" end="4583" title="Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate" label="Sodium lauryl sulfoacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q265878" start="4709" end="4733" title="Peanut oil" label="Arachis oil (peanut oil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q417874" start="4816" end="4825" title="Bisacodyl" label="Bisacodyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q586582" start="4837" end="4851" title="enteric nervous system" label="enteric nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221244" start="4885" end="4892" title="Dantron" label="Dantron"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="4992" end="5002" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5047" end="5049" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5137" end="5140" title="United States" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5144" end="5152" title="Docusate#Constipation" label="Docusate"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="5260" end="5271" title="Mineral oil" label="Mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5400" end="5416" title="Sodium phosphates#Uses" label="Sodium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="5506" end="5514" title="buffer solution" label="Buffered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5809" end="5824" title="Sodium phosphates#Adverse effects" label="adverse effects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5828" end="5836" title="Sorbitol#Laxative" label="Sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815334" start="6395" end="6410" title="docusate sodium" label="docusate sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q686794" start="6584" end="6596" title="Ferring Pharmaceuticals" label="Ferring B.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q105445217" start="6644" end="6653" title="Sodium citrate/sodium lauryl sulfoacetate/glycerol" label="MICROLAX®"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460572" start="6712" end="6726" title="sodium citrate" label="sodium citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="6997" end="7005" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q941169" start="7074" end="7087" title="sigmoidoscopy" label="sigmoidoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="7552" end="7570" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269235" start="7599" end="7620" title="obstructed defecation" label="obstructed defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620862" start="8294" end="8327" title="Malone antegrade continence enema" label="Malone antegrade continence enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="8558" end="8568" title="defecation" label="defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906358" start="8882" end="8886" title="Healthy diet" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549149" start="9069" end="9098" title="lower gastrointestinal series" label="lower gastrointestinal series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9125" end="9139" title="Barium sulphate#Radiocontrast agent" label="barium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849688" start="9166" end="9180" title="contrast agent" label="contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="9196" end="9208" title="X-ray" label="radiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="9827" end="9837" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="9855" end="9861" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="10114" end="10129" title="corticosteroids" label="corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q412479" start="10134" end="10144" title="mesalazine" label="mesalazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="10170" end="10196" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="10275" end="10297" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q138885" start="10820" end="10845" title="Traveller&amp;#x27;s diarrhea" label="Traveller&amp;#x27;s diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q305004" start="10887" end="10902" title="sodium butyrate" label="sodium butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="10904" end="10916" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="10929" end="10944" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q327298" start="11013" end="11024" title="Shigellosis" label="Shigellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121103" start="11577" end="11604" title="fecal microbiota transplant" label="fecal microbiota transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="11782" end="11793" title="colonoscope" label="colonoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144815" start="11955" end="11970" title="splenic flexure" label="splenic flexure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="12018" end="12027" title="nutrition" label="nourished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="12034" end="12056" title="enteral administration" label="enteral administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878706" start="12099" end="12113" title="nutrient enema" label="nutrient enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="12207" end="12212" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="12326" end="12340" title="United States Department of War" label="U. S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="12459" end="12471" title="tube feeding" label="tube feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="12476" end="12495" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="intravenous feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="12883" end="12891" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791388" start="12941" end="12946" title="sobriety" label="sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="13388" end="13399" title="vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="13422" end="13432" title="Heart arrhythmia" label="arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217111" start="13441" end="13452" title="bradycardia" label="bradycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="13508" end="13522" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="13580" end="13588" title="Vermiform appendix" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="13592" end="13599" title="Appendicitis" label="rupture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066061" start="13677" end="13691" title="diverticulitis" label="diverticulitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="13693" end="13711" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="13713" end="13733" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="13754" end="13765" title="hemorrhoids" label="hemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="13769" end="13775" title="tumors" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="13793" end="13798" title="Colon (anatomy)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="13850" end="13857" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905463" start="13889" end="13909" title="health care provider" label="health care provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="13964" end="13977" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="13981" end="13995" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="14062" end="14073" title="disease" label="pathologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q279324" start="14121" end="14138" title="bowel perforation" label="bowel perforation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058941" start="14242" end="14261" title="microscopic colitis" label="microscopic colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310301" start="15260" end="15273" title="Ebers Papyrus" label="Ebers Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q146921" start="15525" end="15530" title="Thoth" label="Thoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277255" start="15609" end="15617" title="calabash" label="calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900495" start="16134" end="16139" title="Bhaca" label="Bhaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="16513" end="16518" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16775" end="16792" title="#Religious rituals" label="religious rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="16798" end="16802" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106019" start="17419" end="17435" title="Florentine Codex" label="Florentine Codex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17442" end="17477" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156993" start="17487" end="17506" title="tobacco smoke enema" label="tobacco smoke enema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17663" end="17698" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas#South America" label="indigenous peoples of South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q197350" start="18214" end="18229" title="Zhang Zhongjing" label="Zhang Zhongjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036871" start="18466" end="18477" title="Wu Lien-teh" label="Wu Lien-teh"/>
<link wikidata="Q383027" start="18516" end="18524" title="Sushruta" label="Sushruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="18748" end="18756" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="18975" end="18986" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q440317" start="19341" end="19356" title="Ancient Greek medicine" label="Greek physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q261936" start="19357" end="19380" title="Asclepiades of Bithynia" label="Asclepiades of Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q446595" start="19743" end="19750" title="Soranus (Greek physician)" label="Soranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q112217556" start="19775" end="19785" title="Surgery in Ancient Rome" label="techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="19804" end="19812" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q315370" start="19847" end="19853" title="Celsus" label="Celsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="20109" end="20122" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q273318" start="20233" end="20240" title="syringe" label="syringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q546354" start="20587" end="20605" title="François Mauriceau" label="François Mauriceau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21153" end="21195" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="indigenous peoples of North America&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="21630" end="21641" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="21646" end="21654" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="21804" end="21811" title="ailment" label="ailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="21841" end="21853" title="stomach ache" label="stomach ache"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="21887" end="21909" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="the duc de Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="21957" end="21976" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231409" start="21982" end="22005" title="Marie Adélaïde of Savoy" label="the duchess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="22135" end="22141" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22751" end="22761" title="#microenema" label="microenema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075835" start="22797" end="22817" title="Charles Browne Fleet" label="Charles Browne Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q120569" start="22998" end="23014" title="gastroenterology" label="gastroenterology"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="23154" end="23182" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544127" start="23368" end="23382" title="FDA Warning Letter" label="Warning Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="23443" end="23463" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192006" start="23536" end="23544" title="Detoxification (alternative medicine)" label="detoxify"/>
<link wikidata="Q380036" start="23887" end="23906" title="John Harvey Kellogg" label="John Harvey Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24592" end="24608" title="Chlorine dioxide#Pseudomedicine" label="Chlorine dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="24686" end="24692" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768019" start="25013" end="25023" title="rope worms" label="rope worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="25083" end="25093" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="25217" end="25220" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="25222" end="25229" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983841" start="25231" end="25246" title="viral hepatitis" label="viral hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="25248" end="25257" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="25259" end="25270" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="25273" end="25277" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="25279" end="25285" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="25287" end="25303" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348411" start="25484" end="25510" title="Miracle Mineral Supplement" label="Miracle Mineral Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="25786" end="25799" title="Scientology" label="Scientologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568650" start="25823" end="25837" title="self-publishing" label="self-published"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="26004" end="26018" title="water purifier" label="water purifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="26064" end="26128" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="26409" end="26415" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="26471" end="26481" title="infections" label="infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="26483" end="26489" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131488" start="26501" end="26514" title="campylobacter" label="campylobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326943" start="26531" end="26552" title="Electrolyte disturbance" label="electrolyte imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="26554" end="26561" title="colitis" label="colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247500" start="26593" end="26606" title="proctocolitis" label="proctocolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="26608" end="26618" title="salmonella" label="salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q141440" start="26620" end="26633" title="brain abscess" label="brain abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q66262" start="26714" end="26728" title="Gerson therapy" label="Gerson therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337492" start="26784" end="26794" title="castor oil" label="castor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="26812" end="26829" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="26836" end="26841" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="26929" end="26935" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258978" start="27141" end="27153" title="klismaphilia" label="klismaphilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178059" start="27190" end="27200" title="paraphilia" label="paraphilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215127" start="27354" end="27368" title="sexual arousal" label="sexual arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="27487" end="27502" title="Human sexual activity" label="sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186561" start="28023" end="28036" title="Alfred Kinsey" label="Alfred Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="28666" end="28681" title="sadomasochism" label="sadomasochistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057073" start="28697" end="28715" title="erotic humiliation" label="erotic humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="28880" end="28888" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="29225" end="29228" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="29230" end="29241" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="29331" end="29348" title="alcohol poisoning" label="alcohol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847787" start="29364" end="29377" title="alcohol enema" label="alcohol enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="29858" end="29869" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850250" start="29940" end="29946" title="balché" label="balché"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="29948" end="29955" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="29957" end="29964" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="29966" end="29972" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="29984" end="30004" title="Psychedelics, dissociatives and deliriants" label="hallucinogenic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="30009" end="30018" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="30041" end="30045" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="30281" end="30300" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="30312" end="30320" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878672" start="30329" end="30334" title="Basti (Panchakarma)" label="Basti"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="30358" end="30369" title="Panchakarma" label="Panchakarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="30389" end="30405" title="Herbalism" label="herbal medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="30595" end="30607" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="30612" end="30622" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30677" end="30706" title="Guantanamo Bay detention camp#Torture" label="Guantanamo Bay Detention Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612127" start="30712" end="30763" title="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture" label="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="30813" end="30840" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227044" start="31375" end="31383" title="Theatre of Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050848" start="31390" end="31400" title="satyr play" label="satyr play"/>
<link wikidata="Q464091" start="31420" end="31427" title="Silenus" label="Silenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="31457" end="31465" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="31471" end="31480" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="31493" end="31504" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="31754" end="31761" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q588161" start="31919" end="31940" title="The Imaginary Invalid" label="The Imaginary Invalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434" start="31964" end="31977" title="hypochondriac" label="hypochondriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q456336" start="32112" end="32127" title="Grace Metalious" label="Grace Metalious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377878" start="32141" end="32165" title="Peyton Place (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Peyton Place&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q527964" start="32422" end="32443" title="Flora Rheta Schreiber" label="Flora Rheta Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915054" start="32456" end="32473" title="Sybil (Schreiber book)" label="&amp;quot;Sybil&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="32624" end="32639" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="32680" end="32692" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q731002" start="32803" end="32816" title="hospital gown" label="hospital gown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669922" start="32886" end="32897" title="Water Power (film)" label="Water Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830867" start="32988" end="33005" title="Michael H. Kenyon" label="Michael H. Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="33215" end="33226" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830867" start="33296" end="33313" title="Michael H. Kenyon" label="Michael H. Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="33321" end="33335" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="33406" end="33424" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="33428" end="33437" title="blink-182" label="blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q135829" start="33666" end="33679" title="Zheleznovodsk" label="Zheleznovodsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950795" start="34383" end="34399" title="Bowel management" label="Bowel management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309586" start="34402" end="34411" title="Dry enema" label="Dry enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121103" start="34414" end="34441" title="Fecal microbiota transplant" label="Fecal microbiota transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665156" start="34444" end="34456" title="Harris flush" label="Harris flush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939036" start="34484" end="34495" title="Murphy drip" label="Murphy drip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878706" start="34498" end="34512" title="Nutrient enema" label="Nutrient enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156993" start="34515" end="34534" title="Tobacco smoke enema" label="Tobacco smoke enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166625" start="34537" end="34557" title="Transanal irrigation" label="Transanal irrigation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83878" wikidata="Q2466253" url="?curid=83878" title="Amarynceus">
<text>Amarynceus (Ancient Greek: Ἀμαρυγκεύς) was in Greek mythology, a chief of the Eleans.

== Family ==
Amarynceus was the son of Onesimachus or of Acetor (Alector) and Diogeneia. In some account, his father was the Thessalian immigrant Pyttius.

Mnesimache, daughter of Dexamenus of Olenus, was the mother of his son Diores while the other son Hippostratus was said have seduced Periboea, daughter of Hipponous. 

== Mythology ==
According to Hyginus, Amarynceus himself joined the expedition against Troy with nineteen ships. Homer, on the other hand, only mentions Amarynceus&#x27; son Diores (also known by the patronymic Amarynceides) as partaking in the Trojan War. 

When Amarynceus died, his sons celebrated funeral games in his honor, in which Nestor took part. According to Pausanias, Amarynceus had been of great service to Augeas against Heracles, in return for which Augeas shared his throne with him.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Tzetzes, John, &quot;Allegories of the Iliad&quot; translated by Goldwyn, Adam J. and Kokkini, Dimitra. Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library, Harvard University Press, 2015. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2466253" start="0" end="10" title="Amarynceus" label="Amarynceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="12" end="25" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="46" end="61" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="78" end="83" title="Elean" label="Elean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126" end="137" title="Onesimachus" label="Onesimachus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="150" title="Acetor" label="Acetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234450" start="152" end="159" title="Alector" label="Alector"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223726" start="165" end="174" title="Diogeneia" label="Diogeneia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247568" start="212" end="222" title="Ancient Thessaly" label="Thessalian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="233" end="240" title="Pyttius" label="Pyttius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885935" start="243" end="253" title="Mnesimache" label="Mnesimache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993227" start="267" end="276" title="Dexamenus" label="Dexamenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939304" start="280" end="286" title="Olenus (Achaea)" label="Olenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028786" start="314" end="320" title="Diores" label="Diores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="341" end="353" title="Hippostratus (mythology)" label="Hippostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12773649" start="376" end="384" title="Periboea" label="Periboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593187" start="398" end="407" title="Hipponous" label="Hipponous"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="440" end="447" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="498" end="502" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="524" end="529" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="611" end="621" title="patronymic" label="patronymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="656" end="666" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="749" end="755" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="780" end="789" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q207663" start="831" end="837" title="Augeas" label="Augeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="846" end="854" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="942" end="953" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="1236" end="1256" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1442" end="1447" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1449" end="1470" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1809" end="1818" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="2215" end="2228" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83879" wikidata="Q854056" url="?curid=83879" title="Dolon (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Dolon (Ancient Greek: Δόλων, gen.: Δόλωνος) fought for Troy during the Trojan War. He volunteered to spy on the Greek camp at the request of Hector, but was captured by Diomedes and Odysseus. 

==Night mission in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;==
Dolon was the son of Eumedes and had five sisters. Considered a fast runner, after a request by Hector in which all the Trojan men were called together, Dolon put himself forward to spy on the Greek ships and check whether or not, as well as how, the Greeks were still guarding them. In exchange, Hector offered the horses and bronze chariot of Achilles as his prize at the end of the war. Fearing deceit, Dolon demanded that Hector swore to fulfill the promised reward. Dolon departed, wearing a wolf skin and a marten-pelt cap in order to blend into his surroundings. His plan was to deceive the Greeks by walking on all fours.

By chance, he was spotted by Odysseus and Diomedes while they were on a secret raid to plunder the Trojans. The Greek warriors saw Dolon coming and hid in the bodies of the dead so that Dolon could not see them. Diomedes chased Dolon down with guidance from Athena. Dolon, after torture, begged for his life, telling the two warriors that he was worth a valuable ransom as his father, Eumedes, was very wealthy. Odysseus said that he would not kill Dolon if he told the two of them why he was spying on the Greeks. Dolon told Odysseus everything he needed to know, including his potential prize, before Odysseus explained to him that he had been tricked by Hector; only Achilles had the ability to control the horses that he was to receive. Dolon then informed the two Greeks which Trojan allies were living in which tent and what their strengths were. After this, Odysseus went back on his promise and Dolon was decapitated by Diomedes before the two went into the Trojan camp to wreak havoc, slaying Rhesus, king of Thrace, and stealing his valuable horses. His son Eumedes, named after Dolon&#x27;s father, survived the Trojan War to later fight and die by the hand of Turnus under the command of Aeneas in Italy.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q854056" start="20" end="25" title="Dolon (mythology)" label="Dolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="27" end="40" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="75" end="79" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="91" end="101" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="161" end="167" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="189" end="197" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="202" end="210" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565003" start="287" end="294" title="Eumedes" label="Eumedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="362" end="368" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="611" end="619" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="926" end="934" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="939" end="947" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1155" end="1161" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="1810" end="1821" title="decapitated" label="decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061782" start="1899" end="1905" title="Rhesus of Thrace" label="Rhesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="1915" end="1921" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565003" start="1965" end="1972" title="Eumedes" label="Eumedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q633549" start="2069" end="2075" title="Turnus" label="Turnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="2097" end="2103" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2107" end="2112" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83880" wikidata="Q3565003" url="?curid=83880" title="Eumedes">
<text>Eumedes (Ancient Greek: Εὐμήδης) was a name attributed to seven individuals in Greek mythology.

*Eumedes, father of Acallaris who married Tros, king of Dardania.
*Eumedes, a Calydonian son of Melas. He, along with his brothers, were killed for plotting against Oeneus.
*Eumedes, son of Hippocoon, the king of Sparta. His tomb was located in the city.
*Eumedes, the Thespian son of Heracles and Lyse, daughter of King Thespius of Thespiae. Eumedes and his 49 half-brothers were born of Thespius&#x27; daughters who were impregnated by Heracles in one night, for a week or in the course of 50 days while hunting for the Cithaeronian lion. Later on, the hero sent a message to Thespius to keep seven of these sons and send three of them in Thebes while the remaining forty, joined by Iolaus, were dispatched to the island of Sardinia to found a colony.
*Eumedes, priest of Athena. When the Heracleidae invaded, Eumedes was suspected of wishing to betray the Palladium to them. Being afraid, he took the Palladium and took it to be hill called Creion.
*Eumedes (also Eumeles) a famous herald among the Trojans. He was the father of Dolon and of five daughters.
*Eumedes, son of Dolon and a companion of Aeneas. He was killed by Turnus.

==Notes==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* Athenaeus of Naucratis, &quot;The Deipnosophists or Banquet of the Learned.&quot; London. Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden. 1854. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Athenaeus of Naucratis, &quot;Deipnosophistae&quot;. Kaibel. In Aedibus B.G. Teubneri. Lipsiae. 1887. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Callimachus, &quot;Callimachus and Lycophron with an English translation by A. W. Mair; Aratus, with an English translation by G. R. Mair&quot;, London: W. Heinemann, New York: G. P. Putnam 1921. Internet Archive
* Callimachus, &quot;Works&quot;. A.W. Mair. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1921. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;The Library of History&quot; translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2&quot;. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Dionysus of Halicarnassus, &quot;Roman Antiquities.&quot; English translation by Earnest Cary in the Loeb Classical Library, 7 volumes. Harvard University Press, 1937–1950. Online version at Bill Thayer&#x27;s Web Site
* Dionysius of Halicarnassus, &quot;Antiquitatum Romanarum quae supersunt&quot;, &quot;Vol I-IV&quot;. . Karl Jacoby. In Aedibus B.G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1885. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Aeneid.&quot; Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Tzetzes, John, &quot;Book of Histories,&quot; Book II-IV translated by Gary Berkowitz from the original Greek of T. Kiessling&#x27;s edition of 1826. Online version at theio.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3565003" start="0" end="7" title="Eumedes" label="Eumedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="9" end="22" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="79" end="94" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671657" start="117" end="126" title="Acallaris" label="Acallaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q599482" start="139" end="143" title="Tros (mythology)" label="Tros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165756" start="153" end="161" title="Dardanians (Trojan)" label="Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="175" end="182" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854079" start="193" end="198" title="Melas (mythology)" label="Melas"/>
<link wikidata="Q749966" start="262" end="268" title="Oeneus" label="Oeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27700265" start="287" end="296" title="Hippocoon" label="Hippocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="310" end="316" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141295" start="366" end="374" title="Thespiae" label="Thespian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="382" end="390" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107144068" start="395" end="399" title="Lyse (mythology)" label="Lyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q952188" start="418" end="426" title="Thespius" label="Thespius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141295" start="430" end="438" title="Thespiae" label="Thespiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743879" start="619" end="636" title="Lion of Cithaeron" label="Cithaeronian lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="738" end="744" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q504076" start="782" end="788" title="Iolaus" label="Iolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="823" end="831" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="871" end="877" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q828084" start="888" end="899" title="Heracleidae" label="Heracleidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q829650" start="956" end="965" title="Palladium (classical antiquity)" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1041" end="1047" title="Creion" label="Creion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27955841" start="1064" end="1071" title="Eumelus" label="Eumeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1099" end="1106" title="Troy" label="Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q854056" start="1129" end="1134" title="Dolon (mythology)" label="Dolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854056" start="1175" end="1180" title="Dolon (mythology)" label="Dolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="1200" end="1206" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q633549" start="1225" end="1231" title="Turnus" label="Turnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1264" end="1275" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="1577" end="1599" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus of Naucratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="1922" end="1933" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2303" end="2319" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="2370" end="2393" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="Charles Henry Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="2411" end="2433" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="2807" end="2832" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysus of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3240" end="3245" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3247" end="3268" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3610" end="3619" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="4017" end="4039" title="Virgil" label="Publius Vergilius Maro"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="4342" end="4355" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83881" wikidata="Q2290489" url="?curid=83881" title="Dryas (mythology)">
<text>Dryas (Ancient Greek: , gen. , from &quot;oak&quot;) is the name of several figures in Greek mythology, including:

* Dryas, an Egyptian prince as one of the sons of King Aegyptus. His mother was the naiad Caliadne and thus full brother of Eurylochus, Phantes, Peristhenes, Hermus, Potamon, Cisseus, Lixus, Imbrus, Bromius, Polyctor and Chthonius. In some accounts, he could be a son of Aegyptus either by Eurryroe, daughter of the river-god Nilus, or Isaie, daughter of King Agenor of Tyre. Dryas suffered the same fate as his other brothers, save Lynceus, when they were slain on their wedding night by their wives who obeyed the command of their father King Danaus of Libya. He married the Danaid Hecabe or Eurydice, daughter of Danaus and the naiad Polyxo.
* Dryas, a Thracian prince as son of King Lycurgus, king of the Edoni in Thrace. He was killed when Lycurgus went insane and mistook him for a mature trunk of ivy, a plant holy to the god Dionysus, whose cult Lycurgus was attempting to extirpate.
* Dryas, father of the aforementioned Lycurgus, and thus grandfather of the above Dryas.
* Dryas, a leader of the Lapiths against the Centaurs, and a participant of the battle that began at the wedding of Pirithous and Hippodamia, where he killed the Centaur Rhoetus, who had killed his fellow Lapiths Corythus and Euagrus just before that. In &quot;Iliad&quot; 1, Nestor numbers Dryas among an earlier generation of heroes of his youth, &quot;the strongest men that Earth has bred, the strongest men against the strongest enemies, a savage mountain-dwelling tribe [i. e. the Centaurs] whom they utterly destroyed&quot;, and call him &quot;shepherd of the people&quot;. No trace of such an oral tradition, which Homer&#x27;s listeners would have recognized in Nestor&#x27;s allusion, survived in literary epic.
*Dryas, son of Ares or of Iapetus.
* Dryas the seer, father of Munichus.
* Dryas, one of the suitors of Pallene, daughter of Sithon. He was killed by Cleitus, who then went on to marry Pallene.
* Dryas, father of Amphilochus, the husband of Alcinoe.
* Dryas, son of Orion, a chieftain from Tanagra. He brought 1000 archers with him to defend Thebes in the Seven against Thebes. Ares made use of the fact that Dryas shared his father&#x27;s hate of Artemis and her followers, and turned him against Parthenopaeus and his Arcadian contingent. Upon killing Parthenopaeus, Dryas was himself felled by an unknown hand.
* Dryas, a Greek warrior killed during the Trojan War by Deiphobus.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Antoninus Liberalis, &quot;The Metamorphoses of Antoninus Liberalis&quot; translated by Francis Celoria (Routledge 1992). Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Conon&quot;, Fifty Narrations, surviving as one-paragraph summaries in the Bibliotheca (Library) of Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople&quot; translated from the Greek by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, &quot;Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus&quot; translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Hesiod, &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; from &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Parthenius, &quot;Love Romances&quot; translated by Sir Stephen Gaselee (1882-1943), S. Loeb Classical Library Volume 69. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. 1916. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Parthenius, &quot;Erotici Scriptores Graeci, Vol. 1&quot;. Rudolf Hercher. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1858. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, &quot;Metamorphoses.&quot; Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Papinius Statius&quot;, The Thebaid&quot; translated by John Henry Mozley. Loeb Classical Library Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1928. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Publius Papinius Statius, &quot;The Thebaid. Vol I-II&quot;. John Henry Mozley. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1928. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot; translated by Way. A. S. Loeb Classical Library Volume 19. London: William Heinemann, 1913. Online version at theio.com
*Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;The Fall of Troy&quot;. Arthur S. Way. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. 1913. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Sophocles, &quot;The Antigone of Sophocles e&quot;dited with introduction and notes by Sir Richard Jebb. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press. 1893. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Sophocles, &quot;Sophocles. Vol 1: Oedipus the king. Oedipus at Colonus. Antigone&quot;. With an English translation by F. Storr. The Loeb classical library, 20. Francis Storr. London; New York. William Heinemann Ltd.; The Macmillan Company. 1912. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.

== Further reading ==
*Robert Graves, (1955) 1960. &quot;The Greek Myths&quot; 27.e.
* Homer, &quot;Iliad&quot; vi. 530–40.
* Karl Kerenyi, 1976. &quot;Dionysos: Archetypal Image of Indestructible Life&quot; (Princeton: Bollingen) Translated by Ralph Manheim.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2290489" start="0" end="5" title="Dryas (mythology)" label="Dryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="7" end="20" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="24" end="28" title="genitive case" label="gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="42" end="45" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="87" end="102" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="128" end="136" title="Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173622" start="158" end="162" title="Sons of Aegyptus" label="sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q404844" start="171" end="179" title="Aegyptus" label="Aegyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182037" start="200" end="205" title="naiad" label="naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559167" start="206" end="214" title="Caliadne" label="Caliadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378477" start="240" end="250" title="Eurylochus (Greek myth)" label="Eurylochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796601" start="252" end="259" title="Phantes" label="Phantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899938" start="261" end="272" title="Peristhenes" label="Peristhenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23502543" start="274" end="280" title="Hermus" label="Hermus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909492" start="282" end="289" title="Potamon (mythology)" label="Potamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259929" start="291" end="298" title="Cisseus" label="Cisseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107174955" start="300" end="305" title="Lixus (mythology)" label="Lixus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534686" start="307" end="313" title="Imbrus" label="Imbrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566812" start="315" end="322" title="Bromius" label="Bromius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767878" start="324" end="332" title="Polyctor" label="Polyctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318821" start="337" end="346" title="Chthonius" label="Chthonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q106795677" start="406" end="414" title="Eurryroe" label="Eurryroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027575" start="432" end="441" title="River gods (Greek mythology)" label="river-god"/>
<link wikidata="Q685243" start="442" end="447" title="Nilus (mythology)" label="Nilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878193" start="452" end="457" title="Isaia (mythology)" label="Isaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q392631" start="476" end="482" title="Agenor" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="486" end="490" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q36026658" start="549" end="556" title="Lynceus" label="Lynceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210883" start="661" end="667" title="Danaus" label="Danaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="671" end="676" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q724907" start="693" end="699" title="Danaïdes" label="Danaid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="700" end="706" title="Hecabe (mythology)" label="Hecabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30133102" start="710" end="718" title="Eurydice (Greek myth)" label="Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103253" start="753" end="759" title="Polyxo" label="Polyxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="772" end="780" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q270117" start="803" end="811" title="Lycurgus (Thrace)" label="Lycurgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q987699" start="825" end="830" title="Edoni" label="Edoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q26771" start="920" end="923" title="ivy" label="ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="949" end="957" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="965" end="969" title="Cult (religion)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q270117" start="1046" end="1054" title="Lycurgus of Thrace" label="Lycurgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="1122" end="1129" title="Lapiths" label="Lapiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="1142" end="1150" title="Centaurs" label="Centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="1213" end="1222" title="Pirithous" label="Pirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468258" start="1227" end="1237" title="Hippodamia (wife of Pirithous)" label="Hippodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12884161" start="1267" end="1274" title="Rhoetus" label="Rhoetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693599" start="1310" end="1318" title="Corythus" label="Corythus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1323" end="1330" title="Euagrus (mythology)" label="Euagrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1358" end="1363" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="1373" end="1379" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28121924" start="1820" end="1825" title="Dryas of Calydon" label="Dryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="1834" end="1838" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q179543" start="1845" end="1852" title="Iapetus (mythology)" label="Iapetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52684686" start="1882" end="1890" title="Munichus" label="Munichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4342721" start="1923" end="1930" title="Pallene (daughter of Sithon)" label="Pallene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421209" start="1944" end="1950" title="Sithon (mythology)" label="Sithon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680850" start="1969" end="1976" title="Cleitus (mythology)" label="Cleitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81045" start="2004" end="2011" title="Kassandra, Chalkidiki" label="Pallene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2032" end="2043" title="Amphilochus (son of Alcinoe)" label="Amphilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54858207" start="2060" end="2067" title="Alcinoe" label="Alcinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201261" start="2085" end="2090" title="Orion (mythology)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q779310" start="2109" end="2116" title="Tanagra" label="Tanagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="2161" end="2167" title="Ancient Thebes (Boeotia)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119061" start="2175" end="2195" title="Seven against Thebes" label="Seven against Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="2197" end="2201" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="2267" end="2274" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128942" start="2317" end="2330" title="Parthenopaeus" label="Parthenopaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="2339" end="2346" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="2444" end="2449" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="2476" end="2486" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q736813" start="2490" end="2499" title="Deiphobus" label="Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="2533" end="2552" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="2698" end="2709" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q709305" start="2992" end="2997" title="Conon (mythographer)" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="3223" end="3243" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3428" end="3434" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3738" end="3743" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3745" end="3766" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q729109" start="4107" end="4117" title="Parthenius of Nicaea" label="Parthenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="4490" end="4510" title="Ovid" label="Publius Ovidius Naso"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="4826" end="4850" title="Statius" label="Publius Papinius Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q352702" start="5264" end="5281" title="Quintus Smyrnaeus" label="Quintus Smyrnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="5619" end="5628" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="6142" end="6155" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="6245" end="6257" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Karl Kerenyi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83893" wikidata="Q2293082" url="?curid=83893" title="Escapology">
<text>Escapology is the practice of escaping from restraints or other traps. Escapologists (also classified as escape artists) escape from handcuffs, straitjackets, cages, coffins, steel boxes, barrels, bags, burning buildings, fish-tanks, and other perils, often in combination.

==History==
The art of escaping from restraints and confined spaces has been a skill employed by performers for a very long time. It was not originally displayed as an overt act in itself but was instead used secretly to create illusions such as a disappearance or transmutation. In the 1860s, the Davenport Brothers, who were skilled at releasing themselves from rope ties, used the art to convey the impression they were restrained while they created spirit phenomena.

Other illusionists, including John Nevil Maskelyne, worked out how the Davenports did their act and re-created the tricks to debunk the brothers&#x27; claims of psychic power. However, the re-creations did not involve overt escape, merely a replication of tricks with the statement that they were accomplished by secret magicians&#x27; skills rather than spirits. It took another thirty years before the pure skill of escape began to be displayed as an act in itself. The figure most responsible for making escapology a recognized entertainment was Harry Houdini, who built his career on demonstrating the ability to escape from a huge variety of restraints and difficult situations.

Houdini made no secret of the fact that he was an expert on restraints and the skills needed to overcome them but he often concealed the exact details of his escapes to maintain an air of mystery and suspense. Although many of his escapes relied on technical skills such as lock-picking and contortion, he also performed tricks such as Metamorphosis and the Chinese Water Torture Cell, which are essentially classic stage illusions reliant on cleverly designed props. Houdini&#x27;s feats helped to define the basic repertoire of escapology, including escapes from handcuffs, padlocks, straitjackets, mail bags, beer barrels, and prison cells.

A succession of performers have added new ideas and created variations on old stunts, but it is common for even the best contemporary escapologists to be dubbed modern day &quot;Houdinis&quot;. During his lifetime, Houdini argued his main escape acts were copyrighted, and sued competitors such as John Clempert, who in 1906 apologized and settled out of court. 

Because St. Nicholas Owen successfully escaped the Tower of London and arranged the escape of two Jesuit inmates from the prison, the 16th-century Christian martyr is considered by Catholic escapologists as their patron saint. Along with St. John Don Bosco, the two are considered the primary patrons of Catholic Gospel Magicians.

==Forms of escape performance==
*Hidden is a style of escape performance popularised by the late Harry Houdini that involved much of the performance taking place behind some form of screen or inside a cabinet in order to protect the secrets of the performer. This style of escape performance was popular with the majority of escape artists until the end of the 20th Century and is still preferred by many performers today. Its disadvantage is that audiences may wrongly believe a concealed assistant to have released the escapologist, whom they may not have seen struggle.
*Full View is a form of escape performance that was popularised by Norman Bigelow Sr. during the 1970s. He presented his escapes as pure tests of human skill and endurance and the audience could actually see everything from start to finish. His signature escape, &quot;The Doors of Death,&quot; inspired many escape artists to adopt this style of performance in their own shows. One performer, Jonathon Bryce, took the full view approach to the Buried Alive escape and with the encouragement of Norman Bigelow Sr., made the world debut of Buried Alive in Full View at the Music is Art Festival in Buffalo, NY with the help of Goo Goo Dolls bassist, Robby Takac. Mark Nelson, &quot;The Great Markini&quot; also performed Full View with his Electrified Mummy Lid Torture Board Escape. 
*Escape or Die, the form of escape performance originated by Houdini, is the standard for top-of-the-line escapologists. There are at least three possible ways for an escapologist&#x27;s life to be at risk from the possible failure of this escape. These are death by drowning, as in the water escapes Houdini pioneered; death by suffocation, as in escapes from airtight enclosures containing no water, such as coffins; and death by falling, as also originated by Houdini, in a straitjacket escape hanging high above the earth as when Houdini hung from cranes and buildings upside down in a strait jacket where falling would mean certain death. UK escape artist Alan Alan took this further by hanging from a burning rope hundreds of feet in the air. This type of escapology does fail, and its failures have resulted in escape artists getting hurt or losing their lives. Others who have done this type of escape include Dorothy Dietrich, Antony Britton, Jonathon Bryce, and Mark Nelson &quot;Markini The Worlds Youngest Professional Escape Artist&quot; highlighted death by electrocution with his &quot;Electrified Mummy Lid Torture Board&quot;. Escape was required in under 60 seconds or a fatal charge of electricity would be passed through the chains holding him to the board.

==World Records==
In 2012, Lucas Wilson, an illusionist from Canada managed the fastest ever recorded escape from a straitjacket while suspended; he escaped in 8.4 seconds while hanging upside down from his ankles at a height of 1m.

== In fiction ==
*&quot;The Grim Game&quot;, a 1919 film, stars Harry Houdini as a young man who is bound and imprisoned on numerous occasions by a gang who have kidnapped his fiancée. Considered by many as Houdini&#x27;s best film. Lost for over 90 years and rediscovered in 2015 by escape artist and magician Dorothy Dietrich.
*&quot;Haldane of the Secret Service&quot;, a 1924 film directed by and starring Harry Houdini, who is repeatedly restrained by villains who murdered his detective-father. Filmed at Beaver Kill Falls in Valatie, NY.
*The novel &quot;The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp; Clay&quot;, written by Michael Chabon and winner of the 2001 Pulitzer Prize, features escapology as an important plot point.
*&quot;Ragtime&quot;, by E.L. Doctorow, features Harry Houdini as a major character, and uses escapology as a metaphor for the struggles faced by the American immigrant.
*In American superhero comic books, many superheroes like Batman are trained in escapology, which is invaluable when dealing with deathtraps. However, superheroes who are escapologists by profession include Mister Miracle, Ms. Liberty and The Escapist. (Mister Miracle and The Escapist were both based on escapologist-turned-comic artist Jim Steranko.) Houdini himself appeared as a time/space traveler in the comic book series &quot;Daring Escapes featuring Houdini.&quot;
*The 1953 biographical film, &quot;Houdini&quot;, starring Tony Curtis in the title role, depicted many of Houdini&#x27;s escapology performances. Curtis&#x27; performance artist character, The Great Leslie, also performs a suspended straight-jacket escape at the start of the film &quot;The Great Race&quot;.
*In 1971, Christopher George played an escape artist named Cameron Steele in the TV movie/unsold series pilot, &quot;Escape&quot;. Steele was a non-performing escapologist and night-club owner who, like Bill Bixby&#x27;s Anthony Blake (&quot;The Magician&quot;), habitually helped people in trouble.
*In 1982, Griffin O&#x27;Neal played a junior escapologist named Danny Masters in the film, &quot;The Escape Artist&quot;.
*In 1983, real-life escape artist Bill Shirk played himself in a film called &quot;The Escapist&quot;.
*Yorick, the main character of the comic book &quot;&quot;, is an escape artist.
*In the 1991 film, &quot;The Linguini Incident&quot;, Rosanna Arquette plays an aspiring escape artist.
*The novels &quot;Specific Gravity&quot; and &quot;Ontario Lacus&quot; by J. Matthew Neal (2007 and 2008) features a scientist who is also a master escape artist.
*Paul Adam&#x27;s &quot;Escape from Shadow Island&quot;, first published in 2009, features young escapologist Max Cassidy. Two further books in the series, &quot;Jaws of Death&quot; and &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Bay&quot;, will be released in April 2011 and 2012 respectively.
* Houdini himself - or rather his ghost - appeared in an episode of &quot;The Real Ghostbusters&quot;; not having lost his touch, the protagonists&#x27; ghost traps could not hold him for more than a minute. 
*Adam Phillips&#x27;s essay &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Box&quot; uses Houdini himself, as well as a young victim of sexual abuse and other examples, to discuss escapology.
*The console video game Exit focuses around the exploits of the self-proclaimed escapologist known as Mr. ESC.
*The 2006 movie &quot;The Prestige&quot; deals with two magicians who employ increasingly difficult escape illusions in a competitive one-upmanship, with tragic results.
*In the 2013 film, &quot;Now You See Me&quot;, Isla Fisher plays an escape artist named Henley Reeves. In an interview, she says, &quot;I watched all of Houdini’s work and Dorothy Dietrich, who is a female escapologist, who is amazing, you have to watch her.&quot; “I got to train with Dorothy Dietrich, the first lady magician to catch a bullet with her teeth.&quot; Fisher studied the life and work of Dietrich to prepare for the role. &quot;Dorothy is a real female escapologist who is working today. She was the first woman to capture a bullet between her teeth, which is an amazing feat. She&#x27;s not only good at misdirection, but she also connects emotionally with the audience, so she&#x27;s better able to involve them in the stunts.&quot;

==List of notable escape artists==
* Harry Houdini
* David Copperfield
* Doc Cunningham
* Alan Alan
* Antony Britton
* Dean Gunnarson
* Frank Reno
* James Randi
* Norman Bigelow
* David Merlini
* Bill Shirk
* Dorothy Dietrich
* Criss Angel
* Michael Griffin
* Kristen Johnson
* Jonathan Goodwin
* Roslyn Walker
* Major Zamora
* Gopinath Muthukad
* Johnny Strange

==See also==
* Illusionist
* List of magicians
* Stunt performer

==References==
==External links==
* Houdini Museum Tour * Magic Show
* Escapology — the magic art of escape
* Busker Central - Rare and historic videos of Escapologists.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="0" end="10" title="Escapology" label="Escapology"/>
<link wikidata="Q357003" start="44" end="53" title="physical restraint" label="restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="71" end="84" title="Escapology" label="Escapologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="105" end="119" title="Escapology" label="escape artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808" start="133" end="142" title="handcuffs" label="handcuffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="144" end="157" title="straitjackets" label="straitjackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q129211" start="159" end="164" title="Cage (enclosure)" label="cages"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="166" end="173" title="coffins" label="coffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="188" end="194" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="222" end="232" title="aquarium" label="fish-tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q478846" start="573" end="591" title="Davenport Brothers" label="Davenport Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q965961" start="777" end="797" title="John Nevil Maskelyne" label="John Nevil Maskelyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="1296" end="1309" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351522" start="1706" end="1718" title="lock-picking" label="lock-picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489919" start="1768" end="1781" title="Metamorphosis (illusion)" label="Metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100683" start="1790" end="1816" title="Chinese Water Torture Cell" label="Chinese Water Torture Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808" start="1997" end="2006" title="handcuffs" label="handcuffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40607" start="2008" end="2015" title="padlock" label="padlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="2018" end="2030" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620264" start="2033" end="2041" title="mail bag" label="mail bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="2044" end="2055" title="beer barrel" label="beer barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q686534" start="2062" end="2073" title="prison cell" label="prison cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q87451522" start="2375" end="2388" title="John Clempert" label="John Clempert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985197" start="2453" end="2466" title="Nicholas Owen (martyr)" label="Nicholas Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="2492" end="2507" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2539" end="2545" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2622" end="2630" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146183" start="2688" end="2697" title="John Bosco" label="Don Bosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473364" start="2754" end="2766" title="Gospel Magic" label="Gospel Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="2870" end="2883" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q86832302" start="3413" end="3427" title="Norman Bigelow" label="Norman Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706058" start="4791" end="4800" title="Alan Alan" label="Alan Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="5048" end="5064" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703075" start="5066" end="5080" title="Antony Britton" label="Antony Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152442" start="5667" end="5680" title="The Grim Game" label="The Grim Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q427729" start="5690" end="5699" title="1919 in film" label="1919 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="5707" end="5720" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="5954" end="5970" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="6053" end="6066" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458039" start="6175" end="6182" title="Valatie" label="Valatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705230" start="6205" end="6250" title="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay" label="The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &amp;amp; Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q313466" start="6269" end="6283" title="Michael Chabon" label="Michael Chabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="6307" end="6321" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q737910" start="6378" end="6385" title="Ragtime (novel)" label="Ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q335232" start="6396" end="6409" title="E.L. Doctorow" label="E.L. Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="6420" end="6433" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="6554" end="6563" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="6564" end="6574" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="6599" end="6605" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997683" start="6671" end="6681" title="deathtrap (plot device)" label="deathtraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365204" start="6748" end="6762" title="Mister Miracle" label="Mister Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317017" start="6764" end="6775" title="Justice Machine" label="Ms. Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397118" start="6780" end="6792" title="The Escapist (character)" label="The Escapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706303" start="6879" end="6891" title="Jim Steranko" label="Jim Steranko"/>
<link wikidata="Q934122" start="7050" end="7057" title="Houdini (1953 film)" label="Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="7074" end="7085" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q304366" start="7303" end="7317" title="The Great Race" label="The Great Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q175908" start="7335" end="7353" title="Christopher George" label="Christopher George"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7442" end="7448" title="Escape (1971 film)" label="Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q498503" start="7528" end="7538" title="Bill Bixby" label="Bill Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q83849" start="7567" end="7579" title="The Magician (U.S. TV series)" label="The Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608815" start="7635" end="7654" title="Griffin O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Griffin O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370399" start="7957" end="7978" title="The Linguini Incident" label="The Linguini Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q109232" start="7986" end="8002" title="Rosanna Arquette" label="Rosanna Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="8054" end="8070" title="Specific Gravity" label="Specific Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143715" start="8087" end="8100" title="Ontario Lacus" label="Ontario Lacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149000" start="8200" end="8209" title="Paul Adam (English novelist)" label="Paul Adam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8223" end="8248" title="Escape from Shadow Island" label="Escape from Shadow Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794642" start="8309" end="8320" title="Max Cassidy" label="Max Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245676" start="8391" end="8410" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q733938" start="8546" end="8567" title="The Real Ghostbusters" label="The Real Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8715" end="8733" title="Houdini&amp;#x27;s Box" label="Houdini&amp;#x27;s Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137071" start="8871" end="8875" title="EXIT (video game)" label="Exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46551" start="8980" end="8992" title="The Prestige (film)" label="The Prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q499851" start="9153" end="9167" title="Now You See Me (film)" label="Now You See Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q228638" start="9175" end="9186" title="Isla Fisher" label="Isla Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="9300" end="9316" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="9917" end="9930" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q139637" start="9933" end="9950" title="David Copperfield (illusionist)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q98076002" start="9953" end="9967" title="Doc Cunningham" label="Doc Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706058" start="9970" end="9979" title="Alan Alan" label="Alan Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703075" start="9982" end="9996" title="Antony Britton" label="Antony Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246188" start="9999" end="10013" title="Dean Gunnarson" label="Dean Gunnarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313392" start="10016" end="10026" title="Frank Reno" label="Frank Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="10029" end="10040" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q86832302" start="10043" end="10057" title="Norman Bigelow" label="Norman Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237520" start="10060" end="10073" title="David Merlini" label="David Merlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910862" start="10076" end="10086" title="Bill Shirk" label="Bill Shirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="10089" end="10105" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131685" start="10108" end="10119" title="Criss Angel" label="Criss Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352626" start="10122" end="10137" title="Michael Griffin (escape artist)" label="Michael Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437775" start="10140" end="10155" title="Kristen Johnson" label="Kristen Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273235" start="10158" end="10174" title="Jonathan Goodwin (escapologist)" label="Jonathan Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221670" start="10177" end="10190" title="Roslyn Walker" label="Roslyn Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738317" start="10193" end="10205" title="Major Zamora" label="Major Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584307" start="10208" end="10225" title="Gopinath Muthukad" label="Gopinath Muthukad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267740" start="10228" end="10242" title="Johnny Strange" label="Johnny Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="10259" end="10270" title="Magic (illusion)" label="Illusionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817667" start="10273" end="10290" title="List of magicians" label="List of magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q465501" start="10293" end="10308" title="Stunt performer" label="Stunt performer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83895" wikidata="Q44490" url="?curid=83895" title="John Henry Newman">
<text>John Henry Newman (21 February 1801 – 11 August 1890) was an English Catholic theologian, academic, philosopher, historian, writer, and poet. He was previously an Anglican priest and after his conversion became a cardinal. He was an important and controversial figure in the religious history of England in the 19th century and was known nationally by the mid-1830s. He was canonised as a Catholic saint in 2019. He was a member of the Oratory of St. Philip Neri.

Originally an evangelical academic at the University of Oxford and priest in the Church of England, Newman was drawn to the high church tradition of Anglicanism. He became one of the more notable leaders of the Oxford Movement, an influential and controversial grouping of Anglicans who wished to restore to the Church of England many Catholic beliefs and liturgical rituals from before the English Reformation. In this, the movement had some success. After publishing his controversial Tract 90 in 1841, Newman later wrote: &quot;I was on my death-bed, as regards my membership with the Anglican Church.&quot; 

In 1845, Newman resigned his teaching post at Oxford University, and, joined by some but not all of his followers, officially left the Church of England and was received into the Catholic Church. He was quickly ordained as a priest and continued as an influential religious leader, based in Birmingham. In 1879, he was created a cardinal by Pope Leo XIII in recognition of his services to the cause of the Catholic Church in England. He was instrumental in the founding of the Catholic University of Ireland in 1854, which later became University College Dublin.

Newman was also a literary figure: his major writings include the &quot;Tracts for the Times&quot; (1833–1841), his autobiography &quot;Apologia Pro Vita Sua&quot; (1864), the &quot;Grammar of Assent&quot; (1870), and the poem &quot;The Dream of Gerontius&quot; (1865), which was set to music in 1900 by Edward Elgar. He wrote the popular hymns &quot;Lead, Kindly Light&quot;, &quot;Firmly I believe, and truly&quot;, and &quot;Praise to the Holiest in the Height&quot; (the latter two taken from &quot;Gerontius&quot;).

Newman&#x27;s beatification was proclaimed by Pope Benedict XVI on 19 September 2010 during his visit to the United Kingdom. His canonisation was officially approved by Pope Francis on 12 February 2019, and took place on 13 October 2019. He is the fifth saint of the City of London, after Thomas Becket (born in Cheapside), Thomas More (born on Milk Street), Edmund Campion (son of a London bookseller) and Polydore Plasden (of Fleet Street).

==Early life and education==
Newman was born on 21 February 1801 in the City of London, the eldest of a family of three sons and three daughters. His father, John Newman, was a banker with Ramsbottom, Newman and Company in Lombard Street. His mother, Jemima (née Fourdrinier), was descended from a notable family of Huguenot refugees in England, founded by the engraver, printer and stationer Paul Fourdrinier. Francis William Newman was a younger brother. His younger sister, Harriet Elizabeth, married Thomas Mozley, also prominent in the Oxford Movement. The family lived in Southampton Street (now Southampton Place) in Bloomsbury and bought a country retreat in Ham, near Richmond, in the early 1800s.

At the age of seven Newman was sent to Great Ealing School conducted by George Nicholas. There George Huxley, father of Thomas Henry Huxley, taught mathematics, and Walter Mayers taught classics. Newman took no part in the casual school games. He was a great reader of the novels of Walter Scott, then in course of publication, and of Robert Southey. Aged 14, he read sceptical works by Thomas Paine, David Hume and perhaps Voltaire.

===Evangelical===
At the age of 15, during his last year at school, Newman converted to Evangelical Christianity, an incident of which he wrote in his &quot;Apologia&quot; that it was &quot;more certain than that I have hands or feet&quot;. Almost at the same time (March 1816) the bank Ramsbottom, Newman and Co. crashed, though it paid its creditors, and his father left to manage a brewery. Mayers, who had himself undergone a conversion in 1814, lent Newman books from the English Calvinist tradition. &quot;It was in the autumn of 1816 that Newman fell under the influence of a definite creed and received into his intellect impressions of dogma never afterwards effaced.&quot; He became an evangelical Calvinist and held the typical belief that the Pope was the antichrist under the influence of the writings of Thomas Newton, as well as his reading of Joseph Milner&#x27;s &quot;History of the Church of Christ&quot;. Mayers is described as a moderate, Clapham Sect Calvinist, and Newman read William Law as well as William Beveridge in devotional literature. He also read &quot;The Force of Truth&quot; by Thomas Scott.

Although to the end of his life, Newman looked back on his conversion to Evangelical Christianity in 1816 as the saving of his soul, he began to shift away from his early Calvinism. As Eamon Duffy puts it, &quot;He came to see Evangelicalism, with its emphasis on religious feeling and on the Reformation doctrine of justification by faith alone, as a Trojan horse for an undogmatic religious individualism that ignored the Church&#x27;s role in the transmission of revealed truth, and that must lead inexorably to subjectivism and skepticism.&quot;

===At university===
Newman&#x27;s name was entered at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn. He was, however, sent shortly to Trinity College, Oxford, where he studied widely. His anxiety to do well in the final schools produced the opposite result; he broke down in the examination, under Thomas Vowler Short, and so graduated as a BA &quot;under the line&quot; (with lower second class honours in Classics, and having failed classification in the Mathematical Papers).

Desiring to remain in Oxford, Newman then took private pupils and read for a fellowship at Oriel College, then &quot;the acknowledged centre of Oxford intellectualism&quot;. He was elected a fellow at Oriel on 12 April 1822. Edward Bouverie Pusey was elected a fellow of the same college in 1823.

==Anglican ministry==
On 13 June 1824, Newman was made an Anglican deacon at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. Ten days later he preached his first sermon at Holy Trinity Church in Over Worton (near Banbury, Oxfordshire), where his former teacher, the Reverend Walter Mayers, was curate. On Trinity Sunday, 29 May 1825, he was ordained a priest at Christ Church Cathedral by the Bishop of Oxford, Edward Legge. He became, at Pusey&#x27;s suggestion, curate of St Clement&#x27;s Church, Oxford. Here, for two years, he was engaged in parochial work and wrote articles on &quot;Apollonius of Tyana&quot;, &quot;Cicero&quot; and &quot;Miracles&quot; for the &quot;Encyclopædia Metropolitana&quot;.

Richard Whately and Edward Copleston, Provost of Oriel, were leaders in the group of Oriel Noetics, a group of independently thinking dons with a strong belief in free debate. In 1825, at Whately&#x27;s request, Newman became vice-principal of St Alban Hall, but he held this post for only one year. He attributed much of his &quot;mental improvement&quot; and partial conquest of his shyness at this time to Whately.
In 1826 Newman returned as a tutor to Oriel, and the same year Richard Hurrell Froude, described by Newman as &quot;one of the acutest, cleverest and deepest men&quot; he ever met, was elected fellow there. The two formed a high ideal of the tutorial office as clerical and pastoral rather than secular, which led to tensions in the college. Newman assisted Whately in his popular work &quot;Elements of Logic&quot; (1826, initially for the &quot;Encyclopædia Metropolitana&quot;), and from him gained a definite idea of the Christian Church as institution: &quot;a Divine appointment, and as a substantive body, independent of the State, and endowed with rights, prerogatives and powers of its own&quot;.

Newman broke with Whately in 1827 on the occasion of the re-election of Robert Peel as Member of Parliament for the university: Newman opposed Peel on personal grounds. In 1827 Newman was a preacher at Whitehall.

==Oxford Movement==
In 1828, Newman supported and secured the election of Edward Hawkins as Provost of Oriel over John Keble. In the same year Newman was appointed vicar of St Mary&#x27;s University Church, to which the benefice of Littlemore (to the south of the city of Oxford) was attached, and Pusey was made Regius Professor of Hebrew.

At this date, though Newman was still nominally associated with the Evangelicals, his views were gradually assuming a higher ecclesiastical tone. George Herring considers that the death of his sister Mary in January had a major impact on Newman. In the middle part of the year he worked to read the Church Fathers thoroughly.

While local secretary of the Church Missionary Society, Newman circulated an anonymous letter suggesting a method by which Anglican clergy might practically oust Nonconformists from all control of the society. This resulted in his being dismissed from the post on 8 March 1830; and three months later Newman withdrew from the Bible Society, completing his move away from the low church group. In 1831–1832, Newman became the &quot;Select Preacher&quot; before the university. In 1832 his difference with Hawkins as to the &quot;substantially religious nature&quot; of a college tutorship became acute and prompted his resignation.

===Mediterranean travels===
In December 1832, Newman accompanied Archdeacon Robert Froude and his son Hurrell on a tour in southern Europe on account of the latter&#x27;s health. On board the mail steamship &quot;Hermes&quot; they visited Gibraltar, Malta, the Ionian Islands and, subsequently, Sicily, Naples and Rome, where Newman made the acquaintance of Nicholas Wiseman. In a letter home he described Rome as &quot;the most wonderful place on Earth&quot;, but the Roman Catholic Church as &quot;polytheistic, degrading and idolatrous&quot;.

During the course of this tour, Newman wrote most of the short poems which a year later were printed in the &quot;Lyra Apostolica&quot;. From Rome, instead of accompanying the Froudes home in April, Newman returned to Sicily alone. He fell dangerously ill with gastric or typhoid fever at Leonforte, but recovered, with the conviction that God still had work for him to do in England. Newman saw this as his third providential illness. In June 1833 he left Palermo for Marseille in an orange boat, which was becalmed in the Strait of Bonifacio. Here, Newman wrote the verses &quot;Lead, Kindly Light&quot; which later became popular as a hymn.

===&quot;Tracts for the Times&quot;===

Newman was at home again in Oxford on 9 July 1833 and, on 14 July, Keble preached at St Mary&#x27;s an assize sermon on &quot;National Apostasy&quot;, which Newman afterwards regarded as the inauguration of the Oxford Movement. In the words of Richard William Church, it was &quot;Keble who inspired, Froude who gave the impetus, and Newman who took up the work&quot;; but the first organisation of it was due to Hugh James Rose, editor of the &quot;British Magazine&quot;, who has been styled &quot;the Cambridge originator of the Oxford Movement&quot;. Rose met Oxford Movement figures on a visit to Oxford looking for magazine contributors, and it was in his rectory house at Hadleigh, Suffolk, that a meeting of High Church clergy was held over 25–26 July (Newman was not present, but Hurrell Froude, Arthur Philip Perceval, and William Palmer had gone to visit Rose), at which it was resolved to fight for &quot;the apostolical succession and the integrity of the Prayer Book&quot;.

A few weeks later Newman started, apparently on his own initiative, the &quot;Tracts for the Times&quot;, from which the movement was subsequently named &quot;Tractarian&quot;. Its aim was to secure for the Church of England a definite basis of doctrine and discipline. At the time the state&#x27;s financial stance towards the Church of Ireland had raised the spectres of disestablishment, or an exit of high churchmen. The teaching of the tracts was supplemented by Newman&#x27;s Sunday afternoon sermons at St Mary&#x27;s, the influence of which, especially over the junior members of the university, was increasingly marked during a period of eight years. Through Francis Rivington, the tracts were published by the Rivington house in London.

In 1835 Professor Edward Pusey joined the Oxford Movement and contributed tracts on Baptism and the Eucharist, and the wider movement became known as the so-called &quot;Puseyites&quot;, a term soon generally applied to Anglican ritualists.

In 1836 the Tractarians appeared as an activist group, in united opposition to the appointment of Renn Dickson Hampden as Regius Professor of Divinity. Hampden&#x27;s 1832 Bampton Lectures, in the preparation of which Joseph Blanco White assisted, were suspected of heresy; and this suspicion was accentuated by a pamphlet put forth by Newman, &quot;Elucidations of Dr Hampden&#x27;s Theological Statements&quot;.

At this date, Newman became editor of the &quot;British Critic&quot;. He also gave courses of lectures in a side chapel of St Mary&#x27;s in defence of the &quot;via media&quot; (&quot;middle way&quot;) of Anglicanism between Roman Catholicism and popular Protestantism.

===Doubts and opposition===
Newman&#x27;s influence in Oxford was supreme about the year 1839. Just then, however, his study of monophysitism caused him to doubt whether Anglican theology was consistent with the principles of ecclesiastical authority which he had come to accept. He read Nicholas Wiseman&#x27;s article in the &quot;Dublin Review&quot; on &quot;The Anglican Claim&quot;, which quoted Augustine of Hippo against the Donatists, &quot;securus judicat orbis terrarum&quot; (&quot;the verdict of the world is conclusive&quot;). Newman later wrote of his reaction:

After a furore in which the eccentric John Brande Morris preached for him in St Mary&#x27;s in September 1839, Newman began to think of moving away from Oxford. One plan that surfaced was to set up a religious community in Littlemore, outside the city of Oxford. Since accepting his post at St Mary&#x27;s, Newman had a chapel (dedicated to Sts Nicholas and Mary) and a school built in the parish&#x27;s neglected area. Newman&#x27;s mother had laid the foundation stone in 1835, based on a half-acre plot and £100 given by Oriel College. Newman planned to appoint Charles Pourtales Golightly, an Oriel man, as curate at Littlemore in 1836. However, Golightly had taken offence at one of Newman&#x27;s sermons and joined a group of aggressive anti-Catholics. Isaac Williams became Littlemore&#x27;s curate instead, succeeded by John Rouse Bloxam from 1837 to 1840, during which the school opened. William John Copeland acted as curate from 1840.

Newman continued as a High Anglican controversialist until 1841, when he published Tract 90, which proved the last of the series. This detailed examination of the Thirty-Nine Articles suggested that their framers directed their negations not against Catholicism&#x27;s authorised creed, but only against popular errors and exaggerations. Though this was not altogether new, Archibald Campbell Tait, with three other senior tutors, denounced it as &quot;suggesting and opening a way by which men might violate their solemn engagements to the university&quot;. Other heads of houses and others in authority joined in the alarm. At the request of Richard Bagot, the Bishop of Oxford, the publication of the &quot;Tracts&quot; came to an end.

===Retreat to Littlemore===
Newman also resigned the editorship of the &quot;British Critic&quot; and was thenceforth, as he later described it, &quot;on his deathbed as regards membership with the Anglican Church&quot;. He now considered the position of Anglicans to be similar to that of the semi-Arians in the Arian controversy. The joint Anglican-Lutheran bishopric set up in Jerusalem was to him further evidence that the Church of England was not apostolic.

In 1842 Newman withdrew to Littlemore with a small band of followers, and lived in semi-monastic conditions. The first to join him there was John Dobree Dalgairns. Others were William Lockhart on the advice of Henry Manning, Ambrose St John in 1843, Frederick Oakeley and Albany James Christie in 1845. The group adapted buildings in what is now College Lane, Littlemore, opposite the inn, including stables and a granary for stage coaches. Newman called it &quot;the house of the Blessed Virgin Mary at Littlemore&quot; (now Newman College). This &quot;Anglican monastery&quot; attracted publicity, and much curiosity in Oxford, which Newman tried to downplay, but some nicknamed it Newmanooth (from Maynooth College). Some Newman wrote about English saints, while Newman himself worked to complete an &quot;Essay&quot; on the development of doctrine.

In February 1843, Newman published, as an advertisement in the &quot;Oxford Conservative Journal&quot;, an anonymous but otherwise formal retractation of all the hard things he had said against Roman Catholicism. Lockhart became the first in the group to convert formally to Catholicism. Newman preached his last Anglican sermon at Littlemore, the valedictory &quot;The parting of friends&quot; on 25 September, and resigned the living of St Mary&#x27;s, although he did not leave Littlemore for two more years, until his own formal reception into the Catholic Church.

==Conversion to Catholicism==
An interval of two years then elapsed before Newman was received into the Catholic Church on 9 October 1845 by Dominic Barberi, an Italian Passionist, at the college in Littlemore. The personal consequences for Newman of his conversion were great: he suffered broken relationships with family and friends, and attitudes toward him within his Oxford circle became polarised. The effect on the wider Tractarian movement is still debated since Newman&#x27;s leading role is regarded by some scholars as overstated, as is Oxford&#x27;s domination of the movement as a whole. Tractarian writings had a wide and continuing circulation after 1845, well beyond the range of personal contacts with the main Oxford figures, and Tractarian clergy continued to be recruited into the Church of England in numbers.

===Oratorian===
In February 1846, Newman left Oxford for St. Mary&#x27;s College, Oscott, where Nicholas Wiseman, then vicar-apostolic of the Midland district, resided; and in October he went to Rome, where he was ordained priest by Cardinal Giacomo Filippo Fransoni and awarded the degree of Doctor of Divinity by Pope Pius IX. At the close of 1847, Newman returned to England as an Oratorian and resided first at Maryvale (near Old Oscott, now the site of Maryvale Institute, a college of Theology, Philosophy and Religious Education); then at St Wilfrid&#x27;s College, Cheadle; and then at St Anne&#x27;s, Alcester Street, Birmingham. Finally, he settled at Edgbaston, where spacious premises were built for the community, and where (except for four years in Ireland) he lived a secluded life for nearly forty years.
Before the house at Edgbaston was occupied, Newman established the London Oratory, with Father Frederick William Faber as its superior.

===&quot;Lectures on the Present Position of Catholics in England&quot;===

Anti-Catholicism had been central to British culture since the 16th-century English Reformation. According to D. G. Paz, anti-Catholicism was &quot;an integral part of what it meant to be a Victorian&quot;. Popular anti-Catholic feeling ran high at this time, partly in consequence of the papal bull &quot;Universalis Ecclesiae&quot; by which Pope Pius IX re-established the Catholic diocesan hierarchy in England on 29 September 1850. New episcopal sees were created and Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman was to be the first Archbishop of Westminster. Wiseman announced the restoration of the hierarchy in England on 7 October in a pastoral letter dated &quot;from out of the Flaminian Gate&quot;.

Led by &quot;The Times&quot; and &quot;Punch&quot;, the British press saw this as being an attempt by the papacy to reclaim jurisdiction over England. This was dubbed the &quot;Papal Aggression&quot;. The prime minister, John Russell, wrote a public letter to the Bishop of Durham and denounced this &quot;attempt to impose a foreign yoke upon our minds and consciences&quot;. Russell&#x27;s stirring up of anti-Catholicism led to a national outcry. This &quot;No Popery&quot; uproar led to violence with Catholic priests being pelted in the streets and Catholic churches being attacked.

Newman was keen for lay people to be at the forefront of any public apologetics, writing that Catholics should &quot;make the excuse of this persecution for getting up a great organization, going round the towns giving lectures, or making speeches&quot;. He supported John Capes in the committee he was organising for public lectures in February 1851. Due to ill health, Capes had to stop them halfway through.

Newman took the initiative and booked the Birmingham Corn Exchange for a series of public lectures. He decided to make their tone popular and provide cheap off-prints to those who attended. These lectures were his &quot;Lectures on the Present Position of Catholics in England&quot; and they were delivered weekly, beginning on 30 June and published on 1 September 1851.

In total, there were nine lectures:
# Protestant view of the Catholic Church
# Tradition the sustaining power of the Protestant view
# Fable the basis of the Protestant view
# True testimony insufficient for the Protestant view
# Logical inconsistency of the Protestant view
# Prejudice the life of the Protestant view
# Assumed principles of the intellectual ground of the Protestant view
# Ignorance concerning Catholics the protection of the Protestant view
# Duties of Catholics towards the Protestant view
which form the nine chapters of the published book. Following the first edition, a number of paragraphs were removed following the Achilli trial as &quot;they were decided by a jury to constitute a libel, June 24, 1852.&quot;

Andrew Nash describes the &quot;Lectures&quot; as &quot;an analysis of this [anti-Catholic] ideology, satirising it, demonstrating the false traditions on which it was based and advising Catholics how they should respond to it. They were the first of their kind in English literature.&quot;

John Wolffe assesses the &quot;Lectures&quot; as: an interesting treatment of the problem of anti-Catholicism from an observer whose partisan commitment did not cause him to slide into mere polemic and who had the advantage of viewing the religious battlefield from both sides of the tortured no man&#x27;s land of Littlemore.

The response to the &quot;Lectures&quot; was split between Catholics and Protestants. Generally, Catholics greeted them with enthusiasm. A review in &quot;The Rambler&quot;, a Catholic periodical, saw them as &quot;furnishing a key to the whole mystery of anti-Catholic hostility and as shewing the special point of attack upon which our controversial energies should be concentrated.&quot; However, some Catholic theologians, principally John Gillow, president of Ushaw College, perceived Newman&#x27;s language as ascribing too much to the role of the laity. Gillow accused Newman of giving the impression that the church&#x27;s infallibility resides in a partnership between the hierarchy and the faithful, rather than falling exclusively in the teaching office of the church, a concept described by Pope Pius IX as the &quot;ordinary magisterium&quot; of the church. The Protestant response was less positive. Archdeacon Julius Hare said that Newman &quot;is determined to say whatever he chooses, in spite of facts and reason&quot;.

Wilfrid Ward, Newman&#x27;s first biographer, describes the &quot;Lectures&quot; as follows: We have the very curious spectacle of a grave religious apologist giving rein for the first time at the age of fifty to a sense of rollicking fun and gifts of humorous writing, which if expended on other subjects would naturally have adorned the pages of Thackeray&#x27;s &quot;Punch&quot;.

Ian Ker has raised the profile of Newman&#x27;s satire. Ker notes that Newman&#x27;s imagery has a &quot;savage, Swiftian flavour&quot; and can be &quot;grotesque in the Dickens manner&quot;.

Newman himself described the &quot;Lectures&quot; as his &quot;best-written book&quot;.

===Achilli trial===

One of the features of English anti-Catholicism was the holding of public meetings at which ex-Catholics, including former priests, denounced their prior beliefs and gave detailed accounts of the alleged &quot;horrors&quot; of Catholic life. Giacinto Achilli (1803–1860), an ex-Dominican friar, was one such speaker.

In 1841, the Roman Inquisition had suspended Achilli&#x27;s priestly faculties for sexual misconduct and sentenced Achilli to three years of penance in a Dominican house. Achilli left the house in 1842, becoming Protestant and asking for political asylum in Corfu. In 1850, he was brought to England by the Evangelical Alliance, which portrayed him as a victim, to speak against the Catholic Church. In July 1850, Wiseman wrote a detailed exposé of him in &quot;The Dublin Review&quot; which listed all of his offences. Newman therefore assumed, after seeking legal advice, that he would be able to repeat the facts in his fifth lecture in his &quot;Lectures on the Present Position of Catholics in England&quot;.

The section of the lecture that was decided by jury to constitute a libel was:
I have been a Catholic and an infidel; I have been a Roman priest and a hypocrite; I have been a profligate under a cowl. I am that Father Achilli, who as early as 1826, was deprived of my faculty to lecture, for an offence which my superiors did their best to conceal; and who in 1827 had already earned the reputation of a scandalous friar. I am that Achilli, who in the diocese of Viterbo in February 1831, robbed of her honour a young woman of eighteen; who in September 1833, was found guilty of a second such crime, in the case of a person of twenty-eight; and who perpetrated a third in July 1834, in the case of another aged twenty-four. I am he, who afterwards was found guilty of sins, similar or worse, in other towns of the neighbourhood. I am that son of St. Dominic who is known to have repeated the offence at Capua, in 1834 or 1835; and at Naples again, in 1840, in the case of a child of fi[f]teen. I am he who chose the sacristy of the church for one of these crimes, and Good Friday for another. Look on me, ye mothers of England, a confessor against Popery, for ye &#x27;ne&#x27;er may look upon my like again.&#x27; I am that veritable priest, who, after all this, began to speak against, not only the Catholic faith, but the moral law, and perverted others by my teaching. I am the Cavaliere Achilli, who then went to Corfu, made the wife of a tailor faithless to her husband, and lived publicly and travelled about with the wife of a chorus-singer. I am that Professor of the Protestant College at Malta, who with two others was dismissed from my post for offences which the authorities cannot get themselves to describe. And now attend to me, such as I am, and you shall see what you shall see about the barbarity and profligacy of the Inquisitors of Rome.

You speak truly, O Achilli, and we cannot answer you a word. You are a Priest; you have been a Friar; you are, it is undeniable, the scandal of Catholicism, and the palmary argument of Protestants, by your extraordinary depravity. You have been, it is true, a profligate, an unbeliever, and a hypocrite. Not many years passed of your conventual life, and you were never in the choir, always in private houses, so that the laity observed you. You were deprived of your professorship, we own it; you were prohibited from preaching and hearing confessions; you were obliged to give hush-money to the father of one of your victims, as we learned from an official document of the Neapolitan Police to be &#x27;known for habitual incontinency;&#x27; your name came before the civil tribunal at Corfu for your crime of adultery. You have put the crown on your offences, by as long as you could, denying them all; you have professed to seek after truth, when you were ravening after sin.

The libel charge was officially laid against Newman in November. Under English law, Newman needed to prove every single charge he had made against Achilli. Newman requested the documents that Wiseman had used for his article in the &quot;Dublin Review&quot; but he had mislaid them. He eventually found them but it was too late to prevent the trial.

Newman and his defence committee needed to locate the victims and return them to England. A number of the victims were found and Maria Giberne, a friend of Newman, went to Italy to return with them to England. Achilli, on hearing that witnesses were being brought, arranged for the trial to be delayed. This put Newman under great strain as he had been invited to be the founding rector of the proposed Catholic University in Dublin and was composing and delivering the lectures that would become &quot;The Idea of a University&quot;.

On 21 June 1852, the libel trial started and lasted three days. Despite the evidence of the victims and witnesses, Achilli denied that any of it had happened; the jury believed him and found Newman guilty of libel. &quot;The Times&quot; said in response that &quot;a great blow has been given to the administration of justice in this country&quot;.

A second trial was not granted and sentencing was postponed. When sentencing occurred, Newman did not get the prison sentence expected but got a fine of £100 and a long lecture from Judge John Taylor Coleridge about his moral deterioration since he had become a Catholic. Coleridge later wrote to Keble: &quot;It is a very painful matter for us who must hail this libel as false, believing it is in great part true—or at least that it may be.&quot;

The fine was paid on the spot and while his expenses as defendant amounted to about £14,000, they were paid out of a fund organised by this defence committee to which Catholics at home and abroad had contributed; there was £2,000 left over which was spent on the purchase of a small property in Rednal, on the Lickey Hills, with a chapel and cemetery, where Newman was eventually buried.

Newman removed the libellous section of the fifth lecture and replaced it with the inscription:
&quot;De illis quae sequebantur&quot; / &quot;posterorum judicium sit&quot; – About those things which had followed / let posterity be the judge.

===Educator===
In 1854, at the request of the Irish Catholic bishops, Newman went to Dublin as rector of the newly established Catholic University of Ireland, now University College Dublin. It was during this time that he founded the Literary and Historical Society. After four years, he retired. He published a volume of lectures entitled &quot;The Idea of a University&quot;, which explained his philosophy of education.
Newman believed in a middle way between free thinking and moral authority—one that would respect the rights of knowledge as well as the rights of revelation. His purpose was to build a Catholic university, in a world where the major Catholic universities on the European continent had recently been secularised, and most universities in the English-speaking world were Protestant. For a university to claim legitimacy in the larger world, it would have to support research and publication free from church censorship; however, for a university to be a safe place for the education of Catholic youth, it would have to be a place in which the teachings of the Catholic church were respected and promoted.

The University ... has this object and this mission; it contemplates neither moral impression nor mechanical production; it professes to exercise the mind neither in art nor in duty; its function is intellectual culture; here it may leave its scholars, and it has done its work when it has done as much as this. It educates the intellect to reason well in all matters, to reach out towards truth, and to grasp it.

This philosophy encountered opposition within the Catholic Church, at least in Ireland, as evidenced by the opinion of bishop Paul Cullen. In 1854 Cullen wrote a letter to the Vatican&#x27;s Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith (now called the Dicastery for Evangelization), criticising Newman&#x27;s liberal exercise of authority within the new university:

The discipline introduced is unsuitable, certainly to this country. The young men are allowed to go out at all hours, to smoke, etc., and there has not been any fixed time for study. All this makes it clear that Father Newman does not give enough attention to details.

The university as envisaged by Newman encountered too much opposition to prosper. However, his book did have a wide influence.

In 1858, Newman projected a branch house of the Oratory at Oxford; but this project was opposed by Father (later Cardinal) Henry Edward Manning, another influential convert from Anglicanism, and others. It was thought that the creation of a Catholic body within the heart of Oxford was likely to induce Catholics to send their sons to that university, rather than to newly formed Catholic universities. The scheme was abandoned. When Catholics did begin to attend Oxford from the 1860s onwards, a Catholic club was formed and, in 1888, it was renamed the Oxford University Newman Society in recognition of Newman&#x27;s efforts on behalf of Catholicism in that university city. The Oxford Oratory was eventually founded over 100 years later in 1993.

In 1859, Newman established, in connection with the Birmingham Oratory, a school for the education of the sons of gentlemen along lines similar to those of English public schools. The Oratory School flourished as a boys&#x27; boarding school, and was one of a number which were to be dubbed &quot;The Catholic Eton&quot;.

Newman&#x27;s published writings and sermons had a profound influence on one of the greatest of American educators, William Augustus Muhlenberg (1796-1877). At his model schools on Long Island (1828, 1836), Muhlenberg would sometimes read Newman&#x27;s sermons to the boys. Muhlenberg, pioneer of a new kind of education in America, and a staunch Protestant, distanced himself from Newman when the latter converted to the Roman Church in 1845. But the influence went deep, nonetheless, as can be seen in the literary remains of Muhlenberg&#x27;s former pupils, especially in those of the missionary school-maker Lloyd Breck (1818-1876) and John Barrett Kerfoot (1816-1881), founder of Saint James School of Maryland.

===Relationships with other converts===
Newman had a special concern in the publisher Burns &amp; Oates; the owner, James Burns, had published some of the Tractarians, and Burns had himself converted to Catholicism in 1847. Newman published several books with the company, effectively saving it. There is even a story that Newman&#x27;s novel &quot;Loss and Gain&quot; was written specifically to assist Burns.

In 1863, in a response to Thomas William Allies, while agreeing that slavery was bad, Newman would not publicly condemn it as &quot;intrinsically evil&quot; on the grounds that it had been tolerated by St Paul—thus asserting that slavery is &quot;a condition of life ordained by God in the same sense that other conditions of life are&quot;.

Newman and Henry Edward Manning both became significant figures in the late 19th-century Catholic Church in England: both were Anglican converts and both were elevated to the dignity of cardinal. Despite these similarities, there was a lack of sympathy between the two men who were different in character and experience, and they clashed on a number of issues, in particular the foundation of an Oratory in Oxford. On theological issues, Newman had reservations about the declaration of papal infallibility (Manning favoured the formal declaration of the doctrine). Newman, while personally convinced, as a matter of theological opinion, of papal infallibility, opposed its definition as dogma, fearing that the definition might be expressed in over-broad terms open to misunderstanding.

George W. E. Russell recorded that:
When Newman died there appeared in a monthly magazine a series of very unflattering sketches by one who had lived under his roof. I ventured to ask Cardinal Manning if he had seen these sketches. He replied that he had and thought them very shocking; the writer must have a very unenviable mind, &amp;c., and then, having thus sacrificed to propriety, after a moment&#x27;s pause he added: &quot;But if you ask me if they are like poor Newman, I am bound to say—&quot;a photograph&quot;.&quot;

==&quot;Apologia&quot;==

In 1862 Newman began to prepare autobiographical and other memoranda to vindicate his career. The occasion came when, in the January 1864 issue of &quot;Macmillan&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, Charles Kingsley, reviewing James Anthony Froude&#x27;s &quot;History of England&quot;, incidentally asserted that &quot;Truth, for its own sake, had never been a virtue with the Roman clergy. Father Newman informs us that it need not, and on the whole ought not to be.&quot; Edward Lowth Badeley, who had been a close legal adviser to Newman since the Achilli trial, encouraged him to make a robust rebuttal. After some preliminary sparring between the two, in which Kingsley refused to admit any fault, Newman published a pamphlet, &quot;Mr Kingsley and Dr Newman: a Correspondence on the Question whether Dr Newman teaches that Truth is no Virtue&quot;, (published in 1864 and not reprinted until 1913). The pamphlet has been described as &quot;unsurpassed in the English language for the vigour of its satire&quot;. However, the anger displayed was later, in a letter to Sir William Cope, admitted to have been largely feigned. After the debate went public, Kingsley attempted to defend his assertion in a lengthy pamphlet entitled &quot;What then does Dr Newman mean?&quot;, described by a historian as &quot;one of the most momentous rhetorical and polemical failures of the Victorian age&quot;.

In answer to Kingsley Newman published his &quot;Apologia Pro Vita Sua&quot;, a religious autobiography, in seven weekly parts starting on 21 April, followed by an appendix two weeks after the seventh part. Its tone changed the popular estimate of its author, by explaining the convictions which had led him into the Catholic Church. Kingsley&#x27;s general accusation against the Catholic clergy is dealt with in the seventh part in the work; his specific accusations are addressed in an appendix. Newman maintains that English Catholic priests are at least as truthful as English Catholic laymen. Newman published a revision of the series of pamphlets in book form in 1865; in 1913 a combined critical edition, edited by Wilfrid Ward, was published. In the book, Newman wrote, &quot;[T]here are but two alternatives, the way to Rome, and the way to Atheism.&quot;

In the conclusion of the &quot;Apologia&quot;, Newman expressed sympathy for the Liberal Catholicism of Charles de Montalembert and Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire: &quot;In their general line of thought and conduct I enthusiastically concur, and consider them to be before their age.&quot;

==Later years and death==
In 1870, Newman published his &quot;Grammar of Assent&quot;, a closely reasoned work in which the case for religious belief is maintained by arguments somewhat different from those commonly used by Catholic theologians of the time. In 1877, in the republication of his Anglican works, he added to the two volumes containing his defence of the &quot;via media&quot;, a long preface in which he criticised and replied to anti-Catholic arguments of his own which were contained in the original works.

At the time of the First Vatican Council (1869–1870), Newman was uneasy about the formal definition of the doctrine of papal infallibility, believing that the time was &quot;inopportune&quot;. In a private letter to his bishop (William Bernard Ullathorne), surreptitiously published, he denounced the &quot;insolent and aggressive faction&quot; that had pushed the matter forward. Newman gave no sign of disapproval when the doctrine was finally defined, but was an advocate of the &quot;principle of minimising&quot;, that included very few papal declarations within the scope of infallibility. Subsequently, in a letter nominally addressed to the Duke of Norfolk when Gladstone accused the Roman church of having &quot;equally repudiated modern thought and ancient history&quot;, Newman affirmed that he had always believed in the doctrine, and had only feared the deterrent effect of its definition on conversions on account of acknowledged historical difficulties. In this letter, and especially in the postscript to the second edition, Newman answered the charge that he was not at ease within the Catholic Church.

===Cardinalate===

In 1878, Newman&#x27;s old college elected him an honorary fellow, and he revisited Oxford after an interval of thirty-two years, on the same day Pope Pius IX died. Pius had mistrusted Newman but his successor, Pope Leo XIII, was encouraged by the Duke of Norfolk and other English Catholic laymen to make Newman a cardinal, despite the fact that he was neither a bishop nor resident in Rome. Cardinal Manning seems not to have been interested in having Newman become a cardinal and remained silent when the Pope asked him about it. Ullathorne, as Newman&#x27;s immediate superior, sent word to Pope Leo that he would welcome the honour. The offer was made by Rome in February 1879. Newman accepted the gesture as a vindication of his work, but made two requests: that he not be consecrated a bishop on receiving the cardinalate, as was usual at that time; and that he might remain in Birmingham.

Newman was elevated to the rank of cardinal in the consistory of 12 May 1879 by Pope Leo XIII, who assigned him the Deaconry of &quot;San Giorgio al Velabro&quot;. While in Rome, Newman insisted on the lifelong consistency of his opposition to &quot;liberalism in religion&quot;; he argued it would lead to complete relativism.

=== Death ===

After an illness, Newman returned to England and lived at the Birmingham Oratory until his death, making occasional visits to London and chiefly to his old friend R. W. Church, now Dean of St Paul&#x27;s. As a cardinal, Newman published nothing beyond a preface to a work by Arthur Wollaston Hutton on the Anglican ministry (1879) and an article, &quot;On the Inspiration of Scripture&quot;, in &quot;The Nineteenth Century&quot; (February 1884). In 1880, Newman confessed to an &quot;extreme joy&quot; that Conservative Benjamin Disraeli was no longer in power, and expressed the hope that Disraeli would be gone permanently.

From the latter half of 1886, Newman&#x27;s health began to fail. He celebrated Mass for the last time on Christmas Day in 1889. On 11 August 1890 he died of pneumonia at the Birmingham Oratory. Eight days later his body was buried alongside Ambrose St. John in the cemetery at Rednal Hill, Birmingham, at the country house of the oratory.

In accordance with his express wishes, Newman was buried in the grave of his lifelong friend Ambrose St. John. The pall over the coffin bore the motto that Newman adopted for use as a cardinal, &quot;Cor ad cor loquitur&quot; (&quot;Heart speaks to heart&quot;), which William Barry, writing in the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; (1913), traces to Francis de Sales and sees as revealing the secret of Newman&#x27;s &quot;eloquence, unaffected, graceful, tender, and penetrating&quot;. Ambrose St. John had become a Roman Catholic at around the same time as Newman, and the two men have a joint memorial stone inscribed with the motto Newman had chosen, &quot;Ex umbris et imaginibus in veritatem&quot; (&quot;Out of shadows and phantasms into the truth&quot;), which Barry traces to Plato&#x27;s allegory of the cave.

On 27 February 1891, Newman&#x27;s estate was probated at £4,206.

=== Remains ===
Newman&#x27;s grave was opened on 2 October 2008, with the intention of moving any remains to a tomb inside Birmingham Oratory for their more convenient veneration as relics during Newman&#x27;s consideration for sainthood; however, his wooden coffin was found to have disintegrated and no bones were found. A representative of the Fathers of the Birmingham Oratory alleged that this was because the coffin was wooden and the burial took place at a damp site. Contemporary sources show that the coffin was covered with a softer type of soil than the clay marl of the grave site. Forensic expert John Hunter, from the University of Birmingham, tested soil samples from near the grave and said that total disappearance of a body was unlikely over that timescale. He said that extreme conditions which could remove bone would also have removed the coffin handles, which were extant.

==Writer==
Some of Newman&#x27;s short and earlier poems are described by R. H. Hutton as &quot;unequalled for grandeur of outline, purity of taste and radiance of total effect&quot;; while his latest and longest, &quot;The Dream of Gerontius&quot;, attempts to represent the unseen world along the same lines as Dante. His prose style, especially in his Catholic days, is fresh and vigorous and is attractive to many who do not sympathise with his conclusions, from the apparent candour with which difficulties are admitted and grappled; while in his private correspondence, there is charm. James Joyce had a lifelong admiration for Newman&#x27;s writing style and in a letter to his patron Harriet Shaw Weaver remarked about Newman that &quot;nobody has ever written English prose that can be compared with that of a tiresome footling little Anglican parson who afterwards became a prince of the only true church&quot;.

==Theologian==
Newman defined theology as &quot;the Science of God, or the truths we know about God, put into a system, just as we have a science of the stars and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth and call it geology&quot;.

Around 1830, Newman developed a distinction between natural religion and revealed religion. Revealed religion is the Christian revelation which finds its fulfilment in Jesus Christ. Natural religion refers to the knowledge of God and divine things that has been acquired outside the Christian revelation. For Newman, this knowledge of God is not the result of unaided reason but of reason aided by grace, and so he speaks of natural religion as containing a revelation, even though it is an incomplete revelation.

Newman&#x27;s view of natural religion gives rise to passages in his writings in which he appears to sympathise with a broader theology. Both as an Anglican and as a Catholic, he put forward the notion of a universal revelation. As an Anglican, Newman subscribed to this notion in various works, among them the 1830 University Sermon entitled &quot;The Influence of Natural and Revealed Religion Respectively&quot;, the 1833 poem &quot;Heathenism&quot;, and the book &quot;The Arians of the Fourth Century&quot;, also 1833, where he admits that there was &quot;something true and divinely revealed in every religion&quot;. As a Catholic, he included the idea in &quot;A Grammar of Assent&quot;: &quot;As far as we know, there never was a time when ... revelation was not a revelation continuous and systematic, with distinct representatives and an orderly succession.&quot;

Newman held that &quot;freedom from symbols and articles is abstractedly the highest state of Christian communion&quot;, but was &quot;the peculiar privilege of the primitive Church&quot;. In 1877 he allowed that &quot;in a religion that embraces large and separate classes of adherents there always is of necessity to a certain extent an exoteric and an esoteric doctrine&quot;.

Newman was worried about the new dogma of papal infallibility advocated by an &quot;aggressive and insolent faction&quot;, fearing that the definition might be expressed in over-broad terms open to misunderstanding and would pit religious authority against physical science. He was relieved about the moderate tone of the eventual definition, which &quot;affirmed the pope&#x27;s infallibility only within a strictly limited province: the doctrine of faith and morals initially given to the apostolic Church and handed down in Scripture and tradition.&quot;

==Character and relationships==
A 2001 biography of Newman notes that since his death in 1890, he has suffered almost as much misrepresentation as he did during his lifetime. In the &quot;Apologia&quot; he had exorcised the phantom which, as he said, &quot;gibbers instead of me&quot;—the phantom of the secret Romanist, corrupting the youth of Oxford, devious and dissimulating. But he raised another phantom—that of the oversensitive, self-absorbed recluse who never did anything but think and write. Unwary readers took the &quot;Apologia&quot; as autobiography, but it is strictly what Newman called its first parts—&quot;A History of My Religious Opinions&quot;.

In Newman&#x27;s letters and memoranda and those of his friends, a more outgoing and humorous character is revealed. Newman lived in the world of his time, travelling by train as soon as engines were built and rail lines laid, and writing amusing letters about his adventures on railways and ships, and during his travels in Scotland and Ireland. He was an indefatigable walker, and as a young don at Oriel he often went out riding with Hurrell Froude and other friends. At Oxford he had an active pastoral life as an Anglican priest, though nothing of it appears in the &quot;Apologia&quot;. Later he was active as a Catholic priest. His parishioners at the Oratory, apart from a few professional men and their families, were mainly factory workers, Irish immigrants, and tradespeople. He was a caring pastor, and their recorded reminiscences show that they held him in affection.

Newman, who was only a few years younger than Keats and Shelley, was born into the Romantic generation when Englishmen still wept in moments of emotion. But he lived on into the age of the stiff upper lip, with the result that later generations, hearing of his tears on a visit to his mother&#x27;s grave or at the funerals of old friends such as Henry Wilberforce, thought him not only sensitive but melancholy.

The &quot;sensitive recluse of legend&quot; had a wide currency, appearing, for instance, in Lytton Strachey&#x27;s description, in his famously debunking set of portraits &quot;Eminent Victorians,&quot; as Newman&#x27;s &quot;soft, spectacled, Oxford manner, with its half-effeminate diffidence&quot;. Geoffrey Faber, whose own account of Newman in &quot;Oxford Apostles&quot; was far from hagiographic, found Strachey&#x27;s portrait a distasteful caricature, bearing scant likeness to the Newman of history and designed solely &quot;to tickle the self-conceit of a cynical and beliefless generation&quot;. In Strachey&#x27;s account, however, the true villain is Cardinal Manning, who is accused of secretly briefing the Press with the false story that Newman would turn down the Cardinalate, and who privately said of his late &quot;friend&quot;: &quot;Poor Newman! He was a great hater!&quot;.

Strachey was only ten when Newman died and never met him. In contrast to Strachey&#x27;s account, James Anthony Froude, Hurrell Froude&#x27;s brother, who knew Newman at Oxford, saw him as a Carlylean hero. Compared with Newman, Froude wrote, Keble, Pusey, and the other Tractarians &quot;were all but as ciphers, and he the indicating number&quot;. Newman&#x27;s face was &quot;remarkably like that of Julius Caesar. ...I have often thought of the resemblance, and believed that it extended to the temperament. In both there was an original force of character which refused to be moulded by circumstances, which was to make its own way, and become a power in the world; a clearness of intellectual perception, a disdain for conventionalities, a temper imperious and wilful, but along with it a most attaching gentleness, sweetness, singleness of heart and purpose. Both were formed by nature to command others, both had the faculty of attracting to themselves the passionate devotion of their friends and followers. ... For hundreds of young men &quot;Credo in Newmannum&quot; was the veritable symbol of faith.&quot;

===Celibacy===
Newman&#x27;s celibacy, which he embraced at the age of 15, also contributed to negative representations of his character, laying him open to what he called &quot;slurs&quot;. To exponents of muscular Christianity such as Charles Kingsley, celibacy was synonymous with unmanliness. Kingsley, who interpreted the Biblical story of Adam and Eve as expressing a &quot;binary law of man&#x27;s being; the want of a complementum, a &#x27;help meet&#x27;, without whom it is not good for him to be&quot;, feared and hated vowed sexual abstinence, considering it, in Laura Fasick&#x27;s words, &quot;a distinct and separate perversion&quot;. The charge of effeminacy was aimed not just at Newman but at Tractarians and Roman Catholics in general. &quot;In all that school&quot;, wrote Kingsley in 1851, &quot;there is an element of foppery—even in dress and manner; a fastidious, maundering, die-away effeminacy, which is mistaken for purity and refinement&quot;. John Cornwell comments that &quot;the notion of Newman&#x27;s effeminacy tells us more about the reaction of others to him at the time than [about] any tendency in his own nature&quot;.

To many members of the Oxford Movement, Newman included, it was Kingsley&#x27;s ideal of domesticity that seemed unmanly. As R. W. Church put it, &quot;To shrink from [celibacy] was a mark of want of strength or intelligence, of an unmanly preference for English home life, of insensibility to the generous devotion and purity of the saints&quot;. Defending his decision to remain single, Charles Reding, the hero of Newman&#x27;s novel &quot;Loss and Gain&quot;, argues that &quot;surely the idea of an Apostle, unmarried, pure, in fast and nakedness, and at length a martyr, is a higher idea than that of one of the old Israelites sitting under his vine and fig-tree, full of temporal goods, and surrounded by sons and grandsons?&quot; James Eli Adams remarks that if manliness is equated with physical and psychological toughness, then perhaps &quot;manhood cannot be &quot;sustained&quot; within domesticity, since the ideal is incompatible with ease&quot;. A &quot;common antagonism to domesticity&quot; links &quot;Tractarian discipline to Carlylean heroism&quot;.

===Friendships===

Although Newman&#x27;s deepest relationships were with men, he had many affectionate friendships with women. One of the most important was with Maria Giberne, who knew him in his youth and followed him into the Catholic Church. She was a noted beauty, who at age fifty was described by one admirer as &quot;the handsomest woman I ever saw in my life&quot;. A gifted amateur artist, she painted many portraits of Newman at various periods, as well as several of the pictures hanging in the Birmingham Oratory. Newman had a photographic portrait of her in his room and was still corresponding with her into their eighties. Emily Bowles, who first met Newman at Littlemore, was the recipient of some of his most outspoken letters on what he felt to be the mistaken course of the extreme infallibilists and his reasons for not &quot;speaking out&quot; as many begged him to do. When she visited Newman at the Birmingham Oratory in 1861, she was welcomed by him &quot;as only he can welcome&quot;; she would never forget &quot;the brightness that lit up his worn face as he received me at the door, carrying in several packages himself&quot;.

Newman also experienced close male friendships, the first with Richard Hurrell Froude (1803–1836), the longest with Ambrose St John (1815–1875), who shared communitarian life with Newman for 32 years starting in 1843 (when St John was 28). Newman wrote after St John&#x27;s death: &quot;I have ever thought no bereavement was equal to that of a husband&#x27;s or a wife&#x27;s, but I feel it difficult to believe that any can be greater, or any one&#x27;s sorrow greater, than mine&quot;. He directed that he be buried in the same grave as St John: &quot;I wish, with all my heart, to be buried in Fr Ambrose St John&#x27;s grave—and I give this as my last, my imperative will&quot;.

Newman spelt out his theology of friendship in a sermon he preached on the Feast of St John the Evangelist, &quot;whom Jesus loved&quot;. In the sermon, Newman said: &quot;There have been men before now, who have supposed Christian love was so diffuse as not to admit of concentration upon individuals; so that we ought to love all men equally. ... Now I shall maintain here, in opposition to such notions of Christian love, and with our Saviour&#x27;s pattern before me, that the best preparation for loving the world at large, and loving it duly and wisely, is to cultivate our intimate friendship and affection towards those who are immediately about us&quot;. For Newman, friendship is an intimation of a greater love, a foretaste of heaven. In friendship, two intimate friends gain a glimpse of the life that awaits them in God. Juan R. Vélez writes that someday Newman &quot;may well earn a new title, that of &quot;Doctor amicitiae&quot;: Doctor of the Church on Friendship. His biography is a treatise on the human and supernatural virtues that make up friendship&quot;.

===Discussion about potential homosexuality===
David Hilliard characterises Geoffrey Faber&#x27;s description of Newman, in his 1933 book &quot;Oxford Apostles&quot;, as a &quot;portrait of Newman as a sublimated homosexual (though the word itself was not used)&quot;. On Newman&#x27;s relations with Hurrell Froude, Faber wrote: &quot;Of all his friends Froude filled the deepest place in his heart, and I&#x27;m not the first to point out that his occasional notions of marrying definitely ceased with the beginning of his real intimacy with Froude&quot;. However, while Faber&#x27;s theory has had considerable popular influence, scholars of the Oxford Movement tend either to dismiss it entirely or to view it with great scepticism, with even scholars specifically concerned with same-sex desire hesitating to endorse it.

Ellis Hanson, for instance, writes that Newman and Froude clearly &quot;presented a challenge to Victorian gender norms&quot;, but &quot;Faber&#x27;s reading of Newman&#x27;s sexlessness and Hurrell Froude&#x27;s guilt as evidence of homosexuality&quot; seems &quot;strained&quot;. When John Campbell Shairp combines masculine and feminine imagery in his highly poetic description of Newman&#x27;s preaching style at Oxford in the early 1840s, Frederick S. Roden is put in mind of &quot;the late Victorian definition of a male invert, the homosexual: his (Newman&#x27;s) homiletics suggest a woman&#x27;s soul in a man&#x27;s body&quot;. Roden, however, does not argue that Newman was homosexual, seeing him rather—particularly in his professed celibacy—as a &quot;cultural dissident&quot; or &quot;queer&quot;. Roden uses the term &quot;queer&quot; in a very general sense &quot;to include any dissonant behaviours, discourses or claimed identities&quot; in relation to Victorian norms. In this sense, &quot;Victorian Roman and Anglo-Catholicism were culturally queer&quot;. In Newman&#x27;s case, Roden writes, &quot;homoaffectivity&quot; (found in heterosexuals and homosexuals alike) &quot;is contained in friendships, in relationships that are not overtly sexual&quot;.

In a September 2010 television documentary, &quot;The Trouble with the Pope&quot;, Peter Tatchell discussed Newman&#x27;s underlying sexuality, citing his close friendship with Ambrose St John and entries in Newman&#x27;s diaries describing their fond love for each other. Alan Bray, however, in his 2003 book &quot;The Friend&quot;, saw the bond between the two men as &quot;entirely spiritual&quot;, noting that Newman, when speaking of St John, echoes the language of John&#x27;s gospel. Shortly after St John&#x27;s death, Bray adds, Newman recorded &quot;a conversation between them before St John lost his speech in those final days. He expressed his hope, Newman wrote, that during his whole priestly life he had not committed one mortal sin. For men of their time and culture that statement is definitive. ... Newman&#x27;s burial with Ambrose St John cannot be detached from his understanding of the place of friendship in Christian belief or its long history&quot;. Bray cites numerous examples of friends being buried together. Newman&#x27;s burial with St John was not unusual at the time and did not draw contemporary comment.

David Hilliard writes that relationships such as Newman&#x27;s with Froude and St John &quot;were not regarded by contemporaries as unnatural. ... Nor is it possible, on the basis of passionate words uttered by mid-Victorians, to make a clear distinction between male affection and homosexual feeling. Theirs was a generation prepared to accept romantic friendships between men simply as friendships without sexual significance. Only with the emergence in the late nineteenth century of the doctrine of the stiff upper lip and the concept of homosexuality as an identifiable condition, did open expressions of love between men become suspect and regarded in a new light as morally undesirable&quot;. Men born in the first decades of the nineteenth century had a capacity, which did not survive into later generations, for intense male friendships. The friendship of Alfred Tennyson and Arthur Hallam, immortalised in &quot;In Memoriam A.H.H.&quot;, is a famous example. Less well-known is that of Charles Kingsley and his closest friend at Cambridge, Charles Mansfield.

When Ian Ker reissued his biography of Newman in 2009, he added an afterword in which he put forward evidence that Newman was a heterosexual. He cited journal entries from December 1816 in which the 15-year-old Newman prayed to be preserved from the temptations awaiting him when he returned from boarding school and met girls at Christmas dances and parties. As an adult, Newman wrote about the deep pain of the &quot;sacrifice&quot; of the life of celibacy. Ker comments: &quot;The only &#x27;sacrifice&#x27; that he could possibly be referring to was that of marriage. And he readily acknowledges that from time to time he continued to feel the natural attraction for marriage that any heterosexual man would.&quot; In 1833, Newman wrote that, despite having &quot;willingly&quot; accepted the call to celibacy, he felt &quot;not the less ... the need&quot; of &quot;the sort of interest [sympathy] which a wife takes and none but she—it is a woman&#x27;s interest&quot;.

==Influence and legacy==
Within both the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches, Newman&#x27;s influence was great in dogma. For the Roman Catholic Church in Britain, Newman&#x27;s conversion secured prestige. On Catholics, his influence was mainly in the direction of a broader spirit and of a recognition of the part played by development, in doctrine and in church government. He is also remembered for his famous quote &quot;To be deep in history is to cease to be a Protestant.&quot;

If his teaching on the church was less widely followed, it was because of doubts as to the thoroughness of his knowledge of history and as to his freedom from bias as a critic.

Catholic Cardinal Marc Ouellet, then Prefect of the then Congregation for Bishops, has said that Newman qualifies to be a Doctor of the Church, ranking with Athanasius and Augustine.

===Tertiary education===

Newman founded the independent school for boys Catholic University School, Dublin, and the Catholic University of Ireland which evolved into University College Dublin, a college of Ireland&#x27;s largest university, the National University of Ireland.

A number of Newman Societies (or Newman Centers in the United States) in Newman&#x27;s honour have been established throughout the world, in the mould of the Oxford University Newman Society. They provide pastoral services and ministries to Catholics at non-Catholic universities; at various times this type of &quot;campus ministry&quot; (the distinction and definition being flexible) has been known to Catholics as the Newman Apostolate or &quot;Newman movement&quot;. Additionally, colleges have been named for him in Birmingham, England; Melbourne, Australia; Edmonton, Canada; Thodupuzha, India, and Wichita, United States.

Newman&#x27;s Dublin lecture series &quot;The Idea of a University Defined and Illustrated&quot; is thought to have become &quot;the basis of a characteristic British belief that education should aim at producing generalists rather than narrow specialists, and that non-vocational subjects—in arts or pure science—could train the mind in ways applicable to a wide range of jobs&quot;.

==Cause for canonisation==

In 1991, Newman was proclaimed venerable by Pope John Paul II after a thorough examination of his life and work by the Congregation for the Causes of Saints.

In 2001, Jack Sullivan, an American deacon from Marshfield in Massachusetts, attributed his recovery from a spinal cord disorder to the intercession of Newman. The miracle was accepted by the Holy See for Newman&#x27;s beatification, which Pope Benedict XVI announced on 19 September 2010 during a visit to Britain.

The approval of a further miracle at the intercession of Newman was reported in November 2018: the healing of a pregnant woman from a grave illness. The decree approving this miracle was authorised to be promulgated on 12 February 2019.

On 1 July 2019, with an affirmative vote, Newman&#x27;s canonisation was authorised and the date for the canonisation ceremony was set for 13 October 2019.

Newman was canonised on 13 October 2019, by Pope Francis, in St. Peter&#x27;s Square. The ceremony was attended by the Prince of Wales (now Charles III), representing the United Kingdom.

=== Feast day ===
The general rule among Roman Catholics is to celebrate canonised or beatified persons on the date of their &quot;dies natalis&quot;, the day on which they died and are considered born into heaven. However, Newman&#x27;s &quot;dies natalis&quot; is 11 August, the same day as the obligatory memorial of Saint Clare of Assisi in the General Roman Calendar which would take precedence. Thus, once Newman was beatified, the Congregation of the Oratory and the Catholic Bishops&#x27; Conference of England and Wales opted to place Newman&#x27;s optional memorial on 9 October, the date of his conversion to Catholicism. This date was chosen because &quot;it falls at the beginning of the University year; an area in which Newman had a particular interest&quot;.

John Henry Newman is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 11 August. He is remembered in the Episcopal Church on 21 February.

==Works==
=== Anglican Period ===
* &quot;The Arians of the Fourth Century&quot;, New York: Longmans, Green, and Co. (1911).
* &quot;Tracts for the Times&quot; (1833–1841)
* &quot;British Critic&quot; (1836–1842)
* &quot;Lyra Apostolica&quot; (poems mostly by Newman and Keble, collected 1836)
* &quot;On the Prophetical Office of the Church&quot; (1837)
* &quot;Lectures on Justification&quot;, London: J.G. &amp; F. Rivington, (1838)
* &quot;Parochial and Plain Sermons&quot; (1834–1843)
* &quot;Select Treatises of St. Athanasius&quot; (1842, 1844)
* &quot;Essays on Miracles&quot; (1826, 1843)
* &quot;Oxford University Sermons&quot; (1843)
* &quot;Sermons on Subjects of the Day&quot;, London: J.G.F. &amp; J. Rivington, (1843)
* &quot;Lives of the Saints&quot;
** &quot;Volume 1&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)
** &quot;Volume 2&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)
** &quot;Volume 3&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)
** &quot;Volume 4&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1844)
** &quot;Volume 5&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)
** &quot;Volume 6&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)
** &quot;Volume 7&quot;, London: James Toovey, (1845)

=== Catholic Period ===
* &quot;Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine&quot;, New York: D. Appleton and Company (1845).
* &quot;Retractation of Anti-Catholic Statements&quot; (1845)
* &quot;Loss and Gain&quot;, London: James Burns, (novel – 1848)
* &quot;Faith and Prejudice and Other Unpublished Sermons&quot; (1848–1873; collected 1956)
* &quot;Discourses to Mixed Congregations&quot;, London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans, (1849)
* &quot;Lectures on Certain Difficulties Felt by Anglicans in Submitting to the Catholic Church&quot;, London: Burns &amp; Lambert, (1850)
* &quot;Lectures on the Present Position of Catholics in England : Addressed to the Brothers of the Oratory&quot;, London: Burns &amp; Lambert, (1851)
* &quot;The Idea of a University&quot; (1852 and 1858)
* &quot;Cathedra Sempiterna&quot; (1852)
* &quot;Callista&quot;, London: Burns and Lambert (novel – 1855)
* &quot;On Consulting the Faithful in Matters of Christian Doctrine&quot; (1859)
* &quot;The Rambler&quot; (editor) (1859–1860)
* &quot;Apologia Pro Vita Sua&quot; (religious autobiography – 1864; revised edition, 1865)
* &quot;Letter to Dr. Pusey&quot; (1865)
* &quot;The Dream of Gerontius&quot; (1865)
* &quot;An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent&quot; (1870)
* &quot;Sermons Preached on Various Occasions&quot; (various/1874)
* &quot;Letter to the Duke of Norfolk&quot; (1875)
* &quot;Five Letters&quot; (1875)
* &quot;Sermon Notes&quot; (1849–1878)
* &quot;Select Treatises of St. Athanasius&quot;, London: Pickering, (1881).
* &quot;On the Inspiration of Scripture&quot;, London: K. Paul, (1884).
* &quot;Development of Religious Error&quot;, London: Isbister, (1885).
* &quot;The Second Spring: A Sermon&quot;, New York: Longmans, Green, and Co. (1911).

=== Other Miscellaneous Works ===
* &quot;Historical Tracts of St. Athanasius&quot;, Oxford: John Henry Parker, (1843).
* Achilli v. Newman: A Full and Authentic Report of the Above Prosecution for Libel, Tried Before Lord Campbell and a Special Jury, in the Court of Queen&#x27;s Bench, Westminster, June, 1852, London: W. Strange, (1852).
* &quot;Lectures and Essays on University Subjects&quot;, London: Longman, Brown, Green. Longmans, and Roberts, (1859).
* &quot;Essays Critical and Historical&quot;, London: B.M. Pickering, (various/1871).
* &quot;Tracts Theological and Ecclesiastical&quot;, London: B.M. Pickering, (1874).
* &quot;Discussions and Arguments&quot;, London: Pickering, (1872).
* &quot;Historical Sketches&quot; (various/1872)
* &quot;Addresses to Cardinal Newman and His Replies&quot;, with &quot;Biglietto Speech&quot; (1879)

=== Selections ===
* &quot;Realizations: Newman&#x27;s Own Selection of His Sermons&quot; (edited by Vincent Ferrer Blehl, S.J., 1964). Liturgical Press, 2009. 
* &quot;Mary the Second Eve&quot; (compiled by Sister Eileen Breen, F.M.A., 1969). TAN Books, 2009. 

==See also==

* Cardinal Newman Society
* Newman Center
* The Newman Society
* &quot;Newman Studies Journal&quot;
* Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham

==References==
===Works cited===
*
*

Attribution

==Further reading==
* Aguzzi, Steven (2010). &quot;John Henry Newman&#x27;s Anglican Views on Judaism&quot;, &quot;Newman Studies Journal,&quot; Vol. VII, No. 1, pp. 56–72.
* Bellasis, Edward (1892). &quot;Cardinal Newman as a Musician&quot;. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner &amp; Co.
* Chadwick, Owen (1987). &quot;The Victorian Church: Part One 1829–1859&quot;. London: SCM.
* Connolly, John R. (2005). &quot;John Henry Newman: A View of Catholic Faith for the New Millennium&quot;. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield. 
* Faught, C. Brad (2003). &quot;The Oxford Movement: A Thematic History of the Tractarians and Their Times.&quot; University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. .
* Gates, Lewis E. (1889), &quot;Three studies in literature&quot;, the second on Cardinal Newman.
* Herring, George (2002). &quot;What Was the Oxford Movement?&quot; London: Continuum.
* Heuser, Herman J. (1890). &quot;Cardinal Newman,&quot; &quot;The American Catholic Quarterly Review&quot;, Vol. XV, pp. 774–94.
* Jost, Walter (1989). &quot;Rhetorical Thought in John Henry Newman&quot;. U. of South Carolina Press.
* Ker, Ian and Merrigan, Terrence (eds) (2009). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to John Henry Newman&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Kings, Graham (2010). &quot;The Ambiguous Legacy of John Henry Newman: Reflections on the Papal Visit 2010&quot;.
* Newsome, David (1993). &quot;The Convert Cardinals: Newman and Manning&quot;. London: John Murray. .
* Rowlands, John Henry Lewis (1989). &quot;Church, State, and Society, 1827–1845: the Attitudes of John Keble, Richard Hurrell Froude, and John Henry Newman&quot;. Worthing, Eng.: P. Smith [of] Churchman Publishing; Folkestone, Eng.: distr. ... by Bailey Book Distribution. 
* Strachey, Lytton (1918). &quot;Eminent Victorians&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus.
* Trevor, Meriol (1962). &quot;Newman: The Pillar of the Cloud&quot; &amp; &quot;Newman: Light in Winter&quot; (two-volume biography). London: Macmillan Co.
* Turner, Frank M (2002). &quot;John Henry Newman: The Challenge to Evangelical Religion&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press.
* Zeno, Dr (1987). &quot;John Henry Newman: His Inner Life.&quot; San Francisco: Ignatius Press. .
* &quot;John Henry Newman. Una biografía&quot;. Ian Ker. (Spanish edition.) Ediciones Palabra 2010. 

==External links==
* 
* 
* Promulgation of Newman as venerable (in Latin)
* Pope Benedict XVI&#x27;s homily 19.09.2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="0" end="17" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="61" end="77" title="Catholic Church in England and Wales" label="English Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="163" end="171" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="213" end="221" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="296" end="303" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033395" start="370" end="383" title="Canonisation of John Henry Newman" label="was canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q247132" start="436" end="462" title="Oratory of Saint Philip Neri" label="Oratory of St. Philip Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455161" start="479" end="490" title="Evangelical Anglicanism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="507" end="527" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="546" end="563" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="589" end="600" title="high church" label="high church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="676" end="691" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="856" end="875" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831610" start="952" end="960" title="Tract 90" label="Tract 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1257" end="1272" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="1419" end="1432" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518472" start="1555" end="1585" title="Catholic University of Ireland" label="Catholic University of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="1614" end="1639" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831654" start="1714" end="1734" title="Tracts for the Times" label="Tracts for the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743363" start="1778" end="1799" title="Apologia Pro Vita Sua" label="Apologia Pro Vita Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113348" start="1824" end="1841" title="Grammar of Assent" label="Grammar of Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227304" start="1875" end="1897" title="The Dream of Gerontius (poem)" label="The Dream of Gerontius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065731" start="1922" end="1934" title="The Dream of Gerontius" label="set to music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="1946" end="1958" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228615" start="1993" end="2011" title="Lead, Kindly Light" label="Lead, Kindly Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="2178" end="2191" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="2210" end="2227" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046277" start="2256" end="2287" title="Pope Benedict XVI&amp;#x27;s visit to the United Kingdom" label="his visit to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="2293" end="2305" title="canonisation" label="canonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="2333" end="2345" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2431" end="2445" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="2453" end="2466" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="2488" end="2499" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q547042" start="2523" end="2537" title="Edmund Campion" label="Edmund Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068996" start="2571" end="2587" title="Polydore Plasden" label="Polydore Plasden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2680" end="2694" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432321" start="2831" end="2845" title="Lombard Street, London" label="Lombard Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2924" end="2932" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174048" start="3001" end="3017" title="Paul Fourdrinier" label="Paul Fourdrinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q780899" start="3019" end="3041" title="Francis William Newman" label="Francis William Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792599" start="3112" end="3125" title="Thomas Mozley" label="Thomas Mozley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="3232" end="3242" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643819" start="3275" end="3278" title="Ham, London" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q32515" start="3285" end="3293" title="Richmond upon Thames" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599084" start="3355" end="3374" title="Great Ealing School" label="Great Ealing School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="3436" end="3455" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3599" end="3611" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="3651" end="3665" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="3703" end="3715" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="3717" end="3727" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="3740" end="3748" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="3839" end="3863" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="4236" end="4245" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="4396" end="4401" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="4519" end="4529" title="antichrist" label="antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29192" start="4569" end="4582" title="Thomas Newton" label="Thomas Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285571" start="4610" end="4623" title="Joseph Milner (priest)" label="Joseph Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q848811" start="4711" end="4723" title="Clapham Sect" label="Clapham Sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177480" start="4751" end="4762" title="William Law" label="William Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900163" start="4774" end="4791" title="William Beveridge (bishop)" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793831" start="4865" end="4877" title="Thomas Scott (commentator)" label="Thomas Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q523247" start="5065" end="5076" title="Eamon Duffy" label="Eamon Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310355" start="5197" end="5225" title="justification by faith alone" label="justification by faith alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="5273" end="5286" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="5346" end="5360" title="revealed truth" label="revealed truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071659" start="5395" end="5407" title="subjectivism" label="subjectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="5412" end="5422" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q69482" start="5485" end="5503" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q73079" start="5538" end="5553" title="Trinity College, Oxford" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="5555" end="5561" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525191" start="5702" end="5721" title="Thomas Vowler Short" label="Thomas Vowler Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691300" start="5961" end="5971" title="Teaching fellow" label="fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="5975" end="5988" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q725186" start="6109" end="6130" title="Edward Bouverie Pusey" label="Edward Bouverie Pusey"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="6249" end="6255" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736208" start="6259" end="6290" title="Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford" label="Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037290" start="6362" end="6373" title="Worton (civil parish), Oxfordshire" label="Over Worton"/>
<link wikidata="Q806160" start="6380" end="6387" title="Banbury" label="Banbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344104" start="6578" end="6590" title="Edward Legge (bishop)" label="Edward Legge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592828" start="6641" end="6673" title="St Clement&amp;#x27;s Church, Oxford" label="St Clement&amp;#x27;s Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q297040" start="6757" end="6776" title="Apollonius of Tyana" label="Apollonius of Tyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="6790" end="6796" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="6813" end="6820" title="Miracle" label="Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915400" start="6842" end="6868" title="Encyclopædia Metropolitana" label="Encyclopædia Metropolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997652" start="6877" end="6892" title="Richard Whately" label="Richard Whately"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342405" start="6897" end="6913" title="Edward Copleston" label="Edward Copleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q756215" start="6915" end="6922" title="Provost (religion)" label="Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102257" start="6962" end="6975" title="Oriel Noetics" label="Oriel Noetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38466217" start="7121" end="7134" title="St Alban Hall" label="St Alban Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048502" start="7358" end="7380" title="Richard Hurrell Froude" label="Richard Hurrell Froude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="7820" end="7836" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="8074" end="8085" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="8204" end="8213" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048547" start="8290" end="8304" title="Edward Hawkins" label="Edward Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q955187" start="8330" end="8340" title="John Keble" label="John Keble"/>
<link wikidata="Q581986" start="8389" end="8421" title="University Church of St Mary the Virgin" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s University Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q274410" start="8436" end="8444" title="benefice" label="benefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594237" start="8448" end="8458" title="Littlemore" label="Littlemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309481" start="8529" end="8555" title="Regius Professor of Hebrew (Oxford)" label="Regius Professor of Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="8857" end="8871" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089760" start="8914" end="8939" title="Church Missionary Society" label="Church Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="9047" end="9061" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280834" start="9211" end="9224" title="Bible Society" label="Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="9260" end="9270" title="low church" label="low church"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="9582" end="9592" title="Archdeacon" label="Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344557" start="9593" end="9606" title="Robert Froude" label="Robert Froude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048502" start="9619" end="9626" title="Hurrell Froude" label="Hurrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="9756" end="9765" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="9778" end="9792" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="9812" end="9818" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="9820" end="9826" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q672816" start="9875" end="9891" title="Nicholas Wiseman" label="Nicholas Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="10017" end="10029" title="polytheistic" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="10045" end="10055" title="idolatrous" label="idolatrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q56205" start="10353" end="10362" title="Leonforte" label="Leonforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207911" start="10588" end="10607" title="Strait of Bonifacio" label="Strait of Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228615" start="10645" end="10663" title="Lead, Kindly Light" label="Lead, Kindly Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012016" start="10875" end="10892" title="National Apostasy" label="National Apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993047" start="10993" end="11015" title="Richard William Church" label="Richard William Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931266" start="11162" end="11177" title="Hugh James Rose" label="Hugh James Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="11253" end="11262" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="11281" end="11296" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013608" start="11428" end="11445" title="Hadleigh, Suffolk" label="Hadleigh, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="11465" end="11476" title="High Church" label="High Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799970" start="11554" end="11576" title="Arthur Philip Perceval" label="Arthur Philip Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016557" start="11582" end="11596" title="William Palmer (theologian)" label="William Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="11670" end="11692" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolical succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="11718" end="11729" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Prayer Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831654" start="11816" end="11836" title="Tracts for the Times" label="Tracts for the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="12066" end="12083" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="12179" end="12185" title="Religious tracts" label="tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019090" start="12458" end="12467" title="Rivington (publishers)" label="Rivington"/>
<link wikidata="Q725186" start="12494" end="12516" title="Edward Bouverie Pusey" label="Professor Edward Pusey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="12528" end="12543" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831654" start="12560" end="12566" title="Tracts for the Times" label="tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433343" start="12706" end="12725" title="Ritualism in the Church of England" label="Anglican ritualists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313296" start="12826" end="12846" title="Renn Dickson Hampden" label="Renn Dickson Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309475" start="12850" end="12878" title="Regius Professor of Divinity" label="Regius Professor of Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992961" start="12900" end="12916" title="Bampton Lectures" label="Bampton Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047406" start="12946" end="12965" title="Joseph Blanco White" label="Joseph Blanco White"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="12994" end="13000" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925719" start="13191" end="13205" title="British Critic" label="British Critic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13305" end="13314" title="Via media#Anglicanism" label="via media"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="13543" end="13556" title="monophysitism" label="monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q672816" start="13703" end="13719" title="Nicholas Wiseman" label="Nicholas Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310958" start="13748" end="13761" title="Dublin Review (Catholic periodical)" label="Dublin Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="13816" end="13834" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="13847" end="13856" title="Donatism" label="Donatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222963" start="14030" end="14048" title="John Brande Morris" label="John Brande Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548688" start="14320" end="14354" title="Church of St Mary and St Nicholas, Littlemore" label="dedicated to Sts Nicholas and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081723" start="14557" end="14584" title="Charles Pourtales Golightly" label="Charles Pourtales Golightly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341457" start="14751" end="14765" title="Isaac Williams (writer)" label="Isaac Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945730" start="14820" end="14837" title="John Rouse Bloxam" label="John Rouse Bloxam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013608" start="14889" end="14910" title="William John Copeland" label="William John Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831610" start="15022" end="15030" title="Tract 90" label="Tract 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="15102" end="15122" title="Thirty-Nine Articles" label="Thirty-Nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q336875" start="15313" end="15336" title="Archibald Campbell Tait" label="Archibald Campbell Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323909" start="15583" end="15596" title="Richard Bagot (bishop)" label="Richard Bagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837303" start="15602" end="15618" title="Bishop of Oxford" label="Bishop of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="15992" end="15997" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q869999" start="16021" end="16048" title="Anglican-German Bishopric in Jerusalem" label="Anglican-Lutheran bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="16059" end="16068" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229542" start="16285" end="16306" title="John Dobree Dalgairns" label="John Dobree Dalgairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014656" start="16320" end="16336" title="William Lockhart (priest)" label="William Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="16354" end="16367" title="Henry Edward Manning" label="Henry Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197218" start="16369" end="16384" title="Ambrose St John" label="Ambrose St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498483" start="16394" end="16411" title="Frederick Oakeley" label="Frederick Oakeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627098" start="16416" end="16437" title="Albany James Christie" label="Albany James Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556206" start="16845" end="16861" title="Maynooth College" label="Maynooth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775972" start="16972" end="16995" title="development of doctrine" label="development of doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q740904" start="17709" end="17724" title="Dominic Barberi" label="Dominic Barberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q774589" start="17737" end="17747" title="Passionist" label="Passionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594237" start="17767" end="17777" title="Littlemore" label="Littlemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983738" start="18457" end="18488" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College, Oscott" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College, Oscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q672816" start="18496" end="18512" title="Nicholas Wiseman" label="Nicholas Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522103" start="18642" end="18666" title="Giacomo Filippo Fransoni" label="Giacomo Filippo Fransoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="18693" end="18711" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="Doctor of Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="18715" end="18727" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q247132" start="18784" end="18793" title="Oratory of Saint Philip Neri" label="Oratorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084675" start="18830" end="18840" title="Old Oscott" label="Old Oscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781792" start="18858" end="18876" title="Maryvale Institute" label="Maryvale Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983686" start="18946" end="18971" title="Cotton College" label="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960322" start="18973" end="18980" title="Cheadle, Staffordshire" label="Cheadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900445" start="18994" end="19025" title="St Anne&amp;#x27;s Church, Birmingham" label="St Anne&amp;#x27;s, Alcester Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047556" start="19062" end="19071" title="Edgbaston" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670634" start="19288" end="19302" title="London Oratory" label="London Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286149" start="19316" end="19339" title="Frederick William Faber" label="Frederick William Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774132" start="19434" end="19450" title="Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom" label="Anti-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q958019" start="19740" end="19761" title="Universalis Ecclesiae" label="Universalis Ecclesiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="20139" end="20148" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="20165" end="20170" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="20347" end="20359" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22141" end="22154" title="#Achilli trial" label="Achilli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522416" start="23012" end="23023" title="The Rambler (Catholic periodical)" label="The Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23296" end="23307" title="John Gillow" label="John Gillow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552548" start="23322" end="23335" title="Ushaw College" label="Ushaw College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847489" start="23488" end="23501" title="infallibility" label="infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="23660" end="23672" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232423" start="23896" end="23908" title="Wilfrid Ward" label="Wilfrid Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="24267" end="24272" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421456" start="24826" end="24842" title="Giacinto Achilli" label="Giacinto Achilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="24862" end="24877" title="Dominican friar" label="Dominican friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="25160" end="25165" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685588" start="25364" end="25381" title="The Dublin Review" label="The Dublin Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="28530" end="28541" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576694" start="28939" end="28952" title="Maria Giberne" label="Maria Giberne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260401" start="29884" end="29905" title="John Taylor Coleridge" label="John Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q642663" start="30441" end="30447" title="Rednal" label="Rednal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543472" start="30456" end="30468" title="Lickey Hills" label="Lickey Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="30863" end="30869" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="30873" end="30879" title="Rector (academia)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518472" start="30905" end="30935" title="Catholic University of Ireland" label="Catholic University of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="30941" end="30966" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647647" start="31012" end="31043" title="Literary and Historical Society (University College Dublin)" label="Literary and Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q564371" start="31176" end="31199" title="philosophy of education" label="philosophy of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="31259" end="31274" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005947" start="32446" end="32457" title="Paul Cullen (bishop)" label="Paul Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q112279141" start="32580" end="32608" title="Dicastery for Evangelization" label="Dicastery for Evangelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="33216" end="33236" title="Henry Edward Manning" label="Henry Edward Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359055" start="33648" end="33680" title="Oxford University Newman Society" label="Oxford University Newman Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666336" start="33775" end="33789" title="Oxford Oratory" label="Oxford Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755270" start="34024" end="34042" title="The Oratory School" label="The Oratory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="34154" end="34158" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000042" start="34971" end="34988" title="Burns &amp;amp; Oates" label="Burns &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130537" start="35001" end="35012" title="James Burns (publisher)" label="James Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259809" start="35234" end="35247" title="Loss and Gain" label="Loss and Gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547059" start="35323" end="35344" title="Thomas William Allies" label="Thomas William Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="35366" end="35373" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="35651" end="35671" title="Henry Edward Manning" label="Henry Edward Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="36127" end="36146" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084189" start="36429" end="36449" title="George W. E. Russell" label="George W. E. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724715" start="37139" end="37164" title="Macmillan&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Macmillan&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="37172" end="37188" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679958" start="37200" end="37220" title="James Anthony Froude" label="James Anthony Froude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344220" start="37448" end="37468" title="Edward Lowth Badeley" label="Edward Lowth Badeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743363" start="38424" end="38445" title="Apologia Pro Vita Sua" label="Apologia Pro Vita Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232423" start="39098" end="39110" title="Wilfrid Ward" label="Wilfrid Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882537" start="39323" end="39342" title="Liberal Catholicism" label="Liberal Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q577504" start="39346" end="39369" title="Charles de Montalembert" label="Charles de Montalembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q605534" start="39374" end="39404" title="Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire" label="Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113348" start="39595" end="39612" title="Grammar of Assent" label="Grammar of Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165336" start="39908" end="39917" title="via media" label="via media"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="40077" end="40098" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="40140" end="40157" title="dogmatic definition" label="formal definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="40177" end="40196" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005463" start="40286" end="40312" title="William Bernard Ullathorne" label="William Bernard Ullathorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q547536" start="40707" end="40722" title="Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="40728" end="40737" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="41344" end="41356" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="41409" end="41422" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="41513" end="41521" title="Cardinal (Catholic)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="42212" end="42220" title="Cardinal-Deacon" label="Deaconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q517374" start="42230" end="42252" title="San Giorgio al Velabro" label="San Giorgio al Velabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q83188" start="42412" end="42422" title="relativism" label="relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993047" start="42603" end="42615" title="Richard William Church" label="R. W. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246665" start="42621" end="42643" title="Dean of St Paul&amp;#x27;s" label="Dean of St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800727" start="42715" end="42738" title="Arthur Wollaston Hutton" label="Arthur Wollaston Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="42961" end="42978" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="43226" end="43235" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642663" start="43346" end="43352" title="Rednal" label="Rednal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="43359" end="43369" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197218" start="43502" end="43518" title="Ambrose St. John" label="Ambrose St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="43714" end="43735" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231256" start="43760" end="43776" title="Francis de Sales" label="Francis de Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22738" start="44195" end="44228" title="Plato&amp;#x27;s allegory of the cave" label="Plato&amp;#x27;s allegory of the cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q82560" start="44422" end="44440" title="Birmingham Oratory" label="Birmingham Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="44481" end="44487" title="relics" label="relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="44527" end="44536" title="sainthood" label="sainthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q283313" start="45269" end="45281" title="Richard Holt Hutton" label="R. H. Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227304" start="45415" end="45437" title="The Dream of Gerontius (poem)" label="The Dream of Gerontius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="45508" end="45513" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="45787" end="45798" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q455830" start="45887" end="45906" title="Harriet Shaw Weaver" label="Harriet Shaw Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971724" start="46409" end="46425" title="natural religion" label="natural religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="46430" end="46447" title="revealed religion" label="revealed religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="46525" end="46537" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="46755" end="46760" title="divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="50285" end="50290" title="Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="50295" end="50302" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="50322" end="50330" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616407" start="50428" end="50443" title="stiff upper lip" label="stiff upper lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730252" start="50586" end="50603" title="Henry Wilberforce" label="Henry Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q540427" start="50746" end="50761" title="Lytton Strachey" label="Lytton Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372505" start="50831" end="50849" title="Eminent Victorians" label="Eminent Victorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534593" start="50956" end="50970" title="Geoffrey Faber" label="Geoffrey Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="51044" end="51056" title="hagiographic" label="hagiographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679958" start="51651" end="51671" title="James Anthony Froude" label="James Anthony Froude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091008" start="51744" end="51758" title="Heroes and Hero-Worship" label="Carlylean hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961616" start="51858" end="51865" title="Names for the number 0 in English" label="ciphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="51956" end="51969" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094637" start="52702" end="52710" title="Clerical celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859136" start="52880" end="52901" title="muscular Christianity" label="muscular Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="52910" end="52926" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="53018" end="53030" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q713824" start="53645" end="53658" title="John Cornwell (writer)" label="John Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993047" start="53957" end="53969" title="Richard William Church" label="R. W. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="54401" end="54407" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048502" start="56125" end="56147" title="Richard Hurrell Froude" label="Richard Hurrell Froude"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197218" start="56178" end="56193" title="Ambrose St John" label="Ambrose St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="56834" end="56853" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="57693" end="57713" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q217249" start="58029" end="58039" title="sublimation (psychology)" label="sublimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="58761" end="58773" title="gender norms" label="gender norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809136" start="58941" end="58961" title="John Campbell Shairp" label="John Campbell Shairp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038158" start="59225" end="59235" title="homiletics" label="homiletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15402063" start="59389" end="59398" title="Profession (religious)" label="professed"/>
<link wikidata="Q658022" start="59492" end="59497" title="Queer theory" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="59683" end="59700" title="Anglo-Catholicism" label="Anglo-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343213" start="60013" end="60027" title="Peter Tatchell" label="Peter Tatchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706238" start="60203" end="60212" title="Alan Bray" label="Alan Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="60401" end="60419" title="Gospel of John" label="John&amp;#x27;s gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="60668" end="60678" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487865" start="61416" end="61435" title="romantic friendship" label="romantic friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="61937" end="61952" title="Alfred Tennyson" label="Alfred Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865138" start="61957" end="61970" title="Arthur Hallam" label="Arthur Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010009" start="61994" end="62012" title="In Memoriam A.H.H." label="In Memoriam A.H.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="62068" end="62084" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="63234" end="63239" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775972" start="63445" end="63456" title="Development of doctrine" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q711547" start="63793" end="63814" title="Cardinal Marc Ouellet" label="Cardinal Marc Ouellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468829" start="63841" end="63865" title="Congregation for Bishops" label="Congregation for Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="63906" end="63926" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="63941" end="63951" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="63956" end="63965" title="Augustine" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053262" start="64041" end="64067" title="Catholic University School" label="Catholic University School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518472" start="64085" end="64115" title="Catholic University of Ireland" label="Catholic University of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="64135" end="64160" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860208" start="64214" end="64244" title="National University of Ireland" label="National University of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339127" start="64280" end="64294" title="Newman Centers" label="Newman Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359055" start="64405" end="64437" title="Oxford University Newman Society" label="Oxford University Newman Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710828" start="64769" end="64788" title="Newman University, Birmingham" label="Birmingham, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018440" start="64790" end="64810" title="Newman College (University of Melbourne)" label="Melbourne, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018483" start="64812" end="64828" title="Newman Theological College" label="Edmonton, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957031" start="64830" end="64847" title="Newman College, Thodupuzha" label="Thodupuzha, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018497" start="64853" end="64875" title="Newman University, Wichita" label="Wichita, United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="64892" end="64898" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51619" start="65323" end="65332" title="venerable" label="venerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063490" start="65411" end="65448" title="Congregation for the Causes of Saints" label="Congregation for the Causes of Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="65670" end="65683" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046277" start="65747" end="65765" title="State visit by Pope Benedict XVI to the United Kingdom" label="a visit to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="66207" end="66219" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83425" start="66224" end="66247" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="66303" end="66314" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q191107" start="66671" end="66692" title="Saint Clare of Assisi" label="Saint Clare of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="66700" end="66722" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q247132" start="66789" end="66816" title="Congregation of the Oratory" label="Congregation of the Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q866173" start="66825" end="66879" title="Catholic Bishops&amp;#x27; Conference of England and Wales" label="Catholic Bishops&amp;#x27; Conference of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="67148" end="67158" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="67166" end="67183" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152292" start="67191" end="67204" title="Commemoration (observance)" label="commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="67225" end="67235" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="67243" end="67259" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259809" start="68621" end="68634" title="Loss and Gain" label="Loss and Gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934238" start="69264" end="69272" title="Callista (novel)" label="Callista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522416" start="69410" end="69421" title="The Rambler (Catholic periodical)" label="The Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743363" start="69457" end="69478" title="Apologia Pro Vita Sua" label="Apologia Pro Vita Sua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227304" start="69590" end="69612" title="The Dream of Gerontius (poem)" label="The Dream of Gerontius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113348" start="69634" end="69672" title="Grammar of Assent" label="An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236951" start="69761" end="69790" title="Letter to the Duke of Norfolk" label="Letter to the Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669313" start="71280" end="71289" title="TAN Books" label="TAN Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038593" start="71315" end="71338" title="Cardinal Newman Society" label="Cardinal Newman Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339127" start="71341" end="71354" title="Newman Center" label="Newman Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359055" start="71357" end="71375" title="The Newman Society" label="The Newman Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709993" start="71384" end="71406" title="Newman Studies Journal" label="Newman Studies Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340740" start="71415" end="71461" title="Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham" label="Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386232" start="71805" end="71819" title="Owen Chadwick" label="Chadwick, Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592984" start="72771" end="72784" title="Graham Kings" label="Kings, Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q540427" start="73265" end="73281" title="Lytton Strachey" label="Strachey, Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819481" start="73353" end="73367" title="Meriol Trevor" label="Trevor, Meriol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73510" end="73525" title="Frank M Turner" label="Turner, Frank M"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="73906" end="73911" title="Latin (language)" label="Latin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83896" wikidata="Q156590" url="?curid=83896" title="Priapism">
<text>Priapism is a condition in which a penis remains erect for hours in the absence of stimulation or after stimulation has ended. There are three types: ischemic (low-flow), nonischemic (high-flow), and recurrent ischemic (intermittent). Most cases are ischemic. Ischemic priapism is generally painful while nonischemic priapism is not. In ischemic priapism, most of the penis is hard; however, the glans penis is not. In nonischemic priapism, the entire penis is only somewhat hard. Very rarely, clitoral priapism occurs in women.
Sickle cell disease is the most common cause of ischemic priapism. Other causes include medications such as antipsychotics, SSRIs, blood thinners and prostaglandin E1, as well as drugs such as cocaine. Ischemic priapism occurs when blood does not adequately drain from the penis. Nonischemic priapism is typically due to a connection forming between an artery and the corpus cavernosum or disruption of the parasympathetic nervous system resulting in increased arterial flow. Nonischemic priapism may occur following trauma to the penis or a spinal cord injury. Diagnosis may be supported by blood gas analysis of blood aspirated from the penis or an ultrasound.
Treatment depends on the type. Ischemic priapism is typically treated with a nerve block of the penis followed by aspiration of blood from the corpora cavernosa. If this is not sufficient, the corpus cavernosum may be irrigated with cold, normal saline or injected with phenylephrine. Nonischemic priapism is often treated with cold packs and compression. Surgery may be done if usual measures are not effective. In ischemic priapism, the risk of permanent scarring of the penis begins to increase after four hours and definitely occurs after 48 hours. Priapism occurs in about 1 in 20,000 to 1 in 100,000 males per year.

==Classification==
Priapism is classified into three groups: ischemic (low-flow), nonischemic (high-flow), and recurrent ischemic. The majority of cases (19 out of 20) are ischemic in nature.

Some sources give a duration of four hours as a definition of priapism, but others give six. Per the University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, &quot;The duration of a normal erection before it is classifiable as priapism is still controversial. Ongoing penile erections for more than 6 hours can be classified as priapism.&quot;

===In women===
Priapism in women (continued, painful erection of the clitoris) is significantly rarer than priapism in men and is known as &quot;clitoral priapism&quot; or &quot;clitorism&quot;. It is associated with persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD). Only a few case reports of women experiencing clitoral priapism exist.

==Signs and symptoms==
===Complications===
Because ischemic priapism causes the blood to remain in the penis for unusually long periods of time, the blood becomes deprived of oxygen, which can cause damage to the penile tissue. Such damage can result in erectile dysfunction or disfigurement of the penis. In extreme cases, if the penis develops severe vascular disease, the priapism can result in penile gangrene.

===Low-flow priapism===
Causes of low-flow priapism include sickle cell anemia (most common in children), leukemia, and other blood dyscrasias such as thalassemia and multiple myeloma, and the use of various drugs, as well as cancers. A genome-wide association study on Brazilian patients with sickle cell disease identified four single nucleotide polymorphisms in LINC02537 and NAALADL2 significantly associated with priapism.

Other conditions that can cause priapism include Fabry&#x27;s disease, as well as neurologic disorders such as spinal cord lesions and spinal cord trauma (priapism has been reported in people who have been hanged; see death erection).

Priapism can also be caused by reactions to medications. The most common medications that cause priapism are intra-cavernous injections for the treatment of erectile dysfunction (papaverine, alprostadil). Other medication groups reported are antihypertensives (e.g. Doxazosin), antipsychotics (e.g., chlorpromazine, clozapine), antidepressants (most notably trazodone), anti-convulsant and mood stabilizer drugs such as sodium valproate. Anticoagulants, cantharides (&quot;Spanish Fly&quot;) and recreational drugs (alcohol, heroin and cocaine) have been associated. Priapism is also known to occur from bites of the Brazilian wandering spider.

===High-flow priapism=== 
Causes of high-flow priapism include:
*blunt trauma to the perineum or penis, with laceration of the cavernous artery, which can generate an arterial-lacunar fistula.
*Anticoagulants (heparin and warfarin).
*Antihypertensives (i.e., hydralazine, guanethidine and propranolol).
*Hormones (i.e., gonadotropin releasing hormone and testosterone).

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis is often based on the history of the condition as well as a physical exam.

Blood gas testing the blood from the cavernosa of the penis can help in the diagnosis. If the low-flow type of priapism is present, the blood typically has a low pH, while if the high-flow type is present, the pH is typically normal. Color Doppler ultrasound may also help differentiate the two. Testing a person to make sure they do not have a hemoglobinopathy may also be reasonable.

===Ultrasonography===

Penile ultrasonography with Doppler is the imaging method of choice, because it is noninvasive, widely available, and highly sensitive. By means of this method, it is possible to diagnose priapism and differentiate between its low- and high-flow forms.

In low-flow (ischemic) priapism the flow in the cavernous arteries is reduced or absent. As the condition progresses, there is an increase in echogenicity of the corpora cavernosa, attributed to tissue edema. Eventually, changes in the echotexture of the corpora cavernosa can be observed due to the fibrotic transformation generated by tissue anoxia.

In high-flow priapism normal or increased, turbulent blood flow in the cavernous arteries is seen. The area surrounding the fistula presents a hypoechoic, irregular lesion in the cavernous tissue.

==Treatment==

Medical evaluation is recommended for erections that last for longer than four hours. Pain can often be reduced with a dorsal penile nerve block or penile ring block. For those with nonischemic priapism, cold packs and pressure to the area may be sufficient.

===Pseudoephedrine===

Orally administered pseudoephedrine is a first-line treatment for priapism. Erection is largely a parasympathetic response, so the sympathetic action of pseudoephedrine may serve to relieve this condition. Pseudoephedrine is an alpha-agonist agent that exerts a constriction effect on smooth muscle of corpora cavernosum, which in turn facilitates venous outflow. Pseudoephedrine is no longer available in some countries.

===Aspiration===
For those with ischemic priapism, the initial treatment is typically aspiration of blood from the corpus cavernosum. This is done on either side. If this is not sufficiently effective, then cold normal saline may be injected and removed.

===Medications===
If aspiration is not sufficient, a small dose of phenylephrine may be injected into the corpus cavernosum. Side effects of phenylephrine may include: high blood pressure, slow heart rate, and arrhythmia. If this medication is used, it is recommended that people be monitored for at least an hour after. For those with recurrent ischemic priapism, diethylstilbestrol (DES) or terbutaline may be tried.

===Surgery===
Distal shunts, such as the Winter&#x27;s, involve puncturing the glans (the distal part of the penis) into one of the cavernosa, where the old, stagnant blood is held. This causes the blood to leave the penis and return to the circulation. This procedure can be performed by a urologist at the bedside. Winter&#x27;s shunts are often the first invasive technique used, especially in hematologically induced priapism, as it is relatively simple and repeatable.

Proximal shunts, such as the Quackel&#x27;s, are more involved and entail operative dissection in the perineum where the corpora meet the spongiosum while making an incision in both and suturing both openings together. Shunts created between the corpora cavernosa and great saphenous vein called a Grayhack shunt can be done though this technique is rarely used.

As the complication rates with prolonged priapism are high, early penile prosthesis implantation may be considered. As well as allowing early resumption of sexual activity, early implantation can avoid the formation of dense fibrosis and, hence, a shortened penis.

===Sickle cell anemia===
In sickle cell anemia, treatment is initially with intravenous fluids, pain medication, and oxygen therapy. The typical treatment of priapism may be carried out as well. Blood transfusions are not usually recommended as part of the initial treatment, but if other treatments are not effective, exchange transfusion may be done.

==History==
Persistent semi-erections and intermittent states of prolonged erections have historically been sometimes called semi-priapism.

===Terminology===
The name comes from the Greek god Priapus (), a fertility god, often represented with a disproportionately large phallus.

==References==
==External links==
* Guideline on the Management of Priapism (2003) - American Urological Association website - The unabridged 275-page version of this guideline.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156590" start="0" end="8" title="Priapism" label="Priapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="35" end="40" title="human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133993" start="49" end="54" title="erection" label="erect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490562" start="83" end="94" title="Sexual stimulation" label="stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="150" end="158" title="ischemic" label="ischemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="396" end="407" title="glans penis" label="glans penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="494" end="502" title="clitoral" label="clitoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="529" end="548" title="Sickle cell disease" label="Sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="637" end="650" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="653" end="658" title="SSRIs" label="SSRIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="660" end="674" title="anticoagulants" label="blood thinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q579348" start="679" end="695" title="prostaglandin E1" label="prostaglandin E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="722" end="729" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="882" end="888" title="artery" label="artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455226" start="897" end="914" title="Corpus cavernosum penis" label="corpus cavernosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185589" start="936" end="966" title="parasympathetic nervous system" label="parasympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="1071" end="1089" title="spinal cord injury" label="spinal cord injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056994" start="1121" end="1130" title="blood gas" label="blood gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="1180" end="1190" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="1269" end="1280" title="nerve block" label="nerve block"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="1431" end="1444" title="normal saline" label="normal saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q421910" start="1462" end="1475" title="phenylephrine" label="phenylephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496401" start="2109" end="2147" title="University Medical Center Schleswig Holstein" label="University Hospital Schleswig Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="2405" end="2413" title="clitoris" label="clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q176671" start="2553" end="2588" title="persistent genital arousal disorder" label="persistent genital arousal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="2720" end="2728" title="ischemia" label="ischemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="2923" end="2943" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="3074" end="3082" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="3145" end="3163" title="sickle cell anemia" label="sickle cell anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="3191" end="3199" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="3236" end="3247" title="thalassemia" label="thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="3252" end="3268" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18308165" start="3464" end="3472" title="NAALADL2" label="NAALADL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q615645" start="3563" end="3583" title="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="3596" end="3616" title="neurology" label="neurologic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="3625" end="3636" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887912" start="3732" end="3746" title="death erection" label="death erection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="3794" end="3804" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="3907" end="3927" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q410374" start="3929" end="3939" title="papaverine" label="papaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q579348" start="3941" end="3952" title="alprostadil" label="alprostadil"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="3992" end="4009" title="antihypertensives" label="antihypertensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q419939" start="4016" end="4025" title="Doxazosin" label="Doxazosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="4028" end="4041" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="4050" end="4064" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221361" start="4066" end="4075" title="clozapine" label="clozapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="4078" end="4092" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q411457" start="4108" end="4117" title="trazodone" label="trazodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="4120" end="4135" title="anti-convulsant" label="anti-convulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622367" start="4140" end="4155" title="mood stabilizer" label="mood stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q240642" start="4170" end="4186" title="sodium valproate" label="sodium valproate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="4188" end="4202" title="Anticoagulants" label="Anticoagulants"/>
<link wikidata="Q410884" start="4204" end="4215" title="cantharides" label="cantharides"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="4266" end="4273" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="4275" end="4281" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="4286" end="4293" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179416" start="4367" end="4393" title="Brazilian wandering spider" label="Brazilian wandering spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="4855" end="4868" title="physical exam" label="physical exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056994" start="4871" end="4880" title="Blood gas" label="Blood gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="5119" end="5129" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642147" start="5216" end="5232" title="hemoglobinopathy" label="hemoglobinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082362" start="5281" end="5303" title="Penile ultrasonography" label="Penile ultrasonography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577488" start="5309" end="5316" title="Doppler ultrasonography" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q376687" start="6220" end="6239" title="dorsal penile nerve" label="dorsal penile nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="6256" end="6266" title="ring block" label="ring block"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="6404" end="6419" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734924" start="6612" end="6625" title="alpha-agonist" label="alpha-agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q331835" start="6893" end="6903" title="Suction (medicine)" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455226" start="6922" end="6939" title="Corpus cavernosum penis" label="corpus cavernosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="7019" end="7032" title="normal saline" label="normal saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q421910" start="7130" end="7143" title="phenylephrine" label="phenylephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="7231" end="7250" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q217111" start="7252" end="7267" title="bradycardia" label="slow heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="7273" end="7283" title="Heart arrhythmia" label="arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423989" start="7428" end="7446" title="diethylstilbestrol" label="diethylstilbestrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q424340" start="7456" end="7467" title="terbutaline" label="terbutaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538339" start="7524" end="7537" title="George D. Winter" label="Winter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="8060" end="8068" title="perineum" label="perineum"/>
<link wikidata="Q543323" start="8226" end="8246" title="great saphenous vein" label="great saphenous vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069010" start="8388" end="8405" title="Penile implant" label="penile prosthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="8664" end="8682" title="intravenous fluids" label="intravenous fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="8684" end="8699" title="pain medication" label="pain medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988216" start="8705" end="8719" title="oxygen therapy" label="oxygen therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="8783" end="8801" title="Blood transfusions" label="Blood transfusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q886468" start="8907" end="8927" title="exchange transfusion" label="exchange transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206878" start="9135" end="9142" title="Priapus" label="Priapus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83900" wikidata="Q206221" url="?curid=83900" title="Languedoc">
<text>The Province of Languedoc (, , ; ) is a former province of France.
Most of its territory is now contained in the modern-day region of Occitanie in Southern France. Its capital city was Toulouse. It had an area of approximately .

==History==
The Roman province of Gallia Narbonensis fell to the Visigothic Kingdom from the 5th to the 8th centuries. Occupied briefly by the Emirate of Córdoba between 719 and 759, it was conquered and incorporated into the Kingdom of the Franks by Pepin the Short in 759 following the Siege of Narbonne.

The term Languedoc originated to describe a cultural region that was not necessarily politically unified. After the decline of the Carolingian Empire political rule fragmented into small territorial divisions.

King John of England lost his holdings in northern Languedoc to Philip II of France. He visited the region in 1214 seeking the restoration of those lands.

In the 13th century, the See of Rome challenged the area&#x27;s spiritual beliefs, and the region became attached to the Kingdom of France following the Albigensian Crusade (1208–1229). This crusade aimed to put an end to what the Catholic Church considered the Cathar heresy. It enabled the Capetian dynasty to extend its influence south of the Loire. As part of this process, the former principalities of Trencavel (the Viscounty of Albi, Carcassona, Besièrs, Agde and Nîmes) were integrated into the Royal French Domain in 1224. The County of Toulouse followed them in 1271. The remaining feudal enclaves were absorbed progressively up to the beginning of the 16th century; the County of Gévaudan in 1258, the County of Melgueil (Mauguiò) in 1293, the Lordship of Montpellier in 1349 and the Viscounty of Narbonne in 1507.

The territory falling within the jurisdiction of the Estates of Languedoc, which convened for the first time in 1346, shrank progressively, becoming known during the Ancien Régime as the province of Languedoc.

The year 1359 marked a turning point in the history of the province. The three bailiwicks (&quot;sénéchaussées&quot;) of Bèucaire, Carcassona and Tolosa had the status of &quot;bonnes villes&quot; (towns granted privileges and protection by the king of France in return for providing a contingent of men at arms). In that year, the three entered into a perpetual union, after which their contribution of royal officers was summoned jointly rather than separately for each of the three sénéchaussées.

Towards the end of 14th century, the term &quot;country of the three seneschalties&quot; (&quot;pays des trois sénéchaussées&quot;), later to become known as Languedoc, designated the two bailiwicks of Bèucaire-Nîmes and Carcassona, and the eastern part of Tolosa (Toulouse), retained under the Treaty of Brétigny. At that time, the County of Foix, which belonged to the seneschal of Carcassona until 1333 before passing to Toulouse, ceased to belong to Languedoc. At this time, the Duchy of Languedoc and the Spanish Duchy of Gandia (of Osuna) became one under the marriage of the two heirs. Later, Duke of Langeuedoc became Governor of Languedoc and Provence; as of 2024 the title is held by the son of the Late Dutchess of Gandia and Prince Obolensky Arnaud Henry Salas-Perez; though the governor role does not exist anymore, title of Duke of Languedoc et Lavandou still remains.

In 1542, the province was divided into two &quot;généralités&quot;: Toulouse for Haut-Languedoc, and Montpellier for Bas-Languedoc. This lasted until the French Revolution in 1789. From the 17th century onward, there was only one intendance for the whole of Languedoc, with its seat in Montpellier.

Part of the territory where Occitan was spoken came to be called &quot;langue d&#x27;oc&quot;, &quot;Lengadòc&quot; or Languedoc.

==Geographical extent==

The traditional provinces of the kingdom of France were not formally defined. A province was simply a territory of common traditions and customs, but it had no political organization. Today, when people refer to the old provinces of France, they are referring to the &quot;gouvernements&quot; as they existed in 1789, before the French Revolution. &quot;Gouvernements&quot; were military regions established by the Crown in the middle of the 16th century; their territories closely matched those of the traditional provinces. However, in some cases, small provinces were merged with a large one into a single &quot;gouvernement&quot;, so &quot;gouvernements&quot; are not exactly the same as the traditional provinces.

Historically, the region was called the County of Toulouse, a county independent from the kings of France. The County of Toulouse was made up of what would later be called Languedoc, but it also included the province of Quercy (now the &quot;département&quot; of Lot and the northern half of the &#x27; of Tarn-et-Garonne) and the province of Rouergue (now the &#x27; of Aveyron), both to the northwest of Languedoc. At some times it included the province of Agenais (now the eastern half of the &#x27; of Lot-et-Garonne) to the west of Languedoc, the province of Gévaudan (now &#x27; of Lozère), the province of Velay (now the central and eastern part of the &#x27; of Haute-Loire), the southern part of the province of Vivarais (now the southern part of the &#x27; of Ardèche), and even all the northern half of Provence. After the French conquest the entire county was dismantled, the central part of it being now called Languedoc.

The &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Languedoc was created in the mid-16th century. In addition to Languedoc proper, it included the three small provinces of Gévaudan, Velay, and Vivarais (in its entirety), these three provinces being to the northeast of Languedoc. Some people also consider that the region around Albi was a traditional province, called Albigeois (now the &#x27; of Tarn), although it is most often considered as being part of Languedoc proper. The provinces of Quercy and Rouergue, despite their old ties with Toulouse, were not incorporated into the &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Languedoc. They were attached to the &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Guienne and its far-away capital Bordeaux. This decision was probably intentional, to avoid reviving the independently spirited County of Toulouse. In the rest of this article, Languedoc&quot;&#x27; refers to the territory of this &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Languedoc.

===Area and location of Languedoc===
The province of Languedoc covered an area of approximately in the central part of southern France, roughly the region between the river Rhône (border with Provence) and the Garonne (border with Gascony), extending northwards to the Cévennes and the Massif Central (border with Auvergne).

===Capital===
As the center of the County of Toulouse and the regional &quot;parlement&quot;, Toulouse is often considered the &quot;capital&quot; of Languedoc. On maps (both ancient and modern) showing the provinces (i.e., &quot;gouvernements&quot;) of France in 1789, it is always marked as such. However, the intricate entanglement of administrations and jurisdictions permitted Montpellier to also claim that distinction. In the 18th century, the monarchy clearly favored Montpellier, a city much smaller than Toulouse, with less history, and with fewer autonomous local authorities such as Toulouse&#x27;s &quot;parlement&quot; and capitoulate.

==Old administrative divisions==
The governors of Languedoc resided in Pézenas, near to the Mediterranean coast, away from Toulouse but close to Montpellier. In time they had increased their power well beyond military matters, and had become the real administrators and executive power of the province, a trend seen in the other &quot;gouvernements&quot; of France, but particularly acute in Languedoc, where the duke of Montmorency, governor of Languedoc, even openly rebelled against the king, then was defeated and beheaded in Toulouse in 1632 by the order of Richelieu. The kings of France became fearful of the power of the governors, so after King Louis XIV (the Sun King) they had to reside in Versailles and were forbidden to enter the territory of their &quot;gouvernement&quot;. Thus the &quot;gouvernements&quot; became hollow structures, but they still carried a sense of the old provinces, and so their names and limits have remained popular until today.
For administrative purposes, Languedoc was divided in two &quot;généralités&quot;, the &quot;généralité&quot; of Toulouse and the &quot;généralité&quot; of Montpellier, the combined territory of the two generalities exactly matching that of the &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Languedoc. At the head of a generality was an &quot;intendant&quot;, but in the case of Languedoc there was only one &quot;intendant&quot; responsible for both generalities, and he was often referred to as the &quot;intendant&quot; of Languedoc, even though technically speaking he was in fact the &quot;intendant&quot; of the generality of Toulouse and &quot;intendant&quot; of the generality of Montpellier. The generality of Toulouse is also referred to as Upper Languedoc (&quot;Haut-Languedoc&quot;), while the generality of Montpellier, down to the level of the sea, is referred to as Lower Languedoc (&quot;Bas-Languedoc&quot;). The &quot;intendants&quot; of Languedoc resided in Montpellier, and they had a sub-delegate in Toulouse. Montpellier was chosen on purpose to diminish the power of Toulouse, whose &quot;parlement&quot; was very influential, and which symbolized the old spirit of independence of the county of Toulouse. The &quot;intendants&quot; replaced the governors as administrators of Languedoc, but appointed and dismissed at will by the king, they were no threat to the central state in Versailles. By 1789 they were the most important element of the local administration of the kingdom.

For judicial and legislative matters, Languedoc was overseen by the Parlement of Toulouse, founded in the middle of the 15th century. It was the first &quot;parlement&quot; created outside of Paris by the kings of France in order to be the equivalent of the &quot;Parlement&quot; of Paris in the far-away southern territories of the kingdom. The jurisdiction of the &quot;Parlement&quot; of Toulouse included the whole of the territory of the &quot;gouvernement&quot; of Languedoc, but it also included the province of Rouergue, most of the province of Quercy, and a part of Gascony. The &quot;Parlement&quot; of Toulouse was the supreme court of justice for this vast area of France, the court of last resort whose rulings could not be appealed, not even to the &quot;Parlement&quot; of Paris. The &quot;Parlement&quot; of Toulouse could also create case law through its decisions, as well as interpret the law. It was also in charge of registering new royal edicts and laws, and could decide to block them if it found them to be in contravention with the liberties and laws of Languedoc.

Finally, for purposes of taxation, Languedoc was ruled by the States of Languedoc, whose jurisdiction included only Languedoc proper (and Albigeois), but not Gévaudan, Velay, and Vivarais, which kept each their own provincial states until 1789. Languedoc proper was one of the very few provinces of France which had the privilege to decide over tax matters, the kings of France having suppressed the provincial states in most other provinces of the kingdom. This was a special favor from the kings to ensure that an independently spirited region far-away from Versailles would remain faithful to the central state. The States of Languedoc met in many different cities, and for some time they established themselves in Pézenas, but in the 18th century they were relocated definitively to Montpellier, where they met once a year, until 1789.

For Christian religious purposes, Languedoc was also divided into a certain number of ecclesiastical provinces, including the archdiocese of Toulouse, the archdiocese of Narbonne, and the archdiocese of Albi.

==Modern administrative divisions==
Between 1956 and 2016, the province of Languedoc was divided between four :

* 55.5% of its former territory lay in the , capital city , covering the of , and the extreme-north of , which accounted for 86.5% of the territory of . The remaining 13.5% is (), a province which was never part of historic Languedoc.
* 24.8% of its former territory lay in the , capital city , covering the of , as well as the eastern half of , the southeast of , and the northwest and northeast of , which account for 23.4% of the territory of . The remaining 76.6% was made of and (of which was talked above), as well as the province of County of (which had been a vassal of the county of in the Middle Ages), several small provinces of the Pyrenees mountains, and a large part of Gascony.
* 13% lay in the , covering the of , which accounted for 12.7% of the territory of .
* 6.7% lay in the , covering the central and eastern part of the of , which accounted for 11% of the territory of the modern .

In 2016, the French regions were reduced in number, with and merging to form , containing over 80% of historic , and and merging to , with just under a fifth of the historic .

==Population and cities==
On the traditional territory of the province of Languedoc there live approximately 3,650,000 people (as of 1999 census), 52% of these in the Languedoc-Roussillon &quot;région&quot;, 35% in the Midi-Pyrénées &quot;région&quot;, 8% in the Rhône-Alpes &quot;région&quot;, and 5% in the Auvergne &quot;région&quot;.

The territory of the former province shows a stark contrast between some densely populated areas (coastal plains as well as metropolitan area of Toulouse in the interior) where density is between (coastal plains) and (plain of Toulouse), and the hilly and mountainous interior where density is extremely low, the Cévennes area in the south of Lozère having one of the lowest densities of Europe with only .

The five largest metropolitan areas on the territory of the former province of Languedoc are (as of 1999 census): Toulouse (964,797), Montpellier (459,916), Nîmes (221,455), Béziers (124,967), and Alès (89,390).

The population of the former province of Languedoc is currently the fastest-growing in France, and also among the fastest-growing in Europe, as an increasing flow of people from northern France and the north of Europe relocating to the sunbelt of Europe, in which Languedoc is located. Growth is particularly strong in the metropolitan areas of Toulouse and Montpellier, which are the two fastest growing metropolitan areas in Europe at the moment. However, the interior of Languedoc is still losing inhabitants, which increases the difference of density that was mentioned.

Population of the coast of Languedoc as well as the region of Toulouse is rather young, educated, and affluent, whereas in the interior the population tends to be much older, with significantly lower incomes, and with a lower percentage of high school and especially college graduates.

==Economy==
===Agriculture===
Languedoc is a significant producer of wine. Today it produces more than a third of the grapes in France, and is a focus for outside investors. Wines from the Mediterranean coast of Languedoc are labeled as Languedoc, those from the interior have other labels such as Fronton, Gaillac, or Limoux to the west – and Côtes du Rhône towards the east.

Other crops include wheat (the traditional crop which made the fortune of the landlords and parliamentarians based in Toulouse, and for whose trade the famous Canal du Midi was built), maize (the new and nowadays most common crop in the region), olives (only on the Mediterranean coast of Languedoc), fruit, and rice (in some coastal areas). In the hilly and mountainous areas of the interior, sheep and goats are raised for meat and cheese. The coastal area is, naturally, a source of fish and shellfish.

===Industry===
Aerospace (Airbus, CNES, etc.), electronics (Freescale, etc.), and bio-tech industries in Toulouse; high-tech, electronics, and computer (IBM) industries in Montpellier; pharmaceutical industry (Pierre Fabre Group) in Castres.

There is also a significant chemical sector in Toulouse, which has been quite battered since the terrible explosion of AZF on 21 September 2001. It has been decided that chemical industries would be moved out of Toulouse, and a large campus devoted to cancer research and bio-tech R&amp;D will be opened on the site.

Elsewhere in the region industries are small and in decline, in particular around the formerly mining areas of Alès and Carmaux in the interior of the region.

===Services and tourism===
Services are the largest sector of the economy in the region. In particular, government services employ a significant part of the workforce, especially in small towns. Key administrations have been relocated to the region, such as France&#x27;s National Meteorology Office (Météo-France) relocated from Paris to Toulouse in 1982.

The area is also a major tourist destination. There exists three types of tourism. First, a massive summer tourism industry on the coast, with huge sea resorts such as Cap d&#x27;Agde, Palavas-les-Flots, or Le Grau-du-Roi, built in the 1970s.

Tourism related to history and art is also strong, as the region contains the historic cities of Carcassonne, Toulouse, Montpellier, countless Roman monuments (such as the Roman arenas in Nîmes), medieval abbeys, Romanesque churches, and old castles (such as the ruined Cathar castles in the mountains of Corbières, testimony of the bloody Albigensian Crusade).

More recently, &quot;green&quot; and sports tourism is on the rise, with the gorges of the Tarn, the Ardèche Gorges, as well as the vast preserved expanses of Cévennes, Ardèche, Lauragais, and other sites.

Tourism on the Canal du Midi combines history (for example viewing the nine locks of Fonseranes near Béziers) with activities such as boating on the Canal, and walking or cycling on the towpaths.

Toulouse and Montpellier are also common places for business congresses and conventions.

In April 2019, The Guardian&#x27;s travel section included two Languedoc locations in its list of &quot;20 of the most beautiful villages in France&quot;. The two were Saint-Guilhem-le-Désert with &quot;one of the finest examples of Romanesque architecture in the region&quot; and Estaing, whose &quot;narrow streets have hardly changed over the centuries&quot;.

==Sports==
Rugby union is the &quot;national&quot; sport in Languedoc, unlike most other parts of France where football is more popular. The Toulouse rugby club (Stade Toulousain) is one of the most successful in Europe; it regularly competes for the French championship and has won four European titles (1996, 2003, 2005, and 2010) in the ten years of the European championship&#x27;s existence.

Bullfighting and other bull-related events are popular in the eastern part of Languedoc. Sea jousts (&quot;Joutes nautiques&quot;) are held on the coast. Dating from the 11th century, this sport has local leagues and attracts large crowds.

==Property==
Property in the Languedoc is quite varied and ranges from newly built villas with swimming pools and tennis courts, to old village houses set into the old ramparts of ancient fortified towns. Some of these village houses date back hundreds of years. A small house in the village of Magalas, Hérault &quot;&quot;, has a date of the 13th century carved into its stonework. Being a large area, the type of property available in Languedoc varies a lot, from apartments in beach resorts such as Cap D&#x27;Agde to isolated bastides in the rural interior.

==See also==
* French wine
* Languedoc wine
* Languedoc-Roussillon
* Midi-Pyrénées
* Occitania
* Septimania timeline
* List of governors of Languedoc
* Émile Mazuc, scholar of the Languedocien language

==Notes==
==External links==

* Languedoc-Roussillon Tourist Board Official Tourism Website for the Region
* The Canal du Midi at Béziers Official Béziers Website
* The Languedoc-Roussillon Official Site of the Région. 
* The Hérault tourist board website Department of Hérault in Languedoc Région. All informations to discover Hérault and to book your holidays in Languedoc. Free brochures and lodging.
* An introduction to the Languedoc for tourists including regional overview and main tourist attractions.
* Atlas historique de la province de Languedoc, de l&#x27;époque romaine à nos jours, by Élie Pélaquier, CNRS. 
* The Languedoc and Roussillon history, geography, climate, cities, towns and historic monuments.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="4" end="25" title="Languedoc" label="Province of Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q209495" start="47" end="65" title="Provinces of France" label="province of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="124" end="130" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678265" start="134" end="143" title="Occitania (administrative region)" label="Occitanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="147" end="162" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="185" end="193" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="264" end="282" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Gallia Narbonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="295" end="313" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="314" end="347" title="Early Middle Ages" label="from the 5th to the 8th centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="373" end="391" title="Emirate of Córdoba" label="Emirate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="456" end="477" title="Kingdom of the Franks" label="Kingdom of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="481" end="496" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin the Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q16169269" start="518" end="535" title="Siege of Narbonne (752–59)" label="Siege of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="669" end="687" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="749" end="769" title="King John of England" label="King John of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="813" end="832" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="930" end="941" title="See of Rome" label="See of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1026" end="1043" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="1058" end="1077" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="1167" end="1180" title="Catharism" label="Cathar heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179544" start="1197" end="1213" title="Capetian dynasty" label="Capetian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="1251" end="1256" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q654564" start="1312" end="1321" title="Trencavel" label="Trencavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132801" start="1340" end="1344" title="Albi" label="Albi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="1346" end="1356" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassona"/>
<link wikidata="Q174019" start="1358" end="1365" title="Béziers" label="Besièrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191396" start="1367" end="1371" title="Agde" label="Agde"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="1376" end="1381" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q476920" start="1408" end="1427" title="Crown lands of France" label="Royal French Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334322" start="1441" end="1459" title="County of Toulouse" label="County of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q514081" start="1586" end="1604" title="County of Gévaudan" label="County of Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115433754" start="1618" end="1636" title="County of Melgueil" label="County of Melgueil"/>
<link wikidata="Q753087" start="1638" end="1645" title="Mauguio" label="Mauguiò"/>
<link wikidata="Q637724" start="1660" end="1683" title="Lordship of Montpellier" label="Lordship of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004191" start="1700" end="1721" title="Viscounty of Narbonne" label="Viscounty of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591894" start="1785" end="1805" title="Estates of Languedoc" label="Estates of Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="1898" end="1911" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q209495" start="1919" end="1940" title="Provinces of France" label="province of Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="2022" end="2031" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q211647" start="2064" end="2072" title="Beaucaire, Gard" label="Bèucaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="2074" end="2084" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="2089" end="2095" title="Toulouse" label="Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="2665" end="2675" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="2701" end="2707" title="Toulouse" label="Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334924" start="2739" end="2757" title="Treaty of Brétigny" label="Treaty of Brétigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481436" start="2777" end="2791" title="County of Foix" label="County of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250551" start="3377" end="3387" title="généralité" label="généralité"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3482" end="3499" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="3558" end="3568" title="Intendant (government official)" label="intendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="3656" end="3663" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="3699" end="3715" title="Occitan language" label="langue d&amp;#x27;oc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4113" end="4130" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334322" start="4544" end="4562" title="County of Toulouse" label="County of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895719" start="4724" end="4730" title="Quercy" label="Quercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="4746" end="4757" title="département in France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q12576" start="4767" end="4770" title="Lot (département)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12779" start="4810" end="4825" title="Tarn-et-Garonne" label="Tarn-et-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q590016" start="4847" end="4855" title="Rouergue" label="Rouergue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216" start="4875" end="4882" title="Aveyron" label="Aveyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q392459" start="4963" end="4970" title="Agenais" label="Agenais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12578" start="5010" end="5024" title="Lot-et-Garonne" label="Lot-et-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q514081" start="5068" end="5076" title="Gévaudan" label="Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="5092" end="5098" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588777" start="5117" end="5122" title="Velay" label="Velay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12572" start="5174" end="5185" title="Haute-Loire" label="Haute-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968100" start="5225" end="5233" title="Vivarais" label="Vivarais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148" start="5274" end="5281" title="Ardèche" label="Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="5318" end="5326" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q514081" start="5593" end="5601" title="Gévaudan" label="Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588777" start="5603" end="5608" title="Velay" label="Velay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968100" start="5614" end="5622" title="Vivarais" label="Vivarais"/>
<link wikidata="Q132801" start="5750" end="5754" title="Albi" label="Albi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132801" start="5790" end="5799" title="Albigeois" label="Albigeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772" start="5819" end="5823" title="Tarn (department)" label="Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895719" start="5915" end="5921" title="Quercy" label="Quercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590016" start="5926" end="5934" title="Rouergue" label="Rouergue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="5964" end="5972" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q849324" start="6098" end="6105" title="Guienne" label="Guienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="6131" end="6139" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="6542" end="6547" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="6561" end="6569" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="6579" end="6586" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="6600" end="6607" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="6638" end="6646" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190695" start="6655" end="6669" title="Massif Central" label="Massif Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="6683" end="6691" title="History of Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q931834" start="6730" end="6748" title="History of Toulouse" label="County of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365529" start="6757" end="6787" title="Parlement of Toulouse" label="regional &amp;quot;parlement&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="6789" end="6797" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="7077" end="7088" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937507" start="7332" end="7343" title="capitoulate" label="capitoulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q633811" start="7417" end="7424" title="Pézenas" label="Pézenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="7469" end="7477" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="7491" end="7502" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q714362" start="7759" end="7778" title="Henri II de Montmorency" label="duke of Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="7909" end="7918" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8000" end="8009" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="8047" end="8057" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250551" start="8378" end="8388" title="généralité" label="généralité"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="8639" end="8648" title="intendant" label="intendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="9409" end="9418" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q931834" start="9506" end="9524" title="History of Toulouse" label="county of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="9701" end="9711" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365529" start="9871" end="9892" title="Parlement of Toulouse" label="Parlement of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q590016" start="10322" end="10330" title="Rouergue" label="Rouergue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895719" start="10356" end="10362" title="Quercy" label="Quercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="10378" end="10385" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q132801" start="11032" end="11041" title="Albigeois" label="Albigeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q514081" start="11052" end="11060" title="Gévaudan" label="Gévaudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588777" start="11062" end="11067" title="Velay" label="Velay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968100" start="11073" end="11081" title="Vivarais" label="Vivarais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="11454" end="11464" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q633811" start="11612" end="11619" title="Pézenas" label="Pézenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="11681" end="11692" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365744" start="11861" end="11884" title="archdiocese of Toulouse" label="archdiocese of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365121" start="11890" end="11913" title="Ancient Diocese of Narbonne" label="archdiocese of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q623134" start="11923" end="11942" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Albi" label="archdiocese of Albi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481436" start="12598" end="12607" title="County of Foix" label="County of"/>
<link wikidata="Q931834" start="12640" end="12649" title="history of Toulouse" label="county of"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="12702" end="12710" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="12742" end="12749" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005" start="13308" end="13328" title="Languedoc-Roussillon" label="Languedoc-Roussillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16393" start="13360" end="13373" title="Midi-Pyrénées" label="Midi-Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="Q463" start="13404" end="13415" title="Rhône-Alpes" label="Rhône-Alpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="13450" end="13458" title="Auvergne (région)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="13793" end="13801" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="13823" end="13829" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="14002" end="14010" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="14022" end="14033" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="14045" end="14050" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174019" start="14062" end="14069" title="Béziers" label="Béziers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193183" start="14085" end="14089" title="Alès" label="Alès"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="14446" end="14454" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="14459" end="14470" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="15082" end="15087" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q744342" start="15262" end="15269" title="Fronton, Haute-Garonne" label="Fronton"/>
<link wikidata="Q392242" start="15271" end="15278" title="Gaillac AOC" label="Gaillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="15283" end="15289" title="Limoux AOC" label="Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151005" start="15308" end="15322" title="Côtes du Rhône" label="Côtes du Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="15362" end="15367" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="15460" end="15468" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q202494" start="15501" end="15514" title="Canal du Midi" label="Canal du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="15527" end="15532" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="15588" end="15593" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="15875" end="15881" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="15883" end="15887" title="CNES" label="CNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q863675" start="15909" end="15918" title="Freescale" label="Freescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="15954" end="15962" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="16002" end="16005" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="16021" end="16032" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q626597" start="16059" end="16077" title="Pierre Fabre Group" label="Pierre Fabre Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188776" start="16082" end="16089" title="Castres" label="Castres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="16139" end="16147" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083316" start="16211" end="16214" title="AZF (factory)" label="AZF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="16304" end="16312" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421914" start="16344" end="16359" title="cancer research" label="cancer research"/>
<link wikidata="Q193183" start="16521" end="16525" title="Alès" label="Alès"/>
<link wikidata="Q637499" start="16530" end="16537" title="Carmaux" label="Carmaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810406" start="16871" end="16883" title="Météo-France" label="Météo-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="16909" end="16917" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q996129" start="17096" end="17111" title="Cap d&amp;#x27;Agde" label="Cap d&amp;#x27;Agde"/>
<link wikidata="Q819267" start="17113" end="17130" title="Palavas-les-Flots" label="Palavas-les-Flots"/>
<link wikidata="Q328427" start="17135" end="17149" title="Le Grau-du-Roi" label="Le Grau-du-Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="17269" end="17280" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="17292" end="17303" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="17360" end="17365" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="17385" end="17395" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345011" start="17442" end="17456" title="Cathar castles" label="Cathar castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002130" start="17477" end="17486" title="Corbières, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence" label="Corbières"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="17512" end="17531" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q215653" start="17626" end="17630" title="Tarn (river)" label="Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538216" start="17636" end="17650" title="Ardèche Gorges" label="Ardèche Gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="17694" end="17702" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500011" start="17713" end="17722" title="Lauragais" label="Lauragais"/>
<link wikidata="Q202494" start="17757" end="17770" title="Canal du Midi" label="Canal du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174019" start="17843" end="17850" title="Béziers" label="Béziers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18048" end="18056" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="18404" end="18415" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="18504" end="18512" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="18534" end="18542" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q431412" start="18555" end="18571" title="Stade Toulousain" label="Stade Toulousain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="18791" end="18803" title="Bullfighting" label="Bullfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q896777" start="18880" end="18890" title="Sea jousting" label="Sea jousts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12545" start="19336" end="19343" title="Hérault" label="Hérault"/>
<link wikidata="Q996129" start="19535" end="19550" title="Cap D&amp;#x27;Agde" label="Cap D&amp;#x27;Agde"/>
<link wikidata="Q630531" start="19611" end="19622" title="French wine" label="French wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805438" start="19625" end="19639" title="Languedoc wine" label="Languedoc wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005" start="19642" end="19662" title="Languedoc-Roussillon" label="Languedoc-Roussillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16393" start="19665" end="19678" title="Midi-Pyrénées" label="Midi-Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="Q104285" start="19681" end="19690" title="Occitania" label="Occitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452291" start="19693" end="19712" title="Septimania timeline" label="Septimania timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q669449" start="19715" end="19745" title="List of governors of Languedoc" label="List of governors of Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q55979140" start="19748" end="19759" title="Émile Mazuc" label="Émile Mazuc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83909" wikidata="Q1048513" url="?curid=83909" title="Graham's law">
<text>Graham&#x27;s law of effusion (also called Graham&#x27;s law of [[diffusion]]) was formulated by Scottish physical chemist Thomas Graham in 1848. Graham found experimentally that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass of its particles. This formula is stated as:
:formula_1,
where:
:Rate1 is the rate of effusion for the first gas. (volume or number of moles per unit time).
:Rate2 is the rate of effusion for the second gas.

:&quot;M1&quot; is the molar mass of gas 1
:&quot;M2&quot; is the molar mass of gas 2.

Graham&#x27;s law states that the rate of diffusion or of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular weight. Thus, if the molecular weight of one gas is four times that of another, it would diffuse through a porous plug or escape through a small pinhole in a vessel at half the rate of the other (heavier gases diffuse more slowly). A complete theoretical explanation of Graham&#x27;s law was provided years later by the kinetic theory of gases. Graham&#x27;s law provides a basis for separating isotopes by diffusion—a method that came to play a crucial role in the development of the atomic bomb.

Graham&#x27;s law is most accurate for molecular effusion which involves the movement of one gas at a time through a hole. It is only approximate for diffusion of one gas in another or in air, as these processes involve the movement of more than one gas.

In the same conditions of temperature and pressure, the molar mass is proportional to the mass density. Therefore, the rates of diffusion of different gases are inversely proportional to the square roots of their mass densities:

:formula_2
where:
:&quot;ρ&quot; is the mass density.

==Examples==
First Example: Let gas 1 be H2 and gas 2 be O2. (This example is solving for the ratio between the rates of the two gases)

:formula_3

Therefore, hydrogen molecules effuse four times faster than those of oxygen.

Graham&#x27;s law can also be used to find the approximate molecular weight of a gas if one gas is a known species, and if there is a specific ratio between the rates of two gases (such as in the previous example). The equation can be solved for the unknown molecular weight.

:formula_4

Graham&#x27;s law was the basis for separating uranium-235 from uranium-238 found in natural uraninite (uranium ore) during the Manhattan Project to build the first atomic bomb. The United States government built a gaseous diffusion plant at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, at the cost of $479 million (equivalent to $ in ). In this plant, uranium from uranium ore was first converted to uranium hexafluoride and then forced repeatedly to diffuse through porous barriers, each time becoming a little more enriched in the slightly lighter uranium-235 isotope.

Second Example: An unknown gas diffuses 0.25 times as fast as He. What is the molar mass of the unknown gas?

Using the formula of gaseous diffusion, we can set up this equation.

:formula_5

Which is the same as the following because the problem states that the rate of diffusion of the unknown gas relative to the helium gas is 0.25.

:formula_6

Rearranging the equation results in

:formula_7

==History==
Graham&#x27;s research on the diffusion of gases was triggered by his reading about the observations of German chemist Johann Döbereiner that hydrogen gas diffused out of a small crack in a glass bottle faster than the surrounding air diffused in to replace it. Graham measured the rate of diffusion of gases through plaster plugs, through very fine tubes, and through small orifices. In this way he slowed down the process so that it could be studied quantitatively. He first stated in 1831 that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its density, and later in 1848 showed that this rate is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass. Graham went on to study the diffusion of substances in solution and in the process made the discovery that some apparent solutions actually are suspensions of particles too large to pass through a parchment filter. He termed these materials colloids, a term that has come to denote an important class of finely divided materials.

Around the time Graham did his work, the concept of molecular weight was being established largely through the measurements of gases. Daniel Bernoulli suggested in 1738 in his book &quot;Hydrodynamica&quot; that heat increases in proportion to the velocity, and thus kinetic energy, of gas particles. Italian physicist Amedeo Avogadro also suggested in 1811 that equal volumes of different gases contain equal numbers of molecules. Thus, the relative molecular weights of two gases are equal to the ratio of weights of equal volumes of the gases. Avogadro&#x27;s insight together with other studies of gas behaviour provided a basis for later theoretical work by Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell to explain the properties of gases as collections of small particles moving through largely empty space.

Perhaps the greatest success of the kinetic theory of gases, as it came to be called, was the discovery that for gases, the temperature as measured on the Kelvin (absolute) temperature scale is directly proportional to the average kinetic energy of the gas molecules. Graham&#x27;s law for diffusion could thus be understood as a consequence of the molecular kinetic energies being equal at the same temperature.

The rationale of the above can be summed up as follows:

Kinetic energy of each type of particle (in this example, Hydrogen and Oxygen, as above) within the system is equal, as defined by thermodynamic temperature:

:formula_8

Which can be simplified and rearranged to:

:formula_9

or:

:formula_10

Ergo, when constraining the system to the passage of particles through an area, Graham&#x27;s law appears as written at the start of this article.

==See also==
* Sieverts&#x27; law
* Henry&#x27;s law
* Gas laws
* Scientific laws named after people
* Viscosity
* Drag (physics)
*Vapour Density

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1048513" start="0" end="29" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s law" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s law of effusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048513" start="43" end="77" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s law" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s law of [[diffusion]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="115" end="122" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q333762" start="123" end="136" title="Thomas Graham (chemist)" label="Thomas Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q424532" start="191" end="199" title="effusion" label="effusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="205" end="208" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="261" end="271" title="molar mass" label="molar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="279" end="287" title="particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="387" end="393" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q104946" start="397" end="412" title="Amount of substance" label="number of moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="504" end="514" title="molar mass" label="molar mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1027" end="1050" title="Kinetic theory of gases#Collisions with container" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="1102" end="1110" title="isotopes" label="isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="1552" end="1564" title="Density" label="mass density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="2289" end="2294" title="Gaseous diffusion" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="2310" end="2321" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="2327" end="2338" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="2356" end="2365" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="2391" end="2408" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134113" start="2509" end="2531" title="Clinton Engineer Works" label="Clinton Engineer Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="2535" end="2555" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="2623" end="2630" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q408887" start="2671" end="2691" title="uranium hexafluoride" label="uranium hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3357" end="3363" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q63690" start="3372" end="3389" title="Johann Döbereiner" label="Johann Döbereiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q26100" start="4089" end="4100" title="suspension (chemistry)" label="suspensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="4186" end="4193" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q122366" start="4410" end="4426" title="Daniel Bernoulli" label="Daniel Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928507" start="4463" end="4476" title="Hydrodynamica" label="Hydrodynamica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43476" start="4595" end="4610" title="Amedeo Avogadro" label="Amedeo Avogadro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="4958" end="4977" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="5239" end="5245" title="Kelvin" label="Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="5686" end="5711" title="thermodynamic temperature" label="thermodynamic temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511810" start="5963" end="5981" title="Sieverts&amp;#x27; law" label="Sieverts&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q285804" start="5984" end="6000" title="Henry&amp;#x27;s law" label="Henry&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q379231" start="6003" end="6011" title="Gas laws" label="Gas laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638016" start="6014" end="6048" title="Scientific laws named after people" label="Scientific laws named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="6051" end="6060" title="Viscosity" label="Viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="6063" end="6077" title="Drag (physics)" label="Drag (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023279" start="6079" end="6093" title="Vapour density" label="Vapour Density"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83916" wikidata="Q105499" url="?curid=83916" title="Perineum">
<text>The perineum (: perineums or perinea) in placental mammals is the space between the anus and the genitals. The human perineum is between the anus and scrotum in the male or between the anus and vulva in the female. The perineum is the region of the body between the pubic symphysis (pubic arch) and the coccyx (tail bone), including the perineal body and surrounding structures. The perineal raphe is visible and pronounced to varying degrees. 

==Etymology==

The word entered English from late Latin via Greek περίναιος ~ περίνεος &quot;perinaios, perineos&quot;, itself from περίνεος, περίνεοι &#x27;male genitals&#x27; and earlier περίς &quot;perís&quot; &#x27;penis&#x27; through influence from πηρίς &quot;pērís&quot; &#x27;scrotum&#x27;. The term was originally understood as a purely male body-part with the perineal raphe seen as a continuation of the scrotal septum since masculinization causes the development of a large anogenital distance in men, in comparison to the corresponding lack of distance in women. As a result of folk etymologies (such as ἰνάω ináō, &quot;to carry off by evacuations&quot;), it is contemporaneously extended to both sexes.

==Structure==
The perineum is generally defined as the surface region between the pubic symphysis and the coccyx. The perineum is below the pelvic diaphragm and between the legs. It is a diamond-shaped area that includes the anus and, in females, the vagina. Its definition varies: it can refer to only the superficial structures in this region, or it can be used to include both superficial and deep structures. The perineum corresponds to the outlet of the pelvis.

A line drawn across the surface connecting the ischial tuberosities divides the space into two triangles:
* The anterior urogenital triangle contains the penis and scrotum (males) or vulva (females)
* The posterior anal triangle contains the anus

The formal anatomical boundaries of the perineum may be said to be:
* in front: the pubic arch and the arcuate ligament of the pubis
* behind: the tip of the coccyx
* on either side: the inferior rami of the pubis and ischial tuberosity, and the sacrotuberous ligament
* superiorly: pelvic floor
* inferiorly: skin and fascia

===Body===
The perineal body (or central tendon of perineum) is a pyramidal fibromuscular mass in the middle line of the perineum at the junction between the urogenital triangle and the anal triangle. In males, it is found between the bulb of the penis and the anus; in females, it is found between the vagina and anus, and about in front of the latter.

The perineal body is essential for the integrity of the pelvic floor, particularly in females. Its rupture during vaginal birth leads to widening of the gap between the anterior free borders of levator ani muscle of both sides, thus predisposing the child-bearer to prolapse of the uterus, rectum, or even the urinary bladder. Perineal tears and episiotomy often occur in childbirth with first-time deliveries, but the risk of these injuries can be reduced by preparing the perineum, often through massage.

At this point, the following muscles converge and are attached:
# External anal sphincter
# Bulbospongiosus muscle
# Superficial transverse perineal muscle
# Anterior fibers of the levator ani
# Fibers from male or female external urinary sphincter
# Deep transverse perineal muscle

===Fascia===
The terminology of the perineal fascia can be confusing, and there is some controversy over the nomenclature. This stems from the fact that there are two parts to the fascia, the superficial and deep parts, and each of these can be subdivided into superficial and deep parts.

The layers and contents are as follows, from superficial to deep:
===Areas===
The region of the perineum can be considered a distinct area from pelvic cavity, with the two regions separated by the pelvic diaphragm. The perianal area (&quot;&quot; and &quot;anal&quot;) is a subset of the perineum. The following areas are thus classified as parts of the perineal region:
* perineal pouches: superficial and deep (see above for details)
* ischioanal fossa – a fat-filled space at the lateral sides of anal canal, bounded laterally by the obturator internus muscle, and medially by the pelvic diaphragm and anal canal; its base is the skin
** anal canal
** pudendal canal – contains internal pudendal artery and the pudendal nerve

==Clinical significance==
The anogenital distance is a measure of the distance between the midpoint of the anus and the underside of the scrotum or the vagina. Studies show that the human perineum is twice as long in males as in females. Measuring the anogenital distance in neonatal humans has been suggested as a noninvasive method to determine male feminisation and thereby predict neonatal and adult reproductive disorders.

Extensive deformation of the pelvic floor occurs during a vaginal delivery. Approximately 85% of women have some perineal tear during a vaginal delivery and in about 69% suturing is required. Obstetric perineal trauma contributes to postpartum morbidity and frustration of women after delivery. In many women the childbirth trauma is manifested in advanced age when the compensatory mechanisms of the pelvic floor become weakened making the problem more serious among the aged population.

There are claims that sometimes the perineum is excessively repaired after childbirth, using a so-called &quot;husband stitch&quot; and that this can increase vaginal tightness or result in pain during intercourse.

The perineum is an erogenous zone. This area is also known as the taint or gooch in American slang, as well as the notcha in Australian slang. 

==Society and culture==
Perineum sunning is a wellness practice that involves exposing the perineum (area between the genitals and anus) to sunlight. Adherents claim various unproven health benefits such as improved libido, circulation, sleep, and longevity. There is no scientific evidence that this behavior promotes any of the alleged benefits. The practice of exposing a sensitive area of skin to sunlight also increases the risk of skin cancers such as melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal-cell carcinoma. Doctors recommend safer alternative options such as relaxation, meditation, and mindfulness, which can also achieve the same desired benefits.

== Gallery ==
==See also==

* Deep perineal pouch
* Erogenous zone
* Intimate part
* Mula Bandha
* Pelvic floor
* Perineal raphe
* Perineal tear classification
* &quot;101 Vagina&quot;
* &quot;Femalia&quot;

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="4" end="12" title="Perineum" label="perineum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="16" end="25" title="Perineum" label="perineums"/>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="29" end="36" title="Perineum" label="perinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="41" end="50" title="placentalia" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="51" end="57" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="84" end="88" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="97" end="105" title="genitals" label="genitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174471" start="150" end="157" title="scrotum" label="scrotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="194" end="199" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="266" end="281" title="pubic symphysis" label="pubic symphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="303" end="309" title="coccyx" label="coccyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q490195" start="383" end="397" title="perineal raphe" label="perineal raphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="506" end="511" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091309" start="861" end="875" title="scrotal septum" label="scrotal septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433654" start="882" end="897" title="Virilization" label="masculinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146642" start="932" end="951" title="anogenital distance" label="anogenital distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="1037" end="1053" title="Folk etymology" label="folk etymologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545415" start="1220" end="1234" title="surface anatomy" label="surface region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="1247" end="1262" title="pubic symphysis" label="pubic symphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="1271" end="1277" title="coccyx" label="coccyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="1305" end="1321" title="pelvic diaphragm" label="pelvic diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258546" start="1390" end="1394" title="human anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="1416" end="1422" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045429" start="1610" end="1630" title="outlet of the pelvis" label="outlet of the pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348834" start="1635" end="1639" title="Anatomical line" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850869" start="1680" end="1700" title="tuberosity of the ischium" label="ischial tuberosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900860" start="1754" end="1773" title="urogenital triangle" label="urogenital triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="1787" end="1792" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174471" start="1797" end="1804" title="scrotum" label="scrotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="1816" end="1821" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751012" start="1848" end="1861" title="anal triangle" label="anal triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258546" start="1875" end="1879" title="Human anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257269" start="1965" end="1975" title="pubic arch" label="pubic arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="1984" end="2000" title="Inferior pubic ligament" label="arcuate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="2008" end="2013" title="pubis (bone)" label="pubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="2039" end="2045" title="coccyx" label="coccyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="2068" end="2094" title="inferior pubic ramus" label="inferior rami of the pubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850869" start="2099" end="2117" title="ischial tuberosity" label="ischial tuberosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575134" start="2127" end="2149" title="sacrotuberous ligament" label="sacrotuberous ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="2164" end="2176" title="pelvic floor" label="pelvic floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900860" start="2366" end="2385" title="urogenital triangle" label="urogenital triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751012" start="2394" end="2407" title="anal triangle" label="anal triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q921517" start="2443" end="2460" title="bulb of penis" label="bulb of the penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258546" start="2469" end="2473" title="Human anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="2511" end="2517" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="2619" end="2631" title="pelvic floor" label="pelvic floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q537123" start="2757" end="2768" title="levator ani" label="levator ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q180777" start="2845" end="2851" title="uterine prolapse" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q964891" start="2853" end="2859" title="rectocele" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q246085" start="2873" end="2888" title="cystocele" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158662" start="2890" end="2903" title="Perineal tear" label="Perineal tear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137446" start="2909" end="2919" title="episiotomy" label="episiotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="2935" end="2945" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379958" start="3137" end="3160" title="External anal sphincter" label="External anal sphincter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757893" start="3163" end="3185" title="Bulbospongiosus muscle" label="Bulbospongiosus muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835450" start="3188" end="3226" title="Superficial transverse perineal muscle" label="Superficial transverse perineal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q537123" start="3252" end="3263" title="levator ani" label="levator ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001932" start="3278" end="3282" title="external sphincter muscle of male urethra" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q427813" start="3286" end="3319" title="external sphincter muscle of female urethra" label="female external urinary sphincter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835450" start="3322" end="3353" title="Deep transverse perineal muscle" label="Deep transverse perineal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q936531" start="3400" end="3406" title="fascia" label="fascia"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="3842" end="3858" title="pelvic diaphragm" label="pelvic diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="3902" end="3906" title="anus" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079258" start="4083" end="4099" title="ischioanal fossa" label="ischioanal fossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="4145" end="4155" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="4286" end="4296" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q696698" start="4300" end="4314" title="pudendal canal" label="pudendal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q707489" start="4326" end="4350" title="internal pudendal artery" label="internal pudendal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753038" start="4359" end="4373" title="pudendal nerve" label="pudendal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146642" start="4405" end="4424" title="anogenital distance" label="anogenital distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442904" start="4727" end="4739" title="feminization (biology)" label="feminisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314317" start="4779" end="4800" title="reproductive disorder" label="reproductive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158662" start="4917" end="4930" title="perineal tear" label="perineal tear"/>
<link wikidata="Q42061229" start="5405" end="5419" title="The husband stitch" label="husband stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207850" start="5529" end="5543" title="erogenous zone" label="erogenous zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077209" start="5701" end="5709" title="wellness (alternative medicine)" label="wellness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="6113" end="6121" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="6123" end="6146" title="squamous cell carcinoma" label="squamous cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q809758" start="6152" end="6172" title="basal-cell carcinoma" label="basal-cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512204" start="6348" end="6367" title="Deep perineal pouch" label="Deep perineal pouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207850" start="6370" end="6384" title="Erogenous zone" label="Erogenous zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084952" start="6387" end="6400" title="Intimate part" label="Intimate part"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502904" start="6403" end="6414" title="Mula Bandha" label="Mula Bandha"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="6417" end="6429" title="Pelvic floor" label="Pelvic floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q490195" start="6432" end="6446" title="Perineal raphe" label="Perineal raphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158662" start="6449" end="6477" title="Perineal tear classification" label="Perineal tear classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985042" start="6486" end="6496" title="101 Vagina" label="101 Vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915644" start="6511" end="6518" title="Femalia" label="Femalia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83921" wikidata="Q6951518" url="?curid=83921" title="N-word (disambiguation)">
<text>The N-word is commonly used as a euphemism for &quot;nigger&quot;, an ethnic slur directed at black people.

(The) N-word may also refer to:

*&quot;The N-Word&quot; (film), a 2004 documentary film
*&quot;The N Word: One Man&#x27;s Stand&quot;, a 2005 autobiography by Stephen Hagan
*&quot;The N-Word of the Narcissus&quot;, a 2009 rework of the 1897 novel &quot;The Nigger of the &quot;Narcissus&quot;&quot;
* In Danish grammar, a linguistic term meaning &quot;of common grammatical gender&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="4" end="10" title="N-word" label="N-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752975" start="143" end="172" title="The N-Word (film)" label="&amp;quot;The N-Word&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="205" end="237" title="The N Word: One Man&amp;#x27;s Stand" label="The N Word: One Man&amp;#x27;s Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q478537" start="290" end="317" title="The N-Word of the Narcissus" label="The N-Word of the Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="414" end="428" title="Danish grammar#Nouns" label="Danish grammar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83930" wikidata="Q29014225" url="?curid=83930" title="Fatah Revolutionary Council">
<text>The Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC) is Fatah’s internal parliamentary body and its second most prominent institution after the Central Committee of Fatah. It consists of approximately 80 members elected from a pool of approximately 1400 party members including civil and military personalities during the Fatah General Congress, from whom another 21 members are also elected for Fatah’s Central Committee. Candidates may only be nominated if they&#x27;re over the age of 33, and have been full party members for 15 years uninterrupted.

== Sessions ==

According to the internal regulations of the Fatah movement, the Revolutionary Council must meet periodically every three months, where:
a) the Secretary-General invites the members to the meeting or,&lt;br&gt;
b) written letter is written by two-thirds of the members to call for a session or,&lt;br&gt;
c) in the event of a request by the Central Committee

== Responsibilities ==

The Fatah Revolutionary Council is tasked with a variety of responsibilities, the most notable of which are to supervise the work of the Central Committee and to approve internal policies and their interpretation. It also replaces vacancies on the Central Committee in the event of death, withdrawal, or expulsion. It also takes on the responsibility of dismissing or freezing members&#x27; memberships, whether in the Central Committee or any of the movement&#x27;s apparatuses. The Revolutionary Council also works to implement Fatah&#x27;s General Conference decisions, monitor the work of the Central Committee and the movement&#x27;s conditions in the regions, and oversee the Fatah movement&#x27;s military affairs, in addition to discussing the Central Committee&#x27;s decisions and activities. It also interprets the texts of Fatah&#x27;s internal regulations in accordance with the movement&#x27;s regulations, elects the head of the movement&#x27;s court and the members of its committees, and discusses the reports of the General Conference and Revolutionary Council committees.

Fatah&#x27;s seventh Congress, held in Ramallah in December 2016, elected a new FRC and FCC. This was widely interpreted as Mahmoud Abbas&#x27; attempt to tighten his grip on the party by expelling his opponent Mohammed Dahlan and marginalising the popular Fatah figure Marwan Barghouti.
== Membership ==

==References==
== Sources ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29014225" start="4" end="31" title="Fatah Revolutionary Council" label="Fatah Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="41" end="46" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060619" start="129" end="155" title="Central Committee of Fatah" label="Central Committee of Fatah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83931" wikidata="Q1053330" url="?curid=83931" title="The Chronicles of Amber">
<text>The Chronicles of Amber is a series of fantasy novels by American writer Roger Zelazny. The main series consists of two story arcs, each five novels in length. Additionally, there are a number of Amber short stories and other works. While Zelazny&#x27;s will expressly forbade sequels by other authors, four posthumous prequels authorized by Zelazny&#x27;s family were authored by John Gregory Betancourt.

==Premise==
The Amber stories take place in two contrasting &quot;true&quot; worlds, Amber and Chaos, and in shadow worlds (Shadows) that lie between the two. These shadows, including Earth, are parallel worlds that exist in — and were created from — the tension between the opposing magical forces of Amber and Chaos. The Courts of Chaos are situated at the very edge of an abyss. Members of the royal family of Amber, after walking in a Pattern that is central to Amber, can travel freely through the Shadows. While traveling (shifting) between Shadows, they can alter reality or create a new reality by choosing which elements of which Shadows to keep or add, and which to subtract. Nobles of the Courts of Chaos who have traversed the Logrus are similarly able to travel through Shadows.

==The Chronicles==
Ten Amber novels were written by Roger Zelazny. The series of books was published over the years from 1970 to 1991. Portions of the first novel, &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot;, had previously been published in &quot;Kallikanzaros&quot; (No. 1, June 1967, and No. 3, December 1967). The novels &quot;Sign of the Unicorn&quot;, &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot;, and &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; first appeared in abridged, serialized versions in &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot;. &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot; and five later &quot;Merlin Cycle&quot; Amber novels were not serialized or excerpted.

Several &quot;Chronicles of Amber&quot; omnibus volumes have also been published, collecting the five novels of the original &quot;Corwin Cycle&quot; in one volume, the five novels of the &quot;Merlin Cycle&quot; in another volume, and later (in &quot;The Great Book of Amber&quot;) all ten novels in a single volume.

===The Corwin cycle===
The first five novels are narrated in the first person by Corwin, a prince of Amber, as he describes his adventures and life upon re-encountering his family after a loss of memory and an absence of centuries.

====&quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; (1970)====
====&quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot; (1972)====
====&quot;Sign of the Unicorn&quot; (1975)====
====&quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot; (1976)====
====&quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; (1978)====
===The Merlin Cycle===
The next five novels focus on Merlin, Corwin&#x27;s son. These stories are held by some fans to be less of a fantasy classic than the first five due to the difference in writing style, direction and setting. One criticism of the sequence is that it revolved around the dealing with and acquisition of ever more powerful artifacts and entities, in a kind of technological/magical arms race.

====&quot;Trumps of Doom&quot; (1985)====

&quot;Trumps of Doom&quot; won the Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel in 1985.

====&quot;Blood of Amber&quot; (1986)====

&quot;Blood of Amber&quot; was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel in 1987.

====&quot;Sign of Chaos&quot; (1987)====

&quot;Sign of Chaos&quot; was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel in 1988.

====&quot;Knight of Shadows&quot; (1989)====

====&quot;Prince of Chaos&quot; (1991)====

===Short stories===
===Background===
For the limited 1985 edition of &quot;Trumps of Doom&quot;, Zelazny wrote a prologue that details Merlin&#x27;s passage through the Logrus. After completing the Merlin Cycle, Zelazny wrote five Amber short stories, in which he began to tease the threads of the story into a new configuration. Zelazny died shortly after completing the last of these short stories, which were collected in &quot;Manna from Heaven&quot; (2003), along with the &quot;Trumps of Doom&quot; prologue and sixteen unrelated stories.

An unfinished sixth story &quot;A Secret of Amber&quot;, was an informal collaboration, co-written in alternating sections by Zelazny and Ed Greenwood over a period of years. It was published in &quot;Amberzine&quot; in 2005, then included in &quot;The Collected Stories of Roger Zelazny, Volume 6: The Road to Amber&quot;, published by NESFA Press in 2009.

Readers have speculated about the correct internal order of the stories. Zelazny has said that the correct order for the stories is the order in which they were written:

* &quot;A Secret of Amber&quot; (&quot;Amberzine&quot; #12–15, March 2005)
* &quot;The Salesman&#x27;s Tale&quot; (&quot;Amberzine&quot; No. 6, by Phage Press, February 1994 and Ten Tales, edited by John Dunning, 1994)
* &quot;Blue Horse, Dancing Mountains&quot; (&quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;, edited by Roger Zelazny, 1995)
* &quot;The Shroudling and the Guisel&quot; (&quot;Realms of Fantasy&quot;, October 1994)
* &quot;Coming to a Cord&quot; (&quot;Pirate Writings&quot;, Number 7, 1995)
* &quot;Hall of Mirrors&quot; (&quot;Castle Fantastic&quot;, edited by John DeChancie and Martin Greenberg, March 1996)

The latter five stories tell a linked tale from several viewpoints. Zelazny had planned to write more, and to eventually publish a collection of Amber short stories.

In 2020 Amber Limited released the short stories as a collection, titled &quot;Seven Tales in Amber&quot;, with an introduction written by Warren Lapine.

===&quot;Dawn of Amber&quot; series===

Several years after Zelazny&#x27;s death, his estate authorized a new series of Amber novels, and John Gregory Betancourt was selected as the writer. Betancourt&#x27;s &quot;Dawn of Amber&quot; series, which took its name from the title of the first volume, is a prequel to Zelazny&#x27;s work, taking place centuries or millennia before &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot;. It is told from the point of view of Corwin&#x27;s father Oberon, and like Zelazny&#x27;s novels, the series was narrated in first person.

Four novels, out of five that had been planned, were published by ibooks:
* &quot;The Dawn of Amber&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Chaos and Amber&quot; (2003)
* &quot;To Rule in Amber&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Shadows of Amber&quot; (2005)

Having ended the fourth book on a cliffhanger, Betancourt never wrote the planned and scheduled fifth volume, &quot;Sword of Chaos&quot;. After Byron Preiss, the owner of ibooks, died, the publishing company filed for bankruptcy, and Betancourt announced in February 2006 that the series had been canceled. After a meeting with the publisher&#x27;s new owner, Betancourt had brief hopes of renewed interest in the series from ibooks, but in August 2007 he announced his conclusion that the project was dead.

Betancourt stated that one of his primary motivations for agreeing to write the new books was to keep Zelazny&#x27;s books and stories alive and in print, and to prevent them from fading into obscurity. He cited Robert E. Howard&#x27;s Conan, Edgar Rice Burroughs&#x27;s Tarzan, and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes as examples of how later authors had successfully continued and extended the stories of iconic characters long after their creators had died. In response to concerns that the &quot;Dawn of Amber&quot; series seemed to contradict some ideas or rules of the Amber universe as stated in Zelazny&#x27;s original ten books, Betancourt stated in an interview that some of those contradictions would not prove valid by the end of his series.

The decision by Zelazny&#x27;s literary executor to authorize a continuation of the Amber series was criticized by several acquaintances of Zelazny, including writers George R. R. Martin, Walter Jon Williams, and Neil Gaiman. They asserted that Zelazny had been quite averse to the idea of a &quot;shared&quot; Amber setting, and that he had clearly stated he did not want any others writing Amber stories. Gaiman wrote:

The series received a critical response from some Zelazny fans, who responded negatively to Betancourt&#x27;s writing style and perceived lack of characterization, and considered his work to be fan fiction. The focus on Oberon also disappointed those who, after reading Zelazny&#x27;s Merlin cycle and Amber short stories, believed that Zelazny had instead been planning another series of books to wrap up matters that he had left hanging. Zelazny&#x27;s short stories, while tying up some of the loose ends, at the same time had opened doors to potential new stories going forward in the Amber universe, rather than a prequel.

=== Audio editions and other adaptations ===
==== Audiobooks ====
Sunset Productions did audio versions of Roger Zelazny reading the novels (except where noted), and produced them with sound effects. Sunset was bought out by Americana Publishing in 2002.

# &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; (abridged February 1992, unabridged April 1998)
# &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot; (abridged February 1992, unabridged November 1998)
# &quot;Sign of the Unicorn&quot; (abridged September 1992, unabridged December 1998)
# &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot; (abridged October 1992, unabridged 1999) (last portion of the unabridged version read by Bruce Watson)
# &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; (abridged only January 1993, unsure of unabridged date)
# &quot;Trumps of Doom&quot; (abridged April 1993, unsure of unabridged date)
# &quot;Blood of Amber&quot; (abridged July 1993, unsure of unabridged date)
# &quot;Sign of Chaos&quot; (abridged November 1994, unabridged 2002)
# &quot;Knight of Shadows&quot; (abridged only) (October 1996)
# &quot;Prince of Chaos&quot; (abridged only) (read by Bruce Watson) (December 1998)

The National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped also created unabridged recorded versions of &quot;The Chronicles of Amber&quot; novels, including a 1979 recording of &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot;, read by Michael Moodie, and a later recording of &quot;Prince of Chaos&quot;, read by John Stratton.

Unabridged recordings created for the Canadian National Institute for the Blind included a 2001 recording of &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; read by Richard Nazarewich.

In 2012, Audible released brand new recordings of &quot;The Chronicles of Amber&quot;, with Alessandro Juliani reading the first five books (the Corwin cycle) and Wil Wheaton reading the last five books (the Merlin cycle).

==== Graphic novel adaptations ====
The first two Amber books, &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; and &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot;, were adapted by Terry Bisson into graphic novels. They were published in 1996, each in three parts.

==== Reference works====
There are two published guides to Amber:
* &quot;Roger Zelazny&#x27;s Visual Guide to Castle Amber&quot; by Roger Zelazny and Neil Randall (1988)
* &quot;The Complete Amber Sourcebook&quot; by Theodore Krulik (Avon Books, New York, 1996) 

==== Games ====
===== Authorized games =====
In 1985, Telarium published the interactive fiction computer game &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot;, based on the first two books of the series.

Two authorized adventure books based on Amber, similar in concept to Neil Randall&#x27;s &quot;Choose Your Own Adventure&quot; series, were published in 1988:
* &quot;Seven No-Trump&quot; (1988), subtitled &quot;A Crossroads Adventure&quot;
* &quot;The Black Road War&quot; (1988), subtitled &quot;Combat Command&quot;

Erick Wujcik created the &quot;Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game&quot;, with two authorized publications:
* &quot;Amber Diceless Role-playing&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Shadow Knight&quot; (1995)

===== Other games =====
The online multiplayer role-playing game &quot;&quot; was based in the Amber universe.

&quot;Lost Souls&quot; is a multiplayer medieval fantasy MUD in which Amber is the center of the cosmos and the Courts of Chaos is the outermost of the outer planes; Amberite and Chaosborn are among the playable races.

&quot;Zangband&quot; is a single-player roguelike computer game with a setting, magic system, and race options that are loosely derived from Zelazny&#x27;s Amber multiverse, with the Serpent of Chaos as its final adversary.

== History, setting, and backstory ==
The series is based on the concept of parallel worlds, domination over them being fought between the kingdoms at the extreme ends of Shadow—Amber, the one true world of Order, and the Courts of Chaos. Amberites of royal blood - those descended from Oberon (and ultimately his parents: Dworkin, formerly of the Courts of Chaos, and the Unicorn of Order herself) — are able to &quot;walk in Shadow&quot;, mentally willing changes to occur around them. These changes are, in effect, representative of the Shadow-walker passing through different realities. There are apparently infinite realities, and the characters in the novels are not sure if these different universes are created as one walks through Shadow, or if they already exist and a Shadow-walker is able to slip from one to another. In the Merlin cycle there are references to the Wheeler–Everett interpretation of quantum-mechanics and the Ghostwheel created by Merlin is said to &quot;shuffle&quot; through Shadows, suggesting that the multiverse exists independently, although this is never explicitly stated.

Within this multiverse, Zelazny deals with some interesting philosophical concepts about the nature of existence, compares and contrasts the ideas of Order and Chaos, and plays with the laws of physics—they can differ from Shadow to Shadow; for instance, gunpowder does not ignite in Amber, which is why the characters all carry swords. Other Shadows have green skies and blue suns, cities of glass, and worlds out of our own fiction can come to life.

===The geography of Amber===
The Castle and City of Amber rest upon a shoulder of Kolvir, a mountain which dominates the land and sea around it. The city lies below the castle and extends down the mountain&#x27;s slopes to a seaport. Part of the eastern face of Kolvir is a cliff, thousands of feet high, which can be climbed using stone steps. These form a switchback stair, a path that is broad enough for two men abreast at the bottom, but soon narrows, wide enough for only for a single person. There are no railings. Below the stairs are a tiger-striped beach and the sea, and the cliff face is riddled with sea caves. Out to sea and to the southeast of Amber lies first the City of Rebma, and then the Isle of Cabra, noted for its lighthouse.

To the north of Amber lie various estates, farms, and small villages and communities, as well as a small port (Baylesport). The great forest of Arden lies to the north, west and south of Kolvir. Also to the south is The Vale of Garnath. This is a lush forest, but &quot;not so thickly or massively wooded as the Arden&quot;, and is where the River Oisen travels to the sea. It is also through Garnath that the forces of Chaos eventually come to attack Amber, using their Black Road. Another important southern location, within the Forest of Arden, is the Grove of the Unicorn.

Prince Julian is generally responsible for patrolling the land approaches to Amber, especially through the Arden, while Princes Caine and Gérard initially shared responsibility for the fleets protecting Amber&#x27;s seas. Since Amber &quot;casts Shadow but is not of it&quot;, walking in Shadow was not possible in the immediate environs of the City or Kolvir. It was necessary to gain some distance from these locations in order to walk in Shadow, traveling to or from other worlds. This usually meant traveling by sea, or through the Forest of Arden. This is why the sea patrols and Julian&#x27;s force in Arden were effective.

===Reflections of Amber===
Amber has two reflections or counterparts. The city of Rebma (Amber spelled backwards) lies under the sea off the coast. Markers on the beach point the way to an underwater stairway (named Faiella-Bionin) which descends to the city. The stairway and city are magical, allowing normal breathing, talking, etc. -- but also allowing one to swim if desired. Leaving the areas of magic returns one to normal water, with the potential of drowning or being crushed by water pressure. Rebma is ruled by Queen Moire. Most inhabitants are a sea people, not shadows of Amberites, and are slightly different in form from humans. They can be resentful of Amber, particularly when strife in Amber causes ripples of trouble in their own home. In times of peace Amberites may visit freely. It was during one such time that Random seduced and abandoned Moire&#x27;s daughter Morganthe, leading her to commit suicide after she bore his son, Martin. Rebma contains a copy of the Pattern, a mirror image of the one in Amber.

On moonlit nights, the ghostly city of Tir-na Nog&#x27;th (cf. Tír na nÓg) appears in the sky above Kolvir. It is an imperfect reflection of Amber, with inhabitants that are shadows and ghosts of people, including those who once, might have, or never existed. Like Rebma, Tir-na Nog&#x27;th is reached by a stair, the bottom three steps of which are of stone rooted on Kolvir, with the rest of the stairs being of the same nature as the city itself. As long as the moon is not obscured, the stairway and the city are solid enough to stand on. Amberites visit the ghost city to seek insights and portents of the future. The passage of time and spatial distances differ in Tir-na Nog&#x27;th, versus the world below. When visiting there, safety suggests staying in contact with someone via a Trump, since the city may disappear without warning if a cloud passes across the moon. Again like Rebma, Tir-na Nog&#x27;th also contains a complete copy of the Pattern (but this copy isn&#x27;t reversed, as is Rebma&#x27;s). Tir-na Nog&#x27;th is visited by Corwin in a crucial development of his story.

===Characters in the Amber novels===

Ultimately, Amber focuses on a dysfunctional family that is at the center of a cosmic war between many powers. Nine princes and four princesses of Amber, including Prince Corwin as narrator of the first book series, try to deal with the disappearance of Oberon, their father, and an apparent need for succession of the throne. No one trusts anyone, everyone appears to be ready to backstab anyone else (often figuratively), and everyone seems genuinely interested in only one thing: himself or herself.

In this respect, the Amber series could perhaps be best described as a philosophical, metaphysical, magical, mystical, fantasy political thriller. It has all those things, all wrapped around a cast of characters who are conniving, paranoid, dysfunctional, self-involved, and often heartless.

All of the princes and princesses of Amber have super-human strength and regenerative capabilities. For example, Random and Corwin are able to pick up a car that had become stuck on a soft shoulder and place it back on the road, and Corwin is able to regenerate his eyes after they are burned out, although it takes him almost five years. Corwin seems to have the fastest regenerative capabilities in the royal family, something he contemplates after his escape from the dungeons of Amber.

===Magical powers and objects===
====The Pattern and the Logrus====
At the two poles of existence are the symbols of Order and Chaos—The Pattern and The Logrus, respectively. Each, when negotiated, gives a person the ability to walk in shadow—across the different possible universes. The Pattern is a single, intertwined curve, laid out in a twisting labyrinth-like design, in size larger than a football field. The Logrus is described as a shifting, three-dimensional obstacle course. Amber&#x27;s Pattern is located in caverns deep underneath the royal palace.

Initially, readers learn there is the Pattern in Amber, and copies in Rebma and Tir-na Nog&#x27;th. Later, more become evident: e.g., there are imperfect or &quot;broken&quot; copies in other Shadows, and that Amber&#x27;s Pattern itself is a close shadow of a hidden Primal Pattern. These imperfect copies exist in shadows close to Amber, with the first three being the least dangerous to use, but with the danger increasing the further one is from the original. Navigating Broken Patterns can give an individual some access to magical energies, but it is &quot;foolish&quot; to attempt to use for such purposes any Broken Pattern further than the ninth one from Amber.

The Logrus is not introduced until the sixth book of the Amber series (&quot;The Trumps of Doom&quot;). Merlin&#x27;s walking of the Logrus appears in a prologue to the initial hardcover edition of the book. We do not see any other instances of a character negotiating the Logrus. The Prologue has Merlin bleeding and experiencing odd sensory inputs. Later we learn that walking the Logrus can leave one mentally unstable for a while afterwards, but this &quot;usually&quot; passes. The Logrus is also described as containing the skeletal remains of those who tried to walk it, but failed.

====The Trumps====
In the Amber universe, the word &quot;trump&quot; is used as both a noun and a verb. As a noun, it properly refers to a specialized type of hand-drawn tarot card depicting a person or a place. As a verb, it refers to using such a card for teleportation.

The original tarot decks used by Amberites had some or all of their Major Arcana cards replaced (or possibly augmented) with images of the royal family, and of at least one location, Castle Amber. These original decks were created by Dworkin, and a deck was given to each family member after they first walked the Pattern. Physically, these cards are cool to the touch. The decks may be used like normal tarots for divination, as Corwin does shortly after meeting one of his brothers.

The Trumps have the magical attribute of facilitating a psychic link to the person or place depicted on the card, enabling instant communication, travel, and even attack. If the card depicts a location, the user is able to teleport to that location. If the card depicts a person, the user concentrates on the image and attempts to reach out to the person to initiate contact. The recipient of a Trump contact does not need to have a card in their possession. An attempted contact may be blocked or declined by the receiving party, by an act of concentration. A variety of other circumstances can also impede or prevent Trump contact from being made, including distance and time-flow differences across Shadows, as well as unconsciousness, amnesia, and magical characteristics of a particular location.

If contact through a Trump is successful, both parties are able to talk to each other, and even see some of each other&#x27;s surroundings. Either party may end a Trump communication, either by passing their hand over the card, or by an effort of will. During the contact, each person has the option of reaching through the link to make physical contact, generally for the purpose of pulling the other person voluntarily to their own physical location. This is sometimes called &quot;trumping&quot; a person to the other location. In some cases, one can also travel via Trump to the other person&#x27;s location without the other&#x27;s consent or assistance, as long as the contact remains open (e.g., Dalt&#x27;s attempt in &quot;Blood of Amber&quot; to come through a Trump held by Merlin, which failed only after Merlin summoned the Logrus to sever the contact). A Trump contact also creates a potential opening for an attack by either party on the other, either with a weapon, or by using the link in an attempt to dominate the other by sheer force of ego and will. This can result in immobilization or worse for the victim of the attack.

To an observer who witnesses a person trumping to another location, the person becomes two-dimensional before disappearing, and there is a prismatic aftereffect. In &quot;Trumps of Doom&quot;, Merlin also mentions sensing a kind of electrical charge as Jasra trumps into a room where he waits.

Further details about the nature of Trumps were revealed as the tale progressed; for example, Trumps are not limited to playing cards, but can be drawn on any surface. Corwin escaped from his dungeon cell after Dworkin materialized in it, by persuading Dworkin, who was mentally unbalanced at the time, to draw him a picture of the lighthouse at Cabra, a location on the edge of Amber. After Dworkin draws another picture to return to his hideout, Corwin uses the lighthouse picture to escape. In &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot; Corwin returns to his cell and uses the other picture to follow Dworkin to his lair, finding that it is located near the Primal Pattern that created Amber and all its Shadows.

Dworkin taught several of his descendants to create Trumps, and other initiates of the Pattern or Logrus can be trained in that skill. If one looks &quot;closely enough&quot; at a Trump, one can see parts of the Pattern or Logrus within its design, which may provide a source of power.

Anyone may use a Trump – the user does not need to be an Amberite, a Pattern initiate, or of royal blood. Similarly, no special characteristics are required in the person depicted on a Trump – for example, in &quot;Blood of Amber&quot;, several initiates of the Logrus were depicted on Trump cards drawn by Brand or Rinaldo, and Merlin considered drawing a Trump depicting Bill Roth, a trusted advisor with no apparent magical aptitude. Provided the artist is sufficiently familiar with the subject, a Trump can be drawn for any person or place desired, unless the place is in constant motion and change (such as portions of Chaos). Under certain circumstances and extreme conditions, the technique for creating a Trump can be used to make contact without drawing on any surface at all. Indeed, Corwin&#x27;s brother Brand is described as becoming a &quot;Living Trump&quot;, who can move through Shadow by will alone.

====The Jewel of Judgment====
A large red gem in a pendant, this is initially thought to be one of Oberon&#x27;s tools that can be used to control the weather in Amber. In &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot;, Eric uses it to summon storms against the dark forces attacking Amber, but is mortally injured. After Corwin&#x27;s forces annihilate the attackers, Eric reveals that he became attuned to the Jewel by walking the Pattern in Amber and then projecting himself into its core. Corwin does this, and discovers other effects, such as a sapping of his energies and a tendency for time to slow down. The Jewel saves his life when he is stabbed in Amber, projecting him back to his old home on Earth where he lived as Carl Corey. Dworkin finally reveals that the Jewel contains within it the original Pattern from which he created Amber. Corwin, fearing that Amber has been destroyed in &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot;, repeats this process in Shadow to create his own Pattern, using its power to project him to the Courts where he witnesses the final battle against Chaos and Brand, who took the Jewel while he was incapacitated after creating his Pattern. Apparently lost during the battle when Brand falls into the abyss, the Jewel is returned by the Unicorn and given to Random, making him the new King in Amber.

====Spikards and Weapons====
In the fictional Amber multiverse a &quot;spikard&quot; is a type of magical object with hyperdimensional &quot;lines of power&quot; which connect it to sorcerous power caches in various universes. In the Amber novels and short stories two shapes of spikards are explicitly cited: rings and swords. Benedict&#x27;s metal arm is never explicitly listed as a spikard, but it does share with Corwin&#x27;s spikard sword Grayswandir the rare magical ability to bypass an existential barrier of intangibility.

Corwin&#x27;s sword, &quot;Grayswandir&quot;, contains a part of the Pattern like the Trumps. The sword appears in &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot;, in which Corwin, having escaped from his imprisonment, draws it from the trunk of a tree, noting that while it was previously in Amber, it was now with him, suggesting that it can be manifested wherever he needs it. &quot;Grayswandir&quot; has power against dark forces such as those besieging Lorraine in &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot;.

In the Merlin cycle, &quot;Grayswandir&quot; has a counterpart in &quot;Werewindle&quot;, formerly Brand&#x27;s sword. Like Grayswandir, Werewindle also bears a portion of the Pattern upon its blade. In &quot;The Salesman&#x27;s Tale&quot; the golden-colored spikard sword Werewindle possesses sentient intelligence. Werewindle is also labelled as the Day Sword, compared to Ferdinand Holthausen&#x27;s translation of the name &quot;Aurvandill/Auriwandal&quot; as &quot;daybreak sword&quot;.

Corwin&#x27;s brother Benedict is introduced in &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot; as having lost his right arm in battle with the same dark forces menacing all of Shadow. In &quot;Sign of the Unicorn&quot; Corwin encounters Benedict&#x27;s ghost in Tir na Nog&#x27;th. The ghost is wearing a remarkable prosthetic metal arm that can reach through unreality and attack him, even as Grayswandir can reach Benedict&#x27;s ghost. Corwin strikes the arm from the ghost and returns to Amber with it. Later it is given to Benedict by Random, who performs the surgery to attach it. In the next novel this proves invaluable as the arm can overcome Brand&#x27;s magic, allowing Benedict to strangle him despite being paralyzed, forcing Brand to vanish leaving the Jewel of Judgement behind. In &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; the arm is returned whence it came in a ghostly re-enactment of Corwin&#x27;s fight with Benedict&#x27;s ghost, occurring in the halls of Amber itself. These events are suspected to be caused by Oberon himself.

==Literary influences==
===Inspirations and sources===
The 1946 short novel &quot;The Dark World&quot; by Henry Kuttner and C.L. Moore was acknowledged by Zelazny as one inspiration. Similarities appear in the theme and in specific instances: some character names are common to both works, and they share the fantasy literary device of moving a present day, realistic character from the familiar world into a fantastical, alternate reality world, exposing the character to this shift as the reader experiences it. Zelazny is quoted as saying:

Zelazny admitted that the series was also inspired by Philip José Farmer&#x27;s &quot;World of Tiers&quot; series, specifically the concepts of a powerful family in rivalry over the fate of multiple universes.

Given Zelazny&#x27;s academic interest in the Medieval European period, it is not a stretch to see a possible influence in Henry Adams&#x27; 1905 work &quot;Mont Saint-Michel and Chartres&quot;, wherein he discusses the building of Chartres Cathedral, and the tidal-islet of Mont Saint-Michel, on the Normandy coast of France. However, these possible influences are not supported by Zelazny&#x27;s own commentary about the origins of the Pattern. He indicated that he loosely based the Pattern in part on the Tree of Life or Sephiroth of Kaballah, and preferred to allow the reader to imagine what the actual Pattern looked like.

More generally, the series draws from many mythological sources as inspirations, especially Celtic (see Tír na nÓg), Norse mythology, and Arthurian legend. Zelazny cited Jessie L. Weston&#x27;s 1921 book &quot;From Ritual to Romance&quot; as a key influence: it examined the pagan and Christian roots of the legends of King Arthur, the Wasteland myths, and the Holy Grail. For example, the Celtic Wasteland myth ties the barrenness of a land to a curse that a hero must lift; Corwin&#x27;s curse is in part responsible for the Black Road.

Philosophical texts have influenced the series as well: many similarities exist between Amber and Plato&#x27;s Republic (see the Allegory of the cave) and the classical problems of metaphysics, virtuality, solipsism, logic, possible worlds, probability, doubles and essences are also repeatedly reflected on.

The references made by Zelazny could be considered foreshadowing. For example, the name Ganelon was taken from the Matter of France, a body of classic French legends and literature that includes the &quot;Song of Roland&quot;. Throughout the Matter of France, Ganelon was often called &quot;Ganelon the Traitor&quot;; thus, for readers familiar with the original Ganelon, Zelazny&#x27;s use of the name foreshadowed events in &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot; where Ganelon purposefully loses a battle to spite Corwin. In the &quot;Song of Roland&quot;, Ganelon was also the stepfather of the protagonist Roland, which Zelazny may have used to foreshadow the relationship between Corwin and Ganelon at the conclusion of &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot;.

===Allusions to Shakespeare===
Throughout the Chronicles, Zelazny alludes extensively to plays by William Shakespeare. It is not stated in the series whether the characters (who are usually well-read) are merely paraphrasing the bard for their own amusement, or if Shakespeare himself was telling stories that are reflections of Amber&#x27;s history and future. It is implied that both variants are true simultaneously. The allusions include:
* Oberon, the King of Amber, is also the name of King of the Fairies from &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;, although Shakespeare did not invent the character.
* The Forest of Arden is also the setting of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;As You Like It&quot;.
* There are greater thematic allusions in the Chronicles, mostly to &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Corwin describes himself at the beginning of &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; as the &quot;mad prince&quot; of Amber, drawing a parallel between himself and the mad prince of Denmark. In addition, Corwin is contacted by the &quot;ghost&quot; of Oberon several times (before realizing that Oberon still lives), an obvious parallel to the plot of &quot;Hamlet&quot;. When dining with Lorraine, Corwin even refers to the attempted Trump contact by Oberon as a message from his &quot;father&#x27;s ghost&quot;.
* The rivalry between Corwin and Eric roughly parallels the Wars of the Roses, as portrayed in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Wars of the Roses&quot; cycle. Corwin&#x27;s symbol, a silver rose, echoes the House of York&#x27;s symbol, a white rose, and Eric&#x27;s chosen color, red, echoes the House of Lancaster&#x27;s symbol, a red rose.
* &quot;Ill-met by moonlight&quot;, Deirdre&#x27;s response to her rescue in &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; (chapter 4): &quot;Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania&quot;, is said by Oberon in &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;.
* &quot;To sleep, perchance to dream... Yeah, there&#x27;s a thing that rubs&quot;, Corwin muses in &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; (chapter 6). &quot;To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there&#x27;s the rub&quot;, is from the To be, or not to be soliloquy in &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
* Very early in &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot; Corwin thinks to himself, &quot;In the state of Denmark there was the odor of decay&quot;, a reference to &quot;Something is rotten in the state of Denmark&quot;, a famous line from &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
* When Corwin first meets Eric in &quot;Nine Princes in Amber&quot;, Eric complains &quot;It&#x27;s true, that uneasy-lies-the-head bit&quot;. &quot;Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown&quot; is the final line in a monologue spoken by Henry IV in Act III, Scene i, of &quot;Henry IV, part 2&quot; wherein Henry is pondering how sleep comes to even the most humble peasant easier than it does to the great.
* When he receives Eric&#x27;s offer of peace in &quot;The Guns of Avalon&quot;, Corwin muses &quot;...I believe you, never doubt it, for we are all of us honorable men&quot; (chapter 8). In Marc Antony&#x27;s funeral oration in &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;, he says, &quot;For Brutus is an honourable man; So are they all; all honourable men&quot;.
* &quot;So Childe Random to the dark tower came&quot;, Random recounts in his story of how he tried to rescue Brand. At the end of Act IV of &quot;King Lear&quot;, Edgar, disguised as the Poor Tom, the crazy beggar, babbles &quot;Child Rowland to the dark tower came&quot;, an allusion itself to the fairy tale of Childe Rowland.
* Corwin, when describing the royal family to Ganelon in &quot;Sign of the Unicorn&quot;, says that Oberon had two other sons with Benedict&#x27;s mother Cymnea, the first being Osric, who shares his name with a courtier in &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
* &quot;Good night, sweet Prince&quot;, Brand says to Benedict in &quot;The Hand of Oberon&quot; (chapter 13). These are the words that Horatio speaks at the death of &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
* After watching his &quot;dream&quot; from Tir-na Nog&#x27;th play out in Amber in &quot;The Courts of Chaos&quot; (chapter 1), Corwin muses, &quot;I looked back once to the empty place where my dream had come true. Such is the stuff&quot;. He alludes to Act IV, scene 1 of &quot;The Tempest&quot;, where, after causing spirits he has summoned to disappear, Prospero delivers the famous speech that includes the line &quot;We are such stuff / As dreams are made on, and our little life / Is rounded by a sleep&quot;.

== Television rights and development ==
In July 2016, Skybound Entertainment announced that it was developing &quot;The Chronicles of Amber&quot; as a television project under Disney-ABC Domestic Television with &quot;Walking Dead&quot; creator and producer Robert Kirkman as an executive producer. Kirkman stated that &quot;&quot;Chronicles of Amber&quot; is one of my favorite book series of all time, and one of my main inspirations for working in film and television. Getting to produce this project is the fulfillment of a lifelong dream. I can&#x27;t wait to share this amazing story with a new generation of fans&quot;.

In August 2017, Kirkman and Skybound announced an agreement with Amazon to develop television projects to debut exclusively on Prime Video with distribution under Disney-ABC Domestic Television, without identifying any specific project as part of the deal. In January 2023, The Hollywood Reporter announced that the production company Spartina had joined Skybound Entertainment and Vincent Newman Entertainment’s existing partnership to develop the works into a drama series.

==References==
==External links==

* The Amber mailing-list FAQ
* Series profile at Internet Book List
* &quot;The Dying of Ember&quot; (Amber parody)
* &quot;The Chronicles of Amber&quot; at Worlds Without End</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057172" start="39" end="52" title="fantasy novel" label="fantasy novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="73" end="86" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q277759" start="92" end="103" title="novel series" label="main series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="120" end="129" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="202" end="215" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="277" end="283" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085950" start="381" end="404" title="John Gregory Betancourt" label="John Gregory Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980349" start="846" end="853" title="The Pattern (The Chronicles of Amber)" label="Pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980349" start="1146" end="1152" title="Logrus" label="Logrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492950" start="1370" end="1391" title="Nine Princes in Amber" label="Nine Princes in Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996937" start="1521" end="1540" title="Sign of the Unicorn" label="Sign of the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657392" start="1554" end="1572" title="The Hand of Oberon" label="The Hand of Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657600" start="1590" end="1609" title="The Courts of Chaos" label="The Courts of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="1673" end="1695" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996611" start="1709" end="1727" title="The Guns of Avalon" label="The Guns of Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13137339" start="1862" end="1869" title="Omnibus edition" label="omnibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624638" start="2222" end="2228" title="Corwin (The Chronicles of Amber)" label="Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443811" start="2662" end="2668" title="Merlin of Amber" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750709" start="3939" end="3956" title="Manna from Heaven" label="Manna from Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q266075" start="4192" end="4204" title="Ed Greenwood" label="Ed Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685605" start="4255" end="4264" title="Amberzine" label="Amberzine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4667" end="4691" title="Amber Short Stories#The Salesman&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Salesman&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4811" end="4840" title="Amber Short Stories#Blue Horse, Dancing Mountains" label="Blue Horse, Dancing Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4917" end="4946" title="Amber Short Stories#The Shroudling and the Guisel" label="The Shroudling and the Guisel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5007" end="5023" title="Amber Short Stories#Coming to a Cord" label="Coming to a Cord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5084" end="5099" title="Amber Short Stories#Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085950" start="5657" end="5680" title="John Gregory Betancourt" label="John Gregory Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018628" start="6138" end="6144" title="Byron Preiss" label="ibooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018628" start="6443" end="6455" title="Byron Preiss" label="Byron Preiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411666" start="6517" end="6527" title="Chapter 7 Bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207640" start="7020" end="7036" title="Robert E. Howard" label="Robert E. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189169" start="7044" end="7049" title="Conan the Barbarian" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="7051" end="7071" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="7079" end="7085" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="7095" end="7113" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="7121" end="7136" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="7740" end="7759" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714485" start="7761" end="7780" title="Walter Jon Williams" label="Walter Jon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="7786" end="7797" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="8189" end="8200" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641340" start="8690" end="8708" title="Sunset Productions" label="Sunset Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974123" start="9738" end="9803" title="National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped" label="National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906450" start="10098" end="10139" title="Canadian National Institute for the Blind" label="Canadian National Institute for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="10241" end="10248" title="Audible.com" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372814" start="10324" end="10342" title="Alessandro Juliani" label="Alessandro Juliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="10395" end="10406" title="Wil Wheaton" label="Wil Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444345" start="10605" end="10617" title="Terry Bisson" label="Terry Bisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="10623" end="10636" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401222" start="11009" end="11017" title="Telarium" label="Telarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="11032" end="11051" title="interactive fiction" label="interactive fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="11052" end="11065" title="computer game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992947" start="11072" end="11093" title="Nine Princes in Amber (video game)" label="Nine Princes in Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990994" start="11241" end="11266" title="Choose Your Own Adventure" label="Choose Your Own Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q924550" start="11466" end="11478" title="Erick Wujcik" label="Erick Wujcik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452" start="11497" end="11528" title="Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game" label="Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11627" end="11640" title="Shadow Knight (Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game)" label="Shadow Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="11702" end="11719" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684255" start="11773" end="11783" title="Lost Souls (online game)" label="Lost Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="11807" end="11823" title="medieval fantasy" label="medieval fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="11824" end="11827" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11993" end="12001" title="Zangband#Derivative works" label="Zangband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143132" start="12027" end="12036" title="roguelike" label="roguelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q40590" start="13090" end="13141" title="Many-worlds interpretation" label="Wheeler–Everett interpretation of quantum-mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463952" start="16831" end="16841" title="Tír na nÓg" label="Tír na nÓg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="18477" end="18490" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="18492" end="18504" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="18506" end="18513" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magical"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="18515" end="18523" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="18525" end="18532" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622291" start="18533" end="18551" title="political thriller" label="political thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980349" start="19323" end="19334" title="The Pattern (The Chronicles of Amber)" label="The Pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980349" start="19339" end="19349" title="The Logrus" label="The Logrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="21187" end="21192" title="tarot" label="tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158357" start="21359" end="21371" title="Major Arcana" label="Major Arcana"/>
<link wikidata="Q125114" start="28641" end="28661" title="Ferdinand Holthausen" label="Ferdinand Holthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q279501" start="28699" end="28720" title="Aurvandil" label="Aurvandill/Auriwandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729024" start="29866" end="29880" title="The Dark World" label="The Dark World"/>
<link wikidata="Q551710" start="29890" end="29903" title="Henry Kuttner" label="Henry Kuttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q242530" start="29908" end="29918" title="C.L. Moore" label="C.L. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="30382" end="30400" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037783" start="30414" end="30428" title="World of Tiers" label="World of Tiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="30662" end="30673" title="Henry Adams" label="Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="30814" end="30831" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651237" start="31048" end="31060" title="Tree of Life" label="Tree of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="31064" end="31085" title="Sephirot" label="Sephiroth of Kaballah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="31262" end="31268" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463952" start="31274" end="31284" title="Tír na nÓg" label="Tír na nÓg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="31287" end="31302" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="31808" end="31829" title="Plato&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Plato&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22738" start="31839" end="31859" title="Allegory of the cave" label="Allegory of the cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="31891" end="31902" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181020" start="31916" end="31925" title="solipsism" label="solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="31927" end="31932" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088088" start="31934" end="31949" title="possible worlds" label="possible worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="31951" end="31962" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q461363" start="31964" end="31971" title="Doppelgänger" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="31976" end="31983" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q629615" start="32108" end="32115" title="Ganelon" label="Ganelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487521" start="32135" end="32151" title="Matter of France" label="Matter of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q185427" start="32225" end="32239" title="Song of Roland" label="Song of Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657392" start="32452" end="32470" title="The Hand of Oberon" label="The Hand of Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624638" start="32528" end="32534" title="Corwin (The Chronicles of Amber)" label="Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207535" start="32622" end="32628" title="Roland" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="32868" end="32887" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33215" end="33221" title="List of The Chronicles of Amber characters#Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="33262" end="33281" title="Oberon" label="King of the Fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="33293" end="33323" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787912" start="33388" end="33403" title="Forest of Arden" label="Forest of Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="33452" end="33466" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="34128" end="34145" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34182" end="34217" title="Shakespearean history#&amp;quot;The &amp;quot;Wars of the Roses&amp;quot; cycle" label="&amp;quot;Wars of the Roses&amp;quot; cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="34267" end="34280" title="House of York" label="House of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="34356" end="34374" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365408" start="34867" end="34886" title="To be, or not to be" label="To be, or not to be"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="34906" end="34912" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232349" start="35449" end="35465" title="Henry IV, part 2" label="Henry IV, part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="35816" end="35829" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="36075" end="36084" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="36228" end="36238" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963580" start="36242" end="36256" title="Childe Rowland" label="Childe Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140503" start="36638" end="36645" title="Horatio (character)" label="Horatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="36970" end="36981" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q978952" start="37048" end="37056" title="Prospero" label="Prospero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537603" start="37262" end="37284" title="Skybound Entertainment" label="Skybound Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737435" start="37384" end="37414" title="Disney-ABC Domestic Television" label="Disney-ABC Domestic Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q232737" start="37420" end="37444" title="The Walking Dead (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Walking Dead&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311891" start="37466" end="37480" title="Robert Kirkman" label="Robert Kirkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="37901" end="37907" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="37963" end="37974" title="Amazon Video" label="Prime Video"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83932" wikidata="Q559618" url="?curid=83932" title="Fictional universe">
<text>A fictional universe, also known as an imagined universe or a constructed universe, is the internally consistent fictional setting used in a narrative or a work of art. This concept is most commonly associated with works of fantasy and science fiction, and can be found in various forms such as novels, comics, films, television shows, video games, and other creative works.

In science fiction, a fictional universe may be a remote alien planet or galaxy with little apparent relationship to the real world (as in &quot;Star Wars&quot;); in fantasy, it may be a greatly fictionalized or invented version of Earth&#x27;s distant past or future (as in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;).

==Fictional continuity==

In a 1970 article in &quot;CAPA-alpha&quot;, comics historian Don Markstein defined the fictional &quot;universe&quot; as meant to clarify the concept of fictional continuities. According to the criteria he imagined:

# If characters A and B have met, then they are in the same universe; if characters B and C have met, then, transitively, A and C are in the same universe.
# Characters cannot be connected by real people—otherwise, it could be argued that Superman and the Fantastic Four were in the same universe, as Superman met John F. Kennedy, Kennedy met Neil Armstrong, and Armstrong met the Fantastic Four.
#Characters cannot be connected by characters &quot;that do not originate with the publisher&quot;—otherwise it could be argued that Superman and the Fantastic Four were in the same universe, as both met Hercules.
# Specific fictionalized versions of real people—for instance, the version of Jerry Lewis from DC Comics&#x27; &quot;The Adventures of Jerry Lewis&quot;, who was distinct from the real Jerry Lewis in that he had a housekeeper with magical powers—&quot; can&quot; be used as connections; this also applies to specific versions of public-domain fictional characters, such as Marvel Comics&#x27; version of Hercules or DC Comics&#x27; version of Robin Hood.
#Characters are only considered to have met if they appeared together in a story; therefore, characters who simply appeared on the same front cover are not necessarily in the same universe.

==Collaboration==
Fictional universes are sometimes shared by multiple prose authors, with each author&#x27;s works in that universe being granted approximately equal canonical status. For example, Larry Niven&#x27;s fictional universe Known Space has an approximately 135-year period in which Niven allows other authors to write stories about the Man-Kzin Wars. Other fictional universes, like the &quot;Ring of Fire&quot; series, actively court canonical stimulus from fans, but gate and control the changes through a formalized process and the final say of the editor and universe creator.

==See also==

* Alternate history
* Alternate universe
* Constructed world
* Continuity
* Diegesis
* Expanded universe
* Shared universe
* Fantasy world
* Fictional country
* Fictional location
* Future history
* Lists of fictional locations
* List of fantasy worlds 
* Mythical place
* Paracosm
* Parallel universe
* Planets in science fiction
* Setting
* Simulated reality
* Virtual reality
*Multiverse
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Alberto Manguel and Gianni Guadalupi: &quot;The Dictionary of Imaginary Places&quot;, New York : Harcourt Brace, c2000. 
* Brian Stableford: &quot;The Dictionary of Science Fiction Places&quot;, New York : Wonderland Press, c1999. 
* Diana Wynne Jones: &quot;The Tough Guide to Fantasyland&quot;, New York : Firebird, 2006. , Explains and parodies the common features of a standard fantasy world
* George Ochoa and Jeffery Osier: &quot;Writer&#x27;s Guide to Creating A Science Fiction Universe&quot;, Cincinnati, Ohio : Writer&#x27;s Digest Books, 1993. 
* Michael Page and Robert Ingpen : &quot;Encyclopedia of Things That Never Were: Creatures, Places, and People&quot;, 1987. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="2" end="20" title="Fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="39" end="56" title="Fictional universe" label="imagined universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="62" end="82" title="Fictional universe" label="constructed universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="91" end="112" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="internally consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q617332" start="123" end="130" title="Setting (narrative)" label="setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="141" end="150" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="156" end="167" title="work of art" label="work of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="224" end="231" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="236" end="251" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="295" end="300" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="303" end="309" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="311" end="315" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="318" end="333" title="television show" label="television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="336" end="346" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="521" end="530" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="657" end="678" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008738" start="741" end="751" title="CAPA-alpha" label="CAPA-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="776" end="789" title="Don Markstein" label="Don Markstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="1040" end="1052" title="transitive relation" label="transitively"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="1171" end="1179" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="1188" end="1202" title="Fantastic Four" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1246" end="1261" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="1275" end="1289" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="1533" end="1541" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="1621" end="1632" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="1638" end="1647" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712521" start="1660" end="1689" title="The Adventures of Jerry Lewis" label="The Adventures of Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q534889" start="1916" end="1955" title="Hercules (Marvel Comics)" label="Marvel Comics&amp;#x27; version of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352491" start="1959" end="1996" title="Robin Hood (DC Comics)" label="DC Comics&amp;#x27; version of Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="2387" end="2398" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122718" start="2425" end="2436" title="Known Space" label="Known Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746104" start="2537" end="2550" title="Man-Kzin Wars" label="Man-Kzin Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q196304" start="2588" end="2619" title="Ring of Fire series" label="&amp;quot;Ring of Fire&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320489" start="2749" end="2780" title="Eric Flint" label="the editor and universe creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="2799" end="2816" title="Alternate history" label="Alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736567" start="2819" end="2837" title="Alternative universe (fan fiction)" label="Alternate universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822655" start="2840" end="2857" title="Worldbuilding" label="Constructed world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="2860" end="2870" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="Continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790314" start="2873" end="2881" title="Diegesis" label="Diegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819123" start="2884" end="2901" title="Expanded universe" label="Expanded universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275581" start="2904" end="2919" title="Shared universe" label="Shared universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16798524" start="2922" end="2935" title="Fantasy world" label="Fantasy world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145276" start="2938" end="2955" title="Fictional country" label="Fictional country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895768" start="2958" end="2976" title="Fictional location" label="Fictional location"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490686" start="2979" end="2993" title="Future history" label="Future history"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378313" start="2996" end="3024" title="Lists of fictional locations" label="Lists of fictional locations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619241" start="3027" end="3049" title="List of fantasy worlds" label="List of fantasy worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053077" start="3053" end="3067" title="List of mythological places" label="Mythical place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134022" start="3070" end="3078" title="Paracosm" label="Paracosm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="3081" end="3098" title="Parallel universes in fiction" label="Parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972970" start="3101" end="3127" title="Extrasolar planets in fiction" label="Planets in science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q617332" start="3130" end="3137" title="Setting (narrative)" label="Setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="3140" end="3157" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="3160" end="3175" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3177" end="3187" title="Multiverse#Multiverse Hypothesis in fiction" label="Multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q554406" start="3227" end="3242" title="Alberto Manguel" label="Alberto Manguel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3247" end="3263" title="Gianni Guadalupi" label="Gianni Guadalupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730141" start="3271" end="3305" title="The Dictionary of Imaginary Places" label="The Dictionary of Imaginary Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631376" start="3350" end="3366" title="Brian Stableford" label="Brian Stableford"/>
<link wikidata="Q236829" start="3461" end="3478" title="Diana Wynne Jones" label="Diana Wynne Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27734616" start="3625" end="3637" title="George Ochoa" label="George Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3642" end="3655" title="Jeffery Osier" label="Jeffery Osier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846533" start="3748" end="3774" title="Writer&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Writer&amp;#x27;s Digest Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295484" start="3802" end="3815" title="Robert Ingpen" label="Robert Ingpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854336" start="3824" end="3862" title="Encyclopedia of Things That Never Were" label="Encyclopedia of Things That Never Were"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83933" wikidata="Q138796" url="?curid=83933" title="Resistance movement">
<text>A resistance movement is an organized group of people that tries to resist or try to overthrow a government or an occupying power, causing disruption and unrest in civil order and stability. Such a movement may seek to achieve its goals through either the use of violent or nonviolent resistance (sometimes called civil resistance), or the use of force, whether armed or unarmed. In many cases, as for example in the United States during the American Revolution, or in Norway in the Second World War, a resistance movement may employ both violent and non-violent methods, usually operating under different organizations and acting in different phases or geographical areas within a country.

==Etymology==
The Oxford English Dictionary records use of the word &quot;resistance&quot; in the sense of organised opposition to an invader from 1862. The modern usage of the term &quot;Resistance&quot; became widespread from the self-designation of many movements during World War II, especially the French Resistance. The term is still strongly linked to the context of the events of 1939–45, and particularly to opposition movements in Axis-occupied countries. Using the term &quot;resistance&quot; to designate a movement meeting the definition prior to World War II might be considered by some to be an anachronism. However, such movements existed prior to World War II (albeit often called by different names), and there have been many after it for example in struggles against colonialism and foreign military occupations. &quot;Resistance&quot; has become a generic term that has been used to designate underground resistance movements in any country.

==Background==
Resistance movements can include any irregular armed force that rises up against an enforced or established authority, government, or administration. This frequently includes groups that consider themselves to be resisting tyranny or dictatorship. Some resistance movements are underground organizations engaged in a struggle for national liberation in a country under military occupation or totalitarian domination. Tactics of resistance movements against a constituted authority range from nonviolent resistance and civil disobedience, to guerrilla warfare and terrorism, or even conventional warfare if the resistance movement is powerful enough. Any government facing violent acts from a resistance movement usually condemns such acts as terrorism, even when such attacks target only the military or security forces. Resistance during World War II was mainly dedicated to fighting the Axis occupiers. Germany itself also had an anti-Nazi Hitler, German resistance movement in this period. Although the United Kingdom did not suffer invasion in World War II, preparations were made for a British resistance movement in the event of a German invasion (see Auxiliary Units).

==Geographies of resistance==

When geographies of resistance are discussed, it is often taken for granted that resistance takes place where domination, power, or oppression occurs and so resistance is often understood as something that always opposes to power or domination. However, some scholars believe and argue that looking at resistance in relation to only power and domination does not provide a full understanding of the actual nature of resistance. Not all power, domination, or oppression leads to resistance, and not all cases of resistance are against or to oppose what is categorized as &quot;power&quot;. In fact, they believe that resistance has its own characteristics and spatialities. In Steve Pile&#x27;s (1997) &quot;Opposition, Political Identities and Spaces of Resistance&quot;, geographies of resistance show:

We can better understand resistance by accounting different perspectives and by breaking the presumptions that resistance is always against power. In fact, resistance should be understood not only in relations to domination and authority, but also through other experiences, such as &quot;desire and anger, capacity and ability, happiness and fear, dreaming and forgetting&quot;, meaning that resistance is not always about the dominated versus the dominator, the exploited versus the exploiter, or the oppressed versus the oppressor. There are various forms of resistance for various reasons, which then can be, again, classified as violent and nonviolent resistance (and &quot;other&quot; which is unclear).

Different geographical spaces can also make different forms of resistance possible or impossible and more effective or less effective. Furthermore, in order to understand any resistance its capacity to achieve its objective effectively, its success or failure we need to take closely into account many variables, such as political identities, cultural identities, class, race, gender and so on. The reason is that these variations can define the nature and outcome of resistance. Harvey (1993), who looked at resistance in relations to capitalist economic exploitation, took on a fire accident happened in the Imperial Foods chicken processing plant in Hamlet, North Carolina in 1991, in which 20 of 200 workers were killed and 56 were injured due to poor working conditions and protections. He compared this accident with a similar fire accident at Triangle Shirtwaist Company, New York, 1911, killing 146 workers, which caused a labor resistance by 100,000 people. He argued that no resistance took place in response to the fire accident in Hamlet because most of the people who died there were black and women workers, and he believed that not only class but also other identities such as race, gender, and sexuality were important factors in understanding nature and outcome of resistance. For an effective resistance, he proposed that four tasks should be undertaken:

There are many forms of resistance in relations to different power dominations and actors. Some resistance takes place in order to oppose, change, or reform the exploitation of the capitalist economic systems and the capitals, while other resistance takes place against the state or authority in power. Moreover, some other resistance takes place in order to resist or question the social/culture norms or discourse or in order to challenge a global trend called &quot;globalization&quot;. For example, LGBT social movements is an example of resistance that challenges and tries to reform the existing cultural norms in many societies. Resistance can also be mapped in various scales ranging from local to national to regional and to global spaces. We can look at a big-scale resistance movement such as anti-globalization movement that tries to resist the global trend of capitalist economic system. Or we can look at the internal resistance to apartheid, which took place at national level. Most, if not all, social movements can be considered as some forms of resistance.

Not all resistance takes place in physical spaces or geographies but in &quot;other spaces&quot; as well. Some resistance happens in the form of Protest Art or in the form of music. Music can be used and has been used as a tool or space to resist certain oppression or domination. Gray-Rosendale, L. (2001) put it this way:

In the age of advanced IT and mass consumption of social media, resistance can also occur in the cyberspace. The Aboriginal Health and Medical Research Council of NSW&#x27;s Tobacco Resistance and Control (A-TRAC) team created a Facebook page to help promote anti-smoking campaign and rise awareness for its members. Sometimes, resistance takes place in people&#x27;s minds and ideology or in people&#x27;s &quot;inner spaces&quot;. For example, sometimes people have to struggle within or fight against their inner spaces, with their consciousness and, sometimes, with their fear before they can resist in the physical spaces. In other cases, people sometimes simply resist to certain ideology, belief, or culture norms within their minds. These kinds of resistance are less visible but very fundamental parts of all forms of resistance.

==Controversy regarding definition==

On the lawfulness of armed resistance movements in international law, there has been a dispute between states since at least 1899, when the first major codification of the laws of war in the form of a series of international treaties took place. In the Preamble to the 1899 Hague Convention II on Land War, the Martens Clause was introduced as a compromise wording for the dispute between the Great Powers who considered francs-tireurs to be unlawful combatants subject to execution on capture and smaller states who maintained that they should be considered lawful combatants.

More recently the 1977 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, referred in Article 1. Paragraph 4 to armed conflicts &quot;... in which peoples are fighting against colonial domination and alien occupation and against racist regimes...&quot; This phraseology, according USA that refused to ratify the Protocol, contains many ambiguities that cloud the issue of who is or is not a legitimate combatant: ultimately, in US Government opinion the distinction is just a political judgment.

Some definitions of resistance movement have proved controversial. 
Hence depending on the perspective of a state&#x27;s government, a resistance movement may or may not be labelled a terrorist group based on whether the members of a resistance movement are considered lawful or unlawful combatants and whether they are recognized as having a right to resist occupation.

According to Joint Publication 1-02, the United States Department of Defense defines a resistance movement as &quot;an organized effort by some portion of the civil population of a country to resist the legally established government or an occupying power and to disrupt civil order and stability&quot;. In strict military terminology, a resistance movement is simply that; it seeks to resist (change) the policies of a government or occupying power. This may be accomplished through violent or non-violent means. In this view, a resistance movement is specifically limited to changing the nature of current power, not to overthrow it; and the correct military term for removing or overthrowing a government is an insurgency. However, in reality many resistance movements have aimed to displace a particular ruler, especially if that ruler has gained or retained power illegally.

==Freedom fighter==


Freedom fighter is another term for those engaged in a struggle to achieve political freedom for themselves or obtain freedom for others. Though the literal meaning of the words could include &quot;anyone who fights for the cause of freedom&quot;, in common use it may be restricted to those who are actively involved in an armed rebellion, rather than those who campaign for freedom by peaceful means, or those who fight violently for the freedom of others outside the context of an uprising (though this title may be applied in its literal sense)

Generally speaking, freedom fighters are people who use physical force to cause a change in the political and or social order. Notable examples include uMkhonto we Sizwe in South Africa, the Sons of Liberty in the American Revolution, the Irish Republican Army in Ireland and Northern Ireland, the Eritrean People&#x27;s Liberation Front, the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association in India and the National Resistance Army in Uganda, which were considered freedom fighters by supporters. However, a person who is campaigning for freedom through peaceful means may still be classed as a freedom fighter, though in common usage they are called political activists, as in the case of the Black Consciousness Movement. In India, &quot;Freedom fighter&quot; is an officially recognized category by the Indian government covering those who took part in the country&#x27;s independence movement; people in this category (can also include dependant family members) get pensions and other benefits like special railway counters.

People described as freedom fighters are often also called assassins, rebels, insurgents or terrorists. This leads to the aphorism &quot;one man&#x27;s terrorist is another man&#x27;s freedom fighter&quot;. The degree to which this occurs depends on a variety of factors specific to the struggle in which a given freedom fighter group is engaged.

During the Cold War, the term &quot;freedom fighter&quot; was first used with reference to the Hungarian rebels in 1956. Ronald Reagan picked up the term to explain America&#x27;s support of rebels in countries controlled by communist states or otherwise perceived to be under the influence of the Soviet Union, including the Contras in Nicaragua, UNITA in Angola and the multi-factional mujahideen in Afghanistan.

In the media, the BBC tries to avoid the phrases &quot;terrorist&quot; or &quot;freedom fighter&quot;, except in attributed quotes, in favor of more neutral terms such as &quot;militant&quot;, &quot;guerrilla&quot;, &quot;assassin&quot;, &quot;insurgent&quot;, &quot;rebel&quot;, &quot;paramilitary&quot;, or &quot;militia&quot;.

==Common weapons==
Partisans often use captured weapons taken from their enemies, or weapons that have been stolen or smuggled in. During the Cold War, partisans often received arms from either NATO or Warsaw Pact member states. Where partisan resources are stretched, improvised weapons are also deployed.

==Examples of resistance movements==

The following examples are of groups that have been considered or would identify themselves as groups. These are mostly, but not exclusively, of armed resistance movements. For movements and phases of activity involving non-violent methods, see civil resistance and nonviolent resistance.

===Pre–20th century===

* The Maccabees were first-century BC Jewish rebel warriors who fought against the occupying Seleucid Empire in Judea, as described in the deuterocanonical Books of the Maccabees.
* The Sicarii were a first-century Jewish movement opposing Roman occupation of the Jewish Promised Land.
* The Yellow Turbans were peasant rebels against the Eastern Han dynasty, led by Zhang Jue, was crushed by the lack of co-ordination with other Yellow Turban groups as well as destabilization.
* The Abbasid Revolution overthrow of the Umayyad dynasty under Abu Muslim, which was caused by discrimination against non-Arab Muslims and government corruption.
* The Mamluks were Turkic slaves who overthrew the Ayyubid dynasty.
* In opposition to British rule in Ireland and the subsequent Plantations of Ireland, the native Gaelic population, at times with and against the Hiberno-Normans lords, launched the Bruce campaign in Ireland (1315-1318), the Desmond Rebellions (1569–1573 &amp; 1579–1583), the Nine Years&#x27; War, also known as Tyrone&#x27;s Rebellion, (1593-1603), the Irish Rebellion of 1641 &amp; the subsequent Irish Confederate Wars (1641-1653), the Williamite War in Ireland (1688–1691), the Irish Rebellion of 1798, also known as the United Irishmen Rebellion, and the Tithe War (1831-1836).
* The Jacobite risings were a series of rebellions, uprisings, and wars to reinstate the Stuart dynasty.
* The American Continental forces of the American Revolutionary War were essentially a resistance movement against the British Empire.
** Francis Marion was an American Revolutionary War partisan who led a partisan guerrilla movement against Great Britain.
* Indigenous Australians in the early history of Australia
** Pemulwuy – An indigenous Australian who resisted the European colonization of Australia. In 1797, a state of guerrilla warfare existed between indigenous people and settler communities in Sydney. The Aboriginals were led by Pemulwuy, a member of the Bidjigal tribe who occupied the land. Pemulwuy was eventually shot and killed by Henry Hacking in 1802.
** Jandamarra – The first Indigenous Australian to use firearms and conduct organized warfare in battle against settlers; leading a war against Euro-Australian settlers for three years, from 1894 to 1897. The resistance movement ended when Jandamarra was shot dead by an Aboriginal tracker.
* Resistance movements against France also emerged during the Napoleonic Wars
** The 1808 invasion of Spain by Bonaparte sparked a resistance movement composed mostly of the lower classes, who felt that the nobility was simply allowing themselves to fall under French control. Lord Wellington remarked that it was extraordinary that the French had managed to remain in the country for so long (about 4 years).
** Landsturm – German resistance groups fighting against the French in the Napoleonic Wars.
* Certain Native Americans during Manifest destiny.
** Tsali – Cherokee tribal member who led a small band of Cherokee people against the United States military during the Trail of Tears era. Executed in exchange for the survival of his band, the band were integrated into the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians.
** Osceola – Seminole chief who was very influential. Resisted deportation during the period of Indian removal. Led a number of successes until being captured by the United States during faux peace talks, died a few months later in prison.
* During the American Civil War, there were also resistance movements on both sides
** Bushwhackers were Confederate guerrillas who engaged in raids, robberies, and massacres against the Union forces and affiliated citizens. Continued resisting for some years after the American Civil War ended. Responsible for the Lawrence Massacre
** Jayhawkers were Union guerrillas who engaged in the same acts as the bushwhackers did, they were also active during Bleeding Kansas, most prominent member was John Brown responsible for the Pottawatomie Massacre and John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harper&#x27;s Ferry.
* Carbonari – 19th-century Italian movement resisting Austrian or Bourbon rule.
* The Polish National Government – Underground Polish supreme authority during the January Uprising against Russian occupation of Poland. In 1863–1864, it was a real shadow government supported by majority of Poles, who even paid taxes for it, and was a significant problem for the Okhrana, the secret police of the Russian Empire.
* Andrés Avelino Cáceres&#x27; resistance movement against invading Chilean forces during the War of the Pacific.
* The Kataas-Taasang, Ka-Galang-galangang, Katipunan ng mga Anak Ng Bayan (KKK) was an organization in the Philippines that instigated the Philippine Revolution in 1896 against the Spanish colonials and resulted in the dissolution of the &quot;Republic of Biak na Bato&quot; and the exile of the Philippine Government, headed by Emillo Aguinaldo.

===Pre–World War II===
* Filipino guerrilla units after official end of Philippine–American War (1902–1913)
* Chinese Communist Party
** Chinese Red Army
** Chinese Soviet Republic
** Communist-controlled China (1927–1949)
** Fujian People&#x27;s Government
** Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region
* Charlemagne Peralte and his Cacos rebels who resisted the United States occupation of Haiti.
* Freikorps
* Ukrainian forces in the Ukrainian War of Independence (1917-1921)
* Dervish Movement (1899-1920)
* House of Saud
** Ikhwan
* Forest Guerrillas (1921–1922)
* Augusto César Sandino led a rebellion against the United States occupation of Nicaragua.
* Lwów Eaglets
* Black Lions (1936)
* Irish Republican Army (1918–1922)
* Turkish national movement
** Association for the Defense of the Rights of Anatolia and Rumelia
* TIGR (1927–1941)
* Ustaše – Croatian nationalist and fascist resistance movement against the Kingdom of Yugoslavia
* White movement and its organizations in the 1920s–1930s:
** Brotherhood of Russian Truth
** Russian All-Military Union
* Green armies (1918–1921)
* Committee for the Independence of Georgia

===World War II===


* Albanian resistance movement
* Austrian resistance movement (O5)
* Belarusian nationalist resistance movements:
** , anti-Soviet and anti-Nazi
* Belgian resistance movement
* British resistance movements
** SIS Section D and Section VII (planned Resistance organisations)
** Resistance in the German-occupied Channel Islands
** The Auxiliary Units, organized by Colonel Colin Gubbins as a potential British resistance movement against a possible invasion of the British Isles by Nazi forces, note that it was the only resistance movement established prior to invasion, albeit the invasion never came.
* Bulgarian resistance movement
* Burmese resistance movement
* Chechen anti-Soviet resistance
* Chinese resistance movements
** Anti-Japanese Army for the Salvation of the Country
** Chinese People&#x27;s National Salvation Army
** Heilungkiang National Salvation Army
** Jilin Self-Defence Army
** Northeast Anti-Japanese National Salvation Army
** Northeast Anti-Japanese United Army
** Northeast People&#x27;s Anti-Japanese Volunteer Army
** Northeastern Loyal and Brave Army
** Northeastern People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army
** Northeastern Volunteer Righteous &amp; Brave Fighters
** Hong Kong resistance movements
*** (Hong Kong-Kowloon big army)
*** East River Column (Dongjiang Guerrillas, Southern China and Hong Kong organisation)
** Chinese Muslims in the Second Sino-Japanese War
*** Muslim Detachment (回民義勇隊 Huimin Zhidui)
*** Muslim corps
* Czech Resistance movement
* Danish resistance movement
* Dutch resistance movement
** The Stijkel Group, a Dutch resistance movement, which mainly operated around the S-Gravenhage area.
** Valkenburg resistance
* Estonian resistance movement
* Forest Brothers
* French resistance movement
** Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&#x27;Action (BCRA)
** Conseil National de la Résistance (CNR)
** Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTP)
** Free French Forces (FFL)
** French Forces of the Interior (FFI)
** Maquis
** Pat O&#x27;Leary Line
* German resistance to Nazism
** Bästlein-Jacob-Abshagen Group
** Confessing Church
** Edelweiss Pirates
** Ehrenfeld Group
** European Union
** Kreisau Circle
** National Committee for a Free Germany
*** Anti-Fascist Committee for a Free Germany
** Neu Beginnen
** Red Orchestra
** Robert Uhrig Group
** Saefkow-Jacob-Bästlein Organization
** Solf Circle
** Vierergruppen in Hamburg, Munich and Vienna
** White Rose
* German pro-Nazi resistance
** Volkssturm – a German resistance group and militia created by the NSDAP near the end of World War II
** Werwolf – German guerrillas resisting Allied occupation of Germany, 1945
* Greek resistance movement
** List of Greek Resistance organizations
** Cretan resistance
** National Liberation Front (EAM) and the Greek People&#x27;s Liberation Army (ELAS), EAM&#x27;s guerrilla forces
** National Republican Greek League (EDES)
** National and Social Liberation (EKKA)
* , anti-fascist anti-Axis movement against the Horthy regime and the Government of National Unity
* Indian resistance movements:
** Quit India Movement, largely non-violent anti-British resistance within Indian territory
** Azad Hind
*** Indian National Army, Indian force fighting alongside Imperial Japan against Allied forces
*** Free Indian Army, Indian unit in Nazi Germany fighting against the Allies for India&#x27;s Independence
* Italian resistance against fascism
** &quot;Arditi del Popolo&quot;
** Assisi Network
** &quot;Brigate Fiamme Verdi&quot;
** &quot;Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale&quot;
** &quot;Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana&quot;
** DELASEM
** &quot;Democrazia Cristiana&quot;
** Four days of Naples
** &quot;Giustizia e Libertà&quot;
** Italian Civil War
** Italian Co-Belligerent Army, Navy, and Air Force
** Italian Communist Party (PCI)
** Italian Partisan Republics
** Italian Socialist Party (PSI)
** Labour Democratic Party (PDL)
** &quot;Movimento Comunista d&#x27;Italia&quot;
** National Liberation Committee for Northern Italy
** &quot;Partito d&#x27;Azione&quot;
** Scintilla
* Italian pro-fascist resistance
** Black Brigades
** Italian guerrilla war in Ethiopia
* Japanese anti-imperial resistance
** Dissent in the Armed Forces of the Empire of Japan
** Japanese in the Chinese resistance to the Empire of Japan
*** Japanese Communist Party
*** Japanese People&#x27;s Emancipation League
*** Japanese People&#x27;s Anti-war Alliance
*** League to Raise the Political Consciousness of Japanese Troops
* Japanese pro-imperial resistance
** Japanese holdout
** Volunteer Fighting Corps
* Jewish resistance movement, including Jewish partisans and Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee
** Resistance movement in Auschwitz
* Korean resistance movement
** Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea
*** Korean Liberation Army
** Korean Volunteer Army
* Latvian resistance movement
* Lithuanian resistance
* Lithuanian, Latvian, and Estonian (Forest Brothers, Latvian national partisans, and Lithuanian partisans) resistance movements during the Soviet invasion and occupation of the Baltic countries (continued after the end of World War II).
* Luxembourgish resistance movement
* Norwegian resistance movement
* Philippine resistance movement (Multiple, often opposing organizations, were active during the Japanese Occupation)
* Polish Underground State and Polish resistance organizations, such as:
** Armia Krajowa (the Home Army), Polish underground army in World War II (400 000 sworn members)
** Narodowe Siły Zbrojne
** Bataliony Chłopskie
** Gwardia Ludowa (the People&#x27;s Guard) and Armia Ludowa (the People&#x27;s Army)
** Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa (ZOB, the Jewish Fighting Organisation), Jewish resistance movement that led the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising in 1943
** Zydowski Zwiazek Walki (ZZW, the Jewish Fighting Union), Jewish resistance movement that led the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising in 1943
** Tudor Vladimirescu Division and Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division of the Red Army
* Romanian anti-fascist anti-Axis resistance and political opposition
** Tudor Vladimirescu Division and Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division of the Red Army
* The &quot;Republic of Rossony&quot; formed by a group of Soviet partisans, described as &quot;neither for the Soviets nor the Germans&quot;
* The so-called &quot;Russian Liberation Movement&quot; attempted to create an independent (either allied with Germany or opposing both sides) Russian anti-Communist force by means of collaboration with the Nazis
** Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia and the Russian Liberation Army within the Wehrmacht, formally released from German command in January 1945, switched sides in May 1945
** GULAG Operation
** Russian People&#x27;s Liberation Army, pro-Nazi militia of the Lokot Autonomy, later absorbed as a part of the Waffen-SS, reformed as an anti-Soviet partisan movement after the war
* Slovak resistance movement
* Soviet resistance movement of Soviet partisans and underground which had Moscow-organized and spontaneously-formed cells opposing German occupation.
** Belarusian Soviet partisans
** Estonian Soviet partisans
** Latvian Soviet partisans
** Moldovan Soviet partisans
** Soviet partisans in Finland
** Soviet partisans in Poland
** Young Guard (Soviet resistance)
* Thai resistance movement
* Ukrainian resistance movements:
** Ukrainian Insurgent Army (anti-German, anti-Soviet and anti-Polish resistance movement)
** Ukrainian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army (anti-German, anti-Soviet and anti-Polish resistance movement)
* Yugoslav resistance movements:
** Yugoslav Army in the Homeland - the &quot;Chetniks&quot;
*** Blue Guard – Slovenian Chetniks
** National Liberation Army – the &quot;Partisans&quot;
*** Croatian Partisans
*** Macedonian Partisans
*** Serbian Partisans
*** Slovene Partisans
* Viet Minh
===Post–World War II===
* Post-WWII anti-fascism (ongoing)

====Africa====

* Casamance conflict (ongoing)
* Conflict in the Niger Delta (ongoing)
* Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda (Frente para a Libertação do Enclave de Cabinda) (ongoing)
* Harakat al-Shabaab Mujahideen (ongoing)
* Lord&#x27;s Resistance Army (ongoing)
* Mai-Mai (ongoing)
* March 23 Movement
* Mau Mau
* MPLA
* Ogaden National Liberation Front
* Sudanese resistance (ongoing)
* Symbionese Liberation Army
* Umkhonto we Sizwe/African National Congress
* ActionSA/Afrikaner Resistance Movement/MK Party/Economic Freedom Fighters/Cape Independence Party/Referendum Party and others in Post-Apartheid South Africa
* ZANU–PF

====East Asia, Southeast Asia, and Oceania====

* East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ongoing)
* Free Papua Movement (ongoing)
* Kuomintang insurgency in China
** Kuomintang Islamic insurgency
** Kuomintang in Burma
* New People&#x27;s Army (ongoing)
* Pathet Lao
* People&#x27;s Liberation Army/Chinese Communist Party
* South Thailand insurgency (ongoing)
* Tibetan resistance movement (ongoing)
* Viet Cong
* Viet Minh

====Europe====

* Albanian insurgency in Yugoslavia
** Kosovo Liberation Army
** Kosovo Protection Corps
** National Liberation Army
** Liberation Army of Preševo, Medveđa and Bujanovac
* Anti-communist resistance in Poland
* Caucasus Emirate 
* Continuity Irish Republican Army
* Crusaders – Croatian Ustaše guerrilla movement fighting against Yugoslav communist forces
* Cursed soldiers Polish anticommunist resistance
* Free Wales Army
* Greek resistance
* Hungarian Uprising
* Irish National Liberation Army
* Irish People&#x27;s Liberation Organisation
* Irish Republican Army
* Insurgency in the North Caucasus (2009-2017)
* Mudiad Amddiffyn Cymru
* National Liberation Front of Corsica (Fronte di Liberazione Naziunale Corsu)
* Óglaigh na hÉireann (ongoing)
* Prague Spring
* Provisional Irish Republican Army (1969–1997)
* Real Irish Republican Army (ongoing)
* Romanian anti-communist resistance movement
* Spanish Maquis
* Ukrainian resistance during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine (ongoing)
* United Irishmen

====Middle East====

* Armenian resistance
* Afghan Mujahideen
* Free Patriotic Movement (1988-2005)
* Free Syrian Army (2011-2014; Splinter branches and groups who use the name ongoing)
* Front for the Liberation of the Golan (ongoing)
* General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries (ongoing)
* Gaddafi loyalism (ongoing)
* Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) (ongoing)
* Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)
* Taliban (2001 to 2021)
* Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (ongoing)
** National Resistance Front of Afghanistan
* Hezbollah (ongoing)
* Houthis (Ansar Allah) (ongoing)
* Popular Mobilization Forces
* Lebanese Front/Lebanese Forces (1975–1990)
* National Liberation Front (Algeria)
* Palestinian militants (ongoing)
** Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade
** Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine
** Hamas (ongoing)
** Palestinian Islamic Jihad (ongoing)
** Palestine Liberation Organization (ongoing)
** Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (ongoing)
* Polisario Front (ongoing)
* People&#x27;s Mujahedin Organization of Iran
* South Yemen Movement (ongoing)

====Indian subcontinent====

* Mukti Bahini (1971)
* Bhutan Tiger Force
* Indian Independence movement and Pakistan movement
* Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir (ongoing)
* Khalistan (ongoing)
* Sindhudesh (ongoing)
* Tamil Tigers

====Western hemisphere====

* American Indian Movement
* Black Guerrilla Family (ongoing)
* Black Panther Party
* Boricua Popular Army
* Contras of Nicaragua
* Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front
* Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (ongoing)
* Front de libération du Québec
* Fruit of Islam
* Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional Puertorriqueña
* Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity
* Los Macheteros – Puerto Rican armed independence movement (ongoing)
* MOVE
* Montoneros, Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo, Peronist Armed Forces of Argentina
* Ñancahuazú Guerrilla
* Paraguayan People&#x27;s Army (ongoing)
* Popular Revolutionary Army (ongoing)
* Sandinistas
* Shining Path (ongoing)
* Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement
* Tupamaros
* Weather Underground
* Zapatistas (ongoing)

==Notable individuals in resistance movements==

===World War II===

* Mordechaj Anielewicz
* Josip Broz Tito 
* Dragoljub &quot;Draža&quot; Mihailović 
* Edmund Charaszkiewicz
* Charles de Gaulle
* Mildred Harnack
* Jan Karski
* Henryk Iwański
* Marcel Louette
* Max Manus
* Jean Moulin
* Christian Pineau
* Hannie Schaft
* Aris Velouchiotis
* Mao Zedong
* Chiang Kai-shek
* Sandro Pertini
* Luigi Longo
* Ferruccio Parri
* Witold Pilecki
* Sophie Scholl
* Haile Selassie
* Gunnar Sønsteby
===Other resistance movements and figures===

* Chief Mkwawa of Uhehe
* Chief Kimweri of Tanganyika
* Kinjekitile Ng&#x27;wale 
* Michel Aoun
* Hassan Nasrallah
* Buenaventura Durruti
* Corazon Aquino
* Giuseppe Garibaldi
* Geronimo
* Ho Chi Minh
* Kim Ku
* Juan Peron
* Lembitu
* Louis Joseph Papineau
* Nestor Makhno
* Maria Nikiforova
* Osceola
* Red Cloud
* Robin Hood
* Juba
* Rummu Jüri
* Osman Batur
* Mohammed Abdullah Hassan
* Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
* Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale
* Ülo Voitka
* Pancho Villa
* Emiliano Zapata
* Ernesto Guevara
* Abbas al-Musawi
* Russel Means
* Leonard Peltier
* John Brown
* Osama bin Laden
* Cochise
* William Quantrill
* Crazy Horse
* Tecumseh
* Fidel Castro
* Maqbool Bhat
* Vladimir Lenin
* Leon Trotsky
* Sitting Bull
* Mangas Colorado
* Alfred the Great
* El Cid
* Lawrence of Arabia
* Charlemagne Peralte
* Boudica
* King Arthur
* Spartacus
* Charles Martel
* Nat Turner
* Toussaint Louverture
* Jean-Jacques Dessalines
* Sans-Souci
* Nelson Mandela
* William Wallace
* Robert the Bruce
* Little Turtle
* Mahatma Gandhi
* Marvin Heemeyer
* Republic of Rose Island
* Blocking of Telegram in Russia
* List of whistleblowers
==See also==

* Anti-war
* Anti-capitalism
* Anti-communism
* Anti-fascism
* Anti-imperialism
* Asymmetric warfare
* People&#x27;s war
* Civil resistance
* Civil rights movement
* Collaborationism (and Collaboration), the opposite of resistance
* Covert cell
* Definitions of terrorism
* Defensivism
* Fictional resistance movements and groups
* Fifth column – clandestine citizen operatives loyal to a foreign government
* Guerrilla warfare
* Insurgency
* Irregular military
* List of guerrillas
* List of revolutions and rebellions
* Nonviolent resistance
* Opposition to the Iraq War
* Opposition to the Vietnam War
* Partisan (military)
* Polish Secret State
* Protesting
* Propaganda
* Reagan Doctrine
* Rebellion
* Reclaim the Streets
* Resistance Studies Magazine
* Riot
* Social change
* Sniper
* Special Activities Division
* Special Operations Executive
* Unconventional warfare
== Citations ==
== General references ==
* Gardam, Judith Gail (1993). &quot;Non-combatant Immunity as a Norm of International Humanitarian&quot;, Martinus Nijhoff. .
* Ticehurst, Rupert. &quot;The Martens Clause and the Laws of Armed Conflict &quot; 30 April 1997, &quot;International Review of the Red Cross&quot; no. 317, pp. 125–34. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="2" end="21" title="Resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="114" end="129" title="occupying power" label="occupying power"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="274" end="295" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="314" end="330" title="civil resistance" label="civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="417" end="430" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="442" end="461" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="469" end="499" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norway in the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="710" end="735" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="995" end="1012" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="1302" end="1313" title="anachronism" label="anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673189" start="1707" end="1728" title="irregular military" label="irregular armed force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1789" end="1799" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="1804" end="1818" title="administration (government)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="1893" end="1900" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="1904" end="1916" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1948" end="1959" title=":wikt:underground" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="2039" end="2058" title="military occupation" label="military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="2062" end="2074" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="2141" end="2150" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="2162" end="2183" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="2188" end="2206" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2211" end="2228" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2233" end="2242" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="2252" end="2272" title="conventional warfare" label="conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2412" end="2421" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="2491" end="2521" title="Resistance during World War II" label="Resistance during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2559" end="2563" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q327401" start="2620" end="2646" title="German resistance movement" label="German resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400296" start="2828" end="2843" title="Auxiliary Units" label="Auxiliary Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="6237" end="6250" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="6271" end="6292" title="LGBT movements" label="LGBT social movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="6572" end="6599" title="anti-globalization movement" label="anti-globalization movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354415" start="6691" end="6723" title="internal resistance to apartheid" label="internal resistance to apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="6779" end="6795" title="social movements" label="social movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251595" start="6989" end="7000" title="Protest art" label="Protest Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="7219" end="7231" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="8098" end="8115" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="8219" end="8230" title="laws of war" label="laws of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469678" start="8358" end="8372" title="Martens Clause" label="Martens Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="8440" end="8451" title="Great Power" label="Great Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="8468" end="8482" title="francs-tireurs" label="francs-tireurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q745570" start="8489" end="8508" title="unlawful combatants" label="unlawful combatants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229133" start="8649" end="8788" title="Protocol I" label="Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8802" end="8824" title="Protocol I#Part I GENERAL PROVISIONS" label="Article 1. Paragraph 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="9192" end="9201" title="Politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="9397" end="9406" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q708363" start="9556" end="9571" title="right to resist" label="right to resist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="9626" end="9661" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="10299" end="10309" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="10812" end="10817" title="armed forces" label="armed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136236" start="11190" end="11207" title="uMkhonto we Sizwe" label="uMkhonto we Sizwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31306" start="11229" end="11244" title="Sons of Liberty" label="Sons of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="11252" end="11271" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="11277" end="11298" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="11302" end="11309" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="11314" end="11330" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q889543" start="11336" end="11375" title="Eritrean People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front" label="Eritrean People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q33182" start="11381" end="11423" title="Hindustan Socialist Republican Association" label="Hindustan Socialist Republican Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="11427" end="11432" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967703" start="11441" end="11465" title="National Resistance Army" label="National Resistance Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="11685" end="11704" title="political activists" label="political activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q880194" start="11728" end="11756" title="Black Consciousness Movement" label="Black Consciousness Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="11840" end="11857" title="Government of India" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="11894" end="11930" title="Indian independence movement" label="country&amp;#x27;s independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="12123" end="12131" title="assassination" label="assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="12134" end="12140" title="rebellion" label="rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="12142" end="12152" title="insurgents" label="insurgents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="12156" end="12166" title="terrorism" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="12186" end="12194" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12423" end="12431" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="12507" end="12523" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="12533" end="12546" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="12577" end="12599" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="America&amp;#x27;s support"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="12637" end="12652" title="communist state" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="12738" end="12745" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="12749" end="12758" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28699" start="12760" end="12765" title="UNITA" label="UNITA"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="12769" end="12775" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="12800" end="12810" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12814" end="12825" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12846" end="12849" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="13005" end="13013" title="Insurgent" label="militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="13027" end="13036" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="13050" end="13058" title="assassin" label="assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="13072" end="13081" title="insurgent" label="insurgent"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="13095" end="13100" title="Rebellion" label="rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="13114" end="13126" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="13143" end="13150" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="13353" end="13357" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="13361" end="13372" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862130" start="13428" end="13445" title="improvised weapon" label="improvised weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="13750" end="13766" title="civil resistance" label="civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="13771" end="13792" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q400019" start="13825" end="13834" title="Maccabees" label="Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="13912" end="13927" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="13931" end="13936" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="13958" end="13974" title="deuterocanonical" label="deuterocanonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q524457" start="13975" end="13997" title="Books of the Maccabees" label="Books of the Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q282586" start="14005" end="14012" title="Sicarii" label="Sicarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="14090" end="14103" title="Promised Land" label="Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q751743" start="14111" end="14125" title="Yellow Turban Rebellion" label="Yellow Turbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="14158" end="14177" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q197202" start="14186" end="14195" title="Zhang Jue" label="Zhang Jue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933860" start="14304" end="14322" title="Abbasid Revolution" label="Abbasid Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="14340" end="14355" title="Umayyad dynasty" label="Umayyad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q335210" start="14362" end="14372" title="Abu Muslim" label="Abu Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="14394" end="14408" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="14421" end="14425" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="14426" end="14433" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="14467" end="14474" title="Mamluks" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="14480" end="14486" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="14512" end="14527" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767601" start="14548" end="14571" title="British rule in Ireland" label="British rule in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262722" start="14591" end="14613" title="Plantations of Ireland" label="Plantations of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="14626" end="14632" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="14675" end="14690" title="Hiberno-Normans" label="Hiberno-Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="14711" end="14736" title="Bruce campaign in Ireland" label="Bruce campaign in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="14754" end="14772" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="14806" end="14826" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="14884" end="14907" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="Irish Rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672808" start="14929" end="14951" title="Irish Confederate Wars" label="Irish Confederate Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="14969" end="14994" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="Williamite War in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="15012" end="15035" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="Irish Rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q184652" start="15086" end="15099" title="Tithe War" label="the Tithe War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="15119" end="15135" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite risings"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="15202" end="15216" title="Stuart dynasty" label="Stuart dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="15224" end="15251" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="American Continental forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="15259" end="15285" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q960315" start="15356" end="15370" title="Francis Marion" label="Francis Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="15378" end="15404" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="15477" end="15499" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775114" start="15507" end="15533" title="History of Australia (1788–1850)" label="early history of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q941321" start="15537" end="15545" title="Pemulwuy" label="Pemulwuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="15551" end="15572" title="indigenous Australian" label="indigenous Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775114" start="15590" end="15624" title="History of Australia (1788–1850)" label="European colonization of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="15646" end="15663" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685042" start="15672" end="15721" title="Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars" label="between indigenous people and settler communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="15725" end="15731" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901739" start="15787" end="15795" title="Bidjigal" label="Bidjigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21007994" start="15868" end="15881" title="Henry Hacking" label="Henry Hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682556" start="15894" end="15904" title="Jandamarra" label="Jandamarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q322974" start="16162" end="16180" title="Aboriginal tracker" label="Aboriginal tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="16213" end="16219" title="First French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="16244" end="16259" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146130" start="16311" end="16332" title="Guerrilla warfare in the Peninsular War" label="a resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q699838" start="16595" end="16604" title="Landsturm" label="Landsturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="16667" end="16682" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="16694" end="16710" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="16718" end="16734" title="Manifest destiny" label="Manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849337" start="16739" end="16744" title="Tsali" label="Tsali"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="16747" end="16755" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="16856" end="16870" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="16961" end="16993" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q335165" start="16998" end="17005" title="Osceola" label="Osceola"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="17008" end="17016" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="17091" end="17105" title="Indian removal" label="Indian removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17248" end="17266" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q887183" start="17322" end="17334" title="Bushwhacker" label="Bushwhackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="17340" end="17351" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="17422" end="17427" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17505" end="17523" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q460143" start="17551" end="17568" title="Lawrence Massacre" label="Lawrence Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q887178" start="17572" end="17582" title="Jayhawker" label="Jayhawkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="17588" end="17593" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="17688" end="17703" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="17731" end="17741" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489516" start="17762" end="17783" title="Pottawatomie Massacre" label="Pottawatomie Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="17788" end="17833" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harper&amp;#x27;s Ferry" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harper&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749325" start="17837" end="17846" title="Carbonari" label="Carbonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="17901" end="17908" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264920" start="17921" end="17947" title="Polish National Government (January Uprising)" label="Polish National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="17998" end="18014" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="18023" end="18051" title="partitions of Poland" label="Russian occupation of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="18197" end="18204" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="18210" end="18223" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18231" end="18245" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q334715" start="18249" end="18271" title="Andrés Avelino Cáceres" label="Andrés Avelino Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106460" start="18278" end="18297" title="Resistance (War of the Pacific)" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="18341" end="18359" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="18367" end="18434" title="Katipunan" label="Kataas-Taasang, Ka-Galang-galangang, Katipunan ng mga Anak Ng Bayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="18781" end="18804" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="18819" end="18842" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="18846" end="18862" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135255" start="18866" end="18889" title="Chinese Soviet Republic" label="Chinese Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060072" start="18893" end="18931" title="Communist-controlled China (1927–1949)" label="Communist-controlled China (1927–1949)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836404" start="18935" end="18966" title="Fujian People&amp;#x27;s Government" label="Fujian People&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="18970" end="18998" title="Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region" label="Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957888" start="19001" end="19020" title="Charlemagne Peralte" label="Charlemagne Peralte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43666391" start="19029" end="19034" title="Cacos (military group)" label="Cacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="19059" end="19092" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="United States occupation of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="19096" end="19105" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479606" start="19132" end="19161" title="Ukrainian War of Independence" label="Ukrainian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q65437776" start="19176" end="19192" title="Dervish movement (Somali)" label="Dervish Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q31711" start="19207" end="19220" title="House of Saud" label="House of Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q143509" start="19224" end="19230" title="Ikhwan" label="Ikhwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468894" start="19233" end="19250" title="Forest Guerrillas" label="Forest Guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="19265" end="19286" title="Augusto César Sandino" label="Augusto César Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304042" start="19315" end="19352" title="United States occupation of Nicaragua" label="United States occupation of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777763" start="19356" end="19368" title="Lwów Eaglets" label="Lwów Eaglets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921191" start="19371" end="19382" title="Black Lions" label="Black Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="19392" end="19413" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="19428" end="19453" title="Turkish National Movement" label="Turkish national movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839878" start="19457" end="19522" title="Association for the Defense of the Rights of Anatolia and Rumelia" label="Association for the Defense of the Rights of Anatolia and Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278630" start="19525" end="19529" title="TIGR" label="TIGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="19544" end="19550" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="19642" end="19656" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q597160" start="19702" end="19730" title="Brotherhood of Russian Truth" label="Brotherhood of Russian Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q142869" start="19734" end="19760" title="Russian All-Military Union" label="Russian All-Military Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q518661" start="19763" end="19775" title="Green armies" label="Green armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985602" start="19790" end="19831" title="Committee for the Independence of Georgia" label="Committee for the Independence of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74109" start="19856" end="19884" title="Military history of Albania during World War II" label="Albanian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252698" start="19887" end="19906" title="Austrian resistance" label="Austrian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987815" start="20001" end="20028" title="Belgian resistance movement" label="Belgian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995587" start="20131" end="20180" title="Resistance in the German-occupied Channel Islands" label="Resistance in the German-occupied Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400296" start="20188" end="20203" title="Auxiliary Units" label="Auxiliary Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739613" start="20226" end="20239" title="Colin Gubbins" label="Colin Gubbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273530" start="20459" end="20488" title="Bulgarian resistance movement" label="Bulgarian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774167" start="20491" end="20518" title="Anti-Fascist Organisation" label="Burmese resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q714706" start="20521" end="20551" title="1940–1944 insurgency in Chechnya" label="Chechen anti-Soviet resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774209" start="20554" end="20582" title="Anti-Japanese resistance volunteers in China" label="Chinese resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913564" start="20586" end="20637" title="Anti-Japanese Army for the Salvation of the Country" label="Anti-Japanese Army for the Salvation of the Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222401" start="20641" end="20686" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s National Salvation Army" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s National Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q218867" start="20690" end="20726" title="Heilungkiang National Salvation Army" label="Heilungkiang National Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069659" start="20730" end="20753" title="Jilin Self-Defence Army" label="Jilin Self-Defence Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057822" start="20757" end="20804" title="Northeast Anti-Japanese National Salvation Army" label="Northeast Anti-Japanese National Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q707629" start="20808" end="20843" title="Northeast Anti-Japanese United Army" label="Northeast Anti-Japanese United Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057962" start="20847" end="20899" title="Northeast People&amp;#x27;s Anti-Japanese Volunteer Army" label="Northeast People&amp;#x27;s Anti-Japanese Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580301" start="20903" end="20936" title="Northeastern Loyal and Brave Army" label="Northeastern Loyal and Brave Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412438" start="20940" end="20985" title="Northeastern People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Northeastern People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058074" start="20989" end="21042" title="Northeastern Volunteer Righteous &amp;amp; Brave Fighters" label="Northeastern Volunteer Righteous &amp;amp; Brave Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21046" end="21076" title="Japanese occupation of Hong Kong#Strikes and anti-Japanese activities" label="Hong Kong resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263100" start="21114" end="21131" title="East River Column" label="East River Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100553" start="21201" end="21248" title="Chinese Muslims in the Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Chinese Muslims in the Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="21312" end="21337" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="Czech Resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="21340" end="21366" title="Danish resistance movement" label="Danish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474417" start="21369" end="21385" title="Dutch resistance" label="Dutch resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606538" start="21398" end="21415" title="The Stijkel Group" label="The Stijkel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933409" start="21501" end="21522" title="Valkenburg resistance" label="Valkenburg resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614871" start="21525" end="21553" title="Estonian resistance movement" label="Estonian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614871" start="21556" end="21571" title="Forest Brothers" label="Forest Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="21574" end="21600" title="French Resistance" label="French resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="21604" end="21653" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="21664" end="21697" title="Conseil National de la Résistance" label="Conseil National de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="21707" end="21734" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="21744" end="21762" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="21772" end="21801" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="21811" end="21817" title="Maquis (WW2)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567104" start="21821" end="21842" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Leary Line" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Leary Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q327401" start="21845" end="21872" title="German resistance to Nazism" label="German resistance to Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q374791" start="21876" end="21905" title="Bästlein-Jacob-Abshagen Group" label="Bästlein-Jacob-Abshagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="21909" end="21926" title="Confessing Church" label="Confessing Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q153349" start="21930" end="21947" title="Edelweiss Pirates" label="Edelweiss Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q879829" start="21951" end="21966" title="Ehrenfeld Group" label="Ehrenfeld Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q319328" start="21970" end="21984" title="European Union (resistance group)" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q675215" start="21988" end="22002" title="Kreisau Circle" label="Kreisau Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q700570" start="22006" end="22043" title="National Committee for a Free Germany" label="National Committee for a Free Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q575198" start="22048" end="22089" title="Anti-Fascist Committee for a Free Germany" label="Anti-Fascist Committee for a Free Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q896490" start="22093" end="22105" title="Neu Beginnen" label="Neu Beginnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170155" start="22109" end="22122" title="Red Orchestra (spy)" label="Red Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q76046" start="22126" end="22144" title="Robert Uhrig" label="Robert Uhrig Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211351" start="22148" end="22183" title="Saefkow-Jacob-Bästlein Organization" label="Saefkow-Jacob-Bästlein Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q322408" start="22187" end="22198" title="Solf Circle" label="Solf Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928409" start="22202" end="22245" title="Vierergruppe (German Resistance)" label="Vierergruppen in Hamburg, Munich and Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153364" start="22249" end="22259" title="White Rose" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q157912" start="22292" end="22302" title="Volkssturm" label="Volkssturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q316545" start="22396" end="22403" title="Werwolf" label="Werwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="22471" end="22496" title="Greek Resistance" label="Greek resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572424" start="22500" end="22538" title="List of Greek Resistance organizations" label="List of Greek Resistance organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155730" start="22542" end="22559" title="Cretan resistance" label="Cretan resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192254" start="22563" end="22588" title="National Liberation Front (Greece)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="22603" end="22638" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q704222" start="22678" end="22710" title="National Republican Greek League" label="National Republican Greek League"/>
<link wikidata="Q562101" start="22721" end="22751" title="National and Social Liberation" label="National and Social Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="22807" end="22820" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Horthy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q427359" start="22829" end="22857" title="Government of National Unity (Hungary)" label="Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="22892" end="22911" title="Quit India Movement" label="Quit India Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="22921" end="22932" title="non-violent" label="non-violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q715197" start="22984" end="22993" title="Azad Hind" label="Azad Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q156062" start="22998" end="23018" title="Indian National Army" label="Indian National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="23052" end="23066" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706802" start="23093" end="23109" title="Indian Legion" label="Free Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="23126" end="23138" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="23199" end="23233" title="Italian resistance movement" label="Italian resistance against fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q639533" start="23243" end="23260" title="Arditi del Popolo" label="Arditi del Popolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15924166" start="23270" end="23284" title="Assisi Network" label="Assisi Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644672" start="23294" end="23314" title="Brigate Fiamme Verdi" label="Brigate Fiamme Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q547858" start="23330" end="23363" title="Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale" label="Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686034" start="23379" end="23415" title="Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana" label="Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700329" start="23425" end="23432" title="DELASEM" label="DELASEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="23436" end="23468" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="&amp;quot;Democrazia Cristiana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635328" start="23472" end="23491" title="Four days of Naples" label="Four days of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053047" start="23501" end="23520" title="Giustizia e Libertà" label="Giustizia e Libertà"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118964" start="23530" end="23547" title="Italian Civil War" label="Italian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732906" start="23551" end="23578" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Army" label="Italian Co-Belligerent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848018" start="23580" end="23584" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381570" start="23590" end="23599" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="23603" end="23632" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party (PCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456497" start="23636" end="23662" title="Italian Partisan Republics" label="Italian Partisan Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="23666" end="23695" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party (PSI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896759" start="23699" end="23728" title="Labour Democratic Party" label="Labour Democratic Party (PDL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633939" start="23738" end="23771" title="Movimento Comunista d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Movimento Comunista d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642882" start="23781" end="23829" title="National Liberation Committee for Northern Italy" label="National Liberation Committee for Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q764125" start="23833" end="23866" title="Action Party (Italy)" label="&amp;quot;Partito d&amp;#x27;Azione&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115531" start="23870" end="23879" title="Scintilla (communist group)" label="Scintilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811988" start="23916" end="23930" title="Black Brigades" label="Black Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q926157" start="23934" end="23967" title="Italian guerrilla war in Ethiopia" label="Italian guerrilla war in Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849671" start="23970" end="24003" title="Japanese dissidence in 20th-century Imperial Japan" label="Japanese anti-imperial resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20637071" start="24007" end="24057" title="Dissent in the Armed Forces of the Empire of Japan" label="Dissent in the Armed Forces of the Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840256" start="24061" end="24118" title="Japanese in the Chinese resistance to the Empire of Japan" label="Japanese in the Chinese resistance to the Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641600" start="24123" end="24147" title="Japanese Communist Party" label="Japanese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507198" start="24152" end="24194" title="Japanese People&amp;#x27;s Emancipation League" label="Japanese People&amp;#x27;s Emancipation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849666" start="24199" end="24239" title="Japanese People&amp;#x27;s Anti-war Alliance" label="Japanese People&amp;#x27;s Anti-war Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932331" start="24244" end="24306" title="League to Raise the Political Consciousness of Japanese Troops" label="League to Raise the Political Consciousness of Japanese Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624429" start="24345" end="24361" title="Japanese holdout" label="Japanese holdout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997719" start="24365" end="24389" title="Volunteer Fighting Corps" label="Volunteer Fighting Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420127" start="24392" end="24418" title="Jewish resistance in German-occupied Europe" label="Jewish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076908" start="24430" end="24446" title="Jewish partisans" label="Jewish partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401614" start="24451" end="24480" title="Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee" label="Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9323623" start="24484" end="24516" title="Resistance movement in Auschwitz" label="Resistance movement in Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q707483" start="24519" end="24545" title="Korean independence movement" label="Korean resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28278" start="24549" end="24596" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea" label="Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q489964" start="24601" end="24623" title="Korean Liberation Army" label="Korean Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182787" start="24627" end="24648" title="Korean Volunteer Army" label="Korean Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932182" start="24651" end="24678" title="Latvian anti-Nazi resistance movement 1941–1945" label="Latvian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315621" start="24681" end="24702" title="Resistance in Lithuania during World War II" label="Lithuanian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614871" start="24740" end="24755" title="Guerrilla war in the Baltic states" label="Forest Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178827" start="24757" end="24783" title="Latvian partisans" label="Latvian national partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358120" start="24789" end="24809" title="Lithuanian partisans" label="Lithuanian partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24843" end="24849" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="24881" end="24897" title="Baltic countries" label="Baltic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q286451" start="24943" end="24976" title="Luxembourg Resistance" label="Luxembourgish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="24979" end="25008" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norwegian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185387" start="25011" end="25041" title="Philippine resistance against Japan" label="Philippine resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175954" start="25106" end="25125" title="Japanese occupation of the Philippines" label="Japanese Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="25129" end="25153" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish Underground State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="25158" end="25175" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="25203" end="25216" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q569284" start="25301" end="25322" title="Narodowe Siły Zbrojne" label="Narodowe Siły Zbrojne"/>
<link wikidata="Q473844" start="25326" end="25345" title="Bataliony Chłopskie" label="Bataliony Chłopskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980468" start="25349" end="25363" title="Gwardia Ludowa" label="Gwardia Ludowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q632757" start="25394" end="25406" title="Armia Ludowa" label="Armia Ludowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="25435" end="25462" title="Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa" label="Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="25544" end="25566" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q707503" start="25578" end="25600" title="Zydowski Zwiazek Walki" label="Zydowski Zwiazek Walki"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="25675" end="25697" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329432" start="25709" end="25736" title="Tudor Vladimirescu Division" label="Tudor Vladimirescu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903169" start="25741" end="25773" title="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division" label="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="25781" end="25789" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779337" start="25792" end="25859" title="Romanian resistance movement during World War II" label="Romanian anti-fascist anti-Axis resistance and political opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329432" start="25863" end="25890" title="Tudor Vladimirescu Division" label="Tudor Vladimirescu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903169" start="25895" end="25927" title="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division" label="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="25935" end="25943" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25956" end="25975" title="Republic of Rossony" label="Republic of Rossony"/>
<link wikidata="Q157615" start="26108" end="26135" title="Russian Liberation Movement" label="Russian Liberation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089313" start="26270" end="26298" title="Collaboration in the German-occupied Soviet Union" label="collaboration with the Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630006" start="26302" end="26355" title="Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia" label="Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164587" start="26364" end="26387" title="Russian Liberation Army" label="Russian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514812" start="26495" end="26510" title="GULAG Operation" label="GULAG Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221551" start="26514" end="26551" title="Kaminski Brigade" label="Russian People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q30573" start="26577" end="26591" title="Lokot Autonomy" label="Lokot Autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="26697" end="26723" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="26726" end="26752" title="Soviet resistance movement" label="Soviet resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="26756" end="26772" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727209" start="26878" end="26905" title="Belarusian resistance during World War II" label="Belarusian Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571783" start="26909" end="26934" title="Soviet partisans in Estonia" label="Estonian Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q724766" start="26938" end="26962" title="Soviet partisans in Latvia" label="Latvian Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345918" start="26966" end="26991" title="Moldovan resistance during World War II" label="Moldovan Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q104403879" start="26995" end="27022" title="Soviet partisans in Finland" label="Soviet partisans in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571784" start="27026" end="27052" title="Soviet partisans in Poland" label="Soviet partisans in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625643" start="27056" end="27087" title="Young Guard (Soviet resistance)" label="Young Guard (Soviet resistance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="27090" end="27114" title="Free Thai Movement" label="Thai resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="27152" end="27176" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660076" start="27243" end="27285" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27351" end="27359" title="Yugoslavia#Yugoslavia during Second World War" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="27385" end="27441" title="Chetniks" label="Yugoslav Army in the Homeland - the &amp;quot;Chetniks&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263969" start="27446" end="27456" title="Blue Guard (Slovene)" label="Blue Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="27481" end="27533" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="National Liberation Army – the &amp;quot;Partisans&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638126" start="27538" end="27556" title="Croatian Partisans" label="Croatian Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063025" start="27561" end="27581" title="Macedonian Partisans" label="Macedonian Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="27586" end="27603" title="Serbian Partisans" label="Serbian Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q174777" start="27608" end="27625" title="Slovene Partisans" label="Slovene Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="27628" end="27637" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q278364" start="27664" end="27686" title="Post-WWII anti-fascism" label="Post-WWII anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209965" start="27716" end="27734" title="Casamance conflict" label="Casamance conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202792" start="27747" end="27774" title="Conflict in the Niger Delta" label="Conflict in the Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q608489" start="27787" end="27837" title="Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda" label="Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q608489" start="27839" end="27885" title="Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda" label="Frente para a Libertação do Enclave de Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q309998" start="27899" end="27928" title="Harakat al-Shabaab Mujahideen" label="Harakat al-Shabaab Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108462" start="27941" end="27968" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Resistance Army" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Resistance Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q277028" start="27981" end="27988" title="Mai-Mai" label="Mai-Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q63345" start="28001" end="28018" title="March 23 Movement" label="March 23 Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q476855" start="28021" end="28028" title="Mau Mau Rebellion" label="Mau Mau"/>
<link wikidata="Q28551" start="28031" end="28035" title="MPLA" label="MPLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477631" start="28038" end="28070" title="Ogaden National Liberation Front" label="Ogaden National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q751442" start="28073" end="28092" title="Sudan Liberation Movement" label="Sudanese resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429446" start="28105" end="28131" title="Symbionese Liberation Army" label="Symbionese Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136236" start="28134" end="28151" title="Umkhonto we Sizwe" label="Umkhonto we Sizwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="28152" end="28177" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q99263962" start="28180" end="28188" title="ActionSA" label="ActionSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q385873" start="28189" end="28218" title="Afrikaner Resistance Movement" label="Afrikaner Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q124037974" start="28219" end="28227" title="MK Party" label="MK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613585" start="28228" end="28253" title="Economic Freedom Fighters" label="Economic Freedom Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034986" start="28254" end="28277" title="Cape Independence Party" label="Cape Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q278315" start="28278" end="28294" title="Referendum Party" label="Referendum Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28309" end="28336" title="Post-Apartheid South Africa" label="Post-Apartheid South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="28339" end="28346" title="ZANU–PF" label="ZANU–PF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674170" start="28398" end="28429" title="East Turkestan Islamic Movement" label="East Turkestan Islamic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q559673" start="28442" end="28461" title="Free Papua Movement" label="Free Papua Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="28474" end="28484" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445249" start="28508" end="28537" title="Kuomintang Islamic insurgency" label="Kuomintang Islamic insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490579" start="28541" end="28560" title="Kuomintang in Burma" label="Kuomintang in Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="28563" end="28585" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q858887" start="28598" end="28608" title="Pathet Lao" label="Pathet Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="28611" end="28640" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="28641" end="28664" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094356" start="28667" end="28692" title="South Thailand insurgency" label="South Thailand insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251691" start="28705" end="28732" title="Tibetan resistance movement" label="Tibetan resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="28745" end="28754" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="28757" end="28766" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193366" start="28823" end="28845" title="Kosovo Liberation Army" label="Kosovo Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514290" start="28849" end="28872" title="Kosovo Protection Corps" label="Kosovo Protection Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296614" start="28876" end="28900" title="National Liberation Army (Macedonia)" label="National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807569" start="28904" end="28953" title="Liberation Army of Preševo, Medveđa and Bujanovac" label="Liberation Army of Preševo, Medveđa and Bujanovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152591" start="28956" end="28991" title="Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–1953)" label="Anti-communist resistance in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58826" start="28994" end="29010" title="Caucasus Emirate" label="Caucasus Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128945" start="29014" end="29046" title="Continuity Irish Republican Army" label="Continuity Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442566" start="29049" end="29058" title="Crusaders (guerrilla)" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="29070" end="29076" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320177" start="29141" end="29156" title="Cursed soldiers" label="Cursed soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q462698" start="29191" end="29206" title="Free Wales Army" label="Free Wales Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="29209" end="29225" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Greek resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="29228" end="29246" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="29249" end="29279" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701081" start="29282" end="29325" title="Irish People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Organisation" label="Irish People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="29328" end="29349" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q849563" start="29352" end="29384" title="Insurgency in the North Caucasus" label="Insurgency in the North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130268" start="29399" end="29421" title="Mudiad Amddiffyn Cymru" label="Mudiad Amddiffyn Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138646" start="29424" end="29460" title="National Liberation Front of Corsica" label="National Liberation Front of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138646" start="29462" end="29499" title="National Liberation Front of Corsica" label="Fronte di Liberazione Naziunale Corsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078762" start="29503" end="29522" title="Óglaigh na hÉireann (Real IRA splinter group)" label="Óglaigh na hÉireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="29535" end="29548" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="29551" end="29584" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122988" start="29599" end="29625" title="Real Irish Republican Army" label="Real Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880362" start="29638" end="29681" title="Romanian anti-communist resistance movement" label="Romanian anti-communist resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551347" start="29684" end="29698" title="Spanish Maquis" label="Spanish Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q112225556" start="29701" end="29765" title="Ukrainian resistance during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian resistance during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="29778" end="29793" title="United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q288284" start="29818" end="29837" title="Armenian irregular units" label="Armenian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="29840" end="29857" title="Afghan Mujahideen" label="Afghan Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454007" start="29860" end="29883" title="Free Patriotic Movement" label="Free Patriotic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q858819" start="29898" end="29914" title="Free Syrian Army" label="Free Syrian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505870" start="29984" end="30021" title="Front for the Liberation of the Golan" label="Front for the Liberation of the Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254238" start="30034" end="30084" title="General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries" label="General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305401" start="30097" end="30113" title="Gaddafi loyalism" label="Gaddafi loyalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q632787" start="30126" end="30166" title="Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present)" label="Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="30179" end="30207" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)" label="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="30210" end="30217" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="30219" end="30223" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="30227" end="30231" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q30747910" start="30235" end="30266" title="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Islamic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127745" start="30280" end="30320" title="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan" label="National Resistance Front of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="30323" end="30332" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q255997" start="30345" end="30366" title="Houthi insurgency in Yemen" label="Houthis (Ansar Allah)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610107" start="30379" end="30406" title="Popular Mobilization Forces" label="Popular Mobilization Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822817" start="30409" end="30423" title="Lebanese Front" label="Lebanese Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="30424" end="30439" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="30454" end="30489" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front (Algeria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342867" start="30492" end="30513" title="Palestinian political violence" label="Palestinian militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q309474" start="30527" end="30550" title="Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade" label="Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q818618" start="30554" end="30602" title="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="30606" end="30611" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117907" start="30625" end="30650" title="Palestinian Islamic Jihad" label="Palestinian Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="30664" end="30697" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="30711" end="30756" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="30769" end="30784" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q636947" start="30797" end="30841" title="People&amp;#x27;s Mujahedin Organization of Iran" label="People&amp;#x27;s Mujahedin Organization of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q632663" start="30844" end="30864" title="South Yemen insurgency" label="South Yemen Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428759" start="30907" end="30919" title="Mukti Bahini" label="Mukti Bahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902244" start="30929" end="30947" title="Bhutan Tiger Force" label="Bhutan Tiger Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="30950" end="30978" title="Indian Independence movement" label="Indian Independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511597" start="30983" end="31000" title="Pakistan movement" label="Pakistan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q749970" start="31003" end="31034" title="Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir" label="Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="31047" end="31056" title="Khalistan" label="Khalistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288851" start="31069" end="31079" title="Sindhudesh" label="Sindhudesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="31092" end="31104" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="Tamil Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="31136" end="31160" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036610" start="31163" end="31185" title="Black Guerrilla Family" label="Black Guerrilla Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="31198" end="31217" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117835" start="31220" end="31240" title="Boricua Popular Army" label="Boricua Popular Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="31243" end="31250" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="31254" end="31263" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q648924" start="31266" end="31307" title="Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front" label="Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q155801" start="31310" end="31348" title="Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia" label="Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129564" start="31361" end="31390" title="Front de libération du Québec" label="Front de libération du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506405" start="31393" end="31407" title="Fruit of Islam" label="Fruit of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131502" start="31410" end="31463" title="Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional Puertorriqueña" label="Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional Puertorriqueña"/>
<link wikidata="Q430960" start="31466" end="31505" title="Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity" label="Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117835" start="31508" end="31522" title="Los Macheteros" label="Los Macheteros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558982" start="31578" end="31582" title="MOVE (Philadelphia organization)" label="MOVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053419" start="31585" end="31595" title="Montoneros" label="Montoneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140216" start="31597" end="31631" title="People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army (Argentina)" label="Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715120" start="31633" end="31654" title="Peronist Armed Forces" label="Peronist Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="31658" end="31667" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322079" start="31670" end="31690" title="Ñancahuazú Guerrilla" label="Ñancahuazú Guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862960" start="31693" end="31722" title="Paraguayan People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Paraguayan People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322043" start="31735" end="31761" title="Popular Revolutionary Army" label="Popular Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="31774" end="31785" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="31788" end="31800" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q829088" start="31813" end="31847" title="Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement" label="Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q826406" start="31850" end="31859" title="Tupamaros" label="Tupamaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163724" start="31862" end="31881" title="Weather Underground" label="Weather Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="31884" end="31894" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327892" start="31977" end="31997" title="Mordechaj Anielewicz" label="Mordechaj Anielewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="32000" end="32015" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="32019" end="32057" title="Dragoljub &amp;quot;Draža&amp;quot; Mihailović" label="Dragoljub &amp;quot;Draža&amp;quot; Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339372" start="32061" end="32082" title="Edmund Charaszkiewicz" label="Edmund Charaszkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="32085" end="32102" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72908" start="32105" end="32120" title="Mildred Harnack" label="Mildred Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="32123" end="32133" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743159" start="32136" end="32150" title="Henryk Iwański" label="Henryk Iwański"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289171" start="32153" end="32167" title="Marcel Louette" label="Marcel Louette"/>
<link wikidata="Q524200" start="32170" end="32179" title="Max Manus" label="Max Manus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632" start="32182" end="32193" title="Jean Moulin" label="Jean Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q661825" start="32196" end="32212" title="Christian Pineau" label="Christian Pineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q448486" start="32215" end="32228" title="Hannie Schaft" label="Hannie Schaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q693729" start="32231" end="32248" title="Aris Velouchiotis" label="Aris Velouchiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="32251" end="32261" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="32264" end="32279" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233" start="32282" end="32296" title="Sandro Pertini" label="Sandro Pertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q701205" start="32299" end="32310" title="Luigi Longo" label="Luigi Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q471315" start="32313" end="32328" title="Ferruccio Parri" label="Ferruccio Parri"/>
<link wikidata="Q315691" start="32331" end="32345" title="Witold Pilecki" label="Witold Pilecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q76972" start="32348" end="32361" title="Sophie Scholl" label="Sophie Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="32364" end="32378" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q562122" start="32381" end="32396" title="Gunnar Sønsteby" label="Gunnar Sønsteby"/>
<link wikidata="Q363392" start="32527" end="32538" title="Michel Aoun" label="Michel Aoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q181182" start="32541" end="32557" title="Hassan Nasrallah" label="Hassan Nasrallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208815" start="32560" end="32580" title="Buenaventura Durruti" label="Buenaventura Durruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="32583" end="32597" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="32600" end="32618" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="32621" end="32629" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="32632" end="32643" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q215737" start="32646" end="32652" title="Kim Ku" label="Kim Ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="32655" end="32665" title="Juan Peron" label="Juan Peron"/>
<link wikidata="Q960492" start="32668" end="32675" title="Lembitu" label="Lembitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271150" start="32678" end="32699" title="Louis Joseph Papineau" label="Louis Joseph Papineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47900" start="32702" end="32715" title="Nestor Makhno" label="Nestor Makhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561085" start="32718" end="32734" title="Maria Nikiforova" label="Maria Nikiforova"/>
<link wikidata="Q335165" start="32737" end="32744" title="Osceola" label="Osceola"/>
<link wikidata="Q312721" start="32747" end="32756" title="Red Cloud" label="Red Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="32759" end="32769" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387004" start="32772" end="32776" title="Juba (sniper)" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379323" start="32779" end="32789" title="Rummu Jüri" label="Rummu Jüri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284439" start="32792" end="32803" title="Osman Batur" label="Osman Batur"/>
<link wikidata="Q557341" start="32806" end="32830" title="Mohammed Abdullah Hassan" label="Mohammed Abdullah Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="32833" end="32854" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="32857" end="32888" title="Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale" label="Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079463" start="32891" end="32901" title="Ülo Voitka" label="Ülo Voitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="32904" end="32916" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="32919" end="32934" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="32937" end="32952" title="Ernesto Guevara" label="Ernesto Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q305952" start="32955" end="32970" title="Abbas al-Musawi" label="Abbas al-Musawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319799" start="32973" end="32985" title="Russel Means" label="Russel Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q439054" start="32988" end="33003" title="Leonard Peltier" label="Leonard Peltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="33006" end="33016" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="33019" end="33034" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q439152" start="33037" end="33044" title="Cochise" label="Cochise"/>
<link wikidata="Q714490" start="33047" end="33064" title="William Quantrill" label="William Quantrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="33067" end="33078" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="33081" end="33089" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="33092" end="33104" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754270" start="33107" end="33119" title="Maqbool Bhat" label="Maqbool Bhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="33122" end="33136" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="33139" end="33151" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="33154" end="33166" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q460856" start="33169" end="33184" title="Mangas Colorado" label="Mangas Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="33187" end="33203" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q43958" start="33206" end="33212" title="El Cid" label="El Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="33215" end="33233" title="Lawrence of Arabia" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957888" start="33236" end="33255" title="Charlemagne Peralte" label="Charlemagne Peralte"/>
<link wikidata="Q184634" start="33258" end="33265" title="Boudica" label="Boudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="33268" end="33279" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83406" start="33282" end="33291" title="Spartacus" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301" start="33294" end="33308" title="Charles Martel" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q329730" start="33311" end="33321" title="Nat Turner" label="Nat Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="33324" end="33344" title="Toussaint Louverture" label="Toussaint Louverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212068" start="33347" end="33370" title="Jean-Jacques Dessalines" label="Jean-Jacques Dessalines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087806" start="33373" end="33383" title="Sans-Souci" label="Sans-Souci"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="33386" end="33400" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="33403" end="33418" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="33421" end="33437" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355169" start="33440" end="33453" title="Little Turtle" label="Little Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="33456" end="33470" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616969" start="33473" end="33488" title="Marvin Heemeyer" label="Marvin Heemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044668" start="33491" end="33514" title="Republic of Rose Island" label="Republic of Rose Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q51991992" start="33517" end="33547" title="Blocking of Telegram in Russia" label="Blocking of Telegram in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645210" start="33550" end="33572" title="List of whistleblowers" label="List of whistleblowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="33589" end="33597" title="Anti-war" label="Anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="33600" end="33615" title="Anti-capitalism" label="Anti-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="33618" end="33632" title="Anti-communism" label="Anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="33635" end="33647" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="33650" end="33666" title="Anti-imperialism" label="Anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="33669" end="33687" title="Asymmetric warfare" label="Asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="33690" end="33707" title="People&amp;#x27;s war" label="People&amp;#x27;s war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109572" start="33710" end="33726" title="Civil resistance" label="Civil resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="33729" end="33750" title="Civil rights movement" label="Civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="33753" end="33769" title="Collaborationism" label="Collaborationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="33775" end="33788" title="Collaboration" label="Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944071" start="33820" end="33831" title="Covert cell" label="Covert cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043192" start="33834" end="33858" title="Definitions of terrorism" label="Definitions of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251489" start="33861" end="33872" title="Defensivism" label="Defensivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446577" start="33875" end="33916" title="Fictional resistance movements and groups" label="Fictional resistance movements and groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="33919" end="33931" title="Fifth column" label="Fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="33997" end="34014" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="Guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="34017" end="34027" title="Insurgency" label="Insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673189" start="34030" end="34048" title="Irregular military" label="Irregular military"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621937" start="34051" end="34069" title="List of guerrillas" label="List of guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q142330" start="34072" end="34106" title="List of revolutions and rebellions" label="List of revolutions and rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="34109" end="34130" title="Nonviolent resistance" label="Nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098650" start="34133" end="34159" title="Opposition to the Iraq War" label="Opposition to the Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="34162" end="34191" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="Opposition to the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="34194" end="34213" title="Partisan (military)" label="Partisan (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="34216" end="34235" title="Polish Secret State" label="Polish Secret State"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="34238" end="34248" title="Protesting" label="Protesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="34251" end="34261" title="Propaganda" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="34264" end="34279" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="34282" end="34291" title="Rebellion" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364639" start="34294" end="34313" title="Reclaim the Streets" label="Reclaim the Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315614" start="34316" end="34343" title="Resistance Studies Magazine" label="Resistance Studies Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="34346" end="34350" title="Riot" label="Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="34353" end="34366" title="Social change" label="Social change"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="34369" end="34375" title="Sniper" label="Sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974176" start="34378" end="34405" title="Special Activities Division" label="Special Activities Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="34408" end="34436" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342628" start="34439" end="34461" title="Unconventional warfare" label="Unconventional warfare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83934" wikidata="Q2419495" url="?curid=83934" title="Norwegian resistance movement">
<text>The Norwegian resistance (Norwegian: &quot;Motstandsbevegelsen&quot;) to the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany began after Operation Weserübung in 1940 and ended in 1945. It took several forms:

*Asserting the legitimacy of the exiled government, and by implication the lack of legitimacy of Vidkun Quisling&#x27;s pro-Nazi regime and Josef Terboven&#x27;s military administration
*The initial defence in Southern Norway, which was largely disorganised, but succeeded in allowing the government to escape capture
*The more organised military defence and counter-attacks in parts of Western and Northern Norway, aimed at securing strategic positions and the evacuation of the government
*Armed resistance, in the form of sabotage, commando raids, assassinations and other special operations during the occupation
*Civil disobedience and unarmed resistance

==Asserting legitimacy of exiled Norwegian government==
The Norwegian government of Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold, with the exception of foreign minister Halvdan Koht and minister of defence Birger Ljungberg, was largely caught by surprise when it became apparent in the early hours of 9 April 1940 that Nazi Germany had launched an invasion of Norway. Although some of the country&#x27;s gold reserve had already been removed from Oslo, there were few contingency plans for such an invasion.

The Norwegian government was unprepared and unwilling to capitulate to the ultimatum timed to coincide with the arrival of German troops and delivered by Curt Bräuer, the German representative in Oslo. The German demand that Norway accept the &quot;protection of the Reich&quot; was rebuffed by Koht and the Norwegian government before dawn had broken on the morning of invasion. &quot;Vi gir oss ikke frivillig, kampen er allerede i gang&quot;, replied Koht. &quot;We will not submit voluntarily; the struggle is already underway.&quot;

Anticipating German efforts to capture the government, the entire Norwegian parliament (the &quot;Storting&quot;), the royal family, and cabinet hastily evacuated Oslo by train and car to Hamar and then on to Elverum, where an extraordinary session of parliament was called. In large part because of the presence of mind of the parliament&#x27;s president C. J. Hambro, the &quot;Storting&quot; managed to pass an emergency measure (known as the Elverum Authorization) that gave full authority to the king and his cabinet until the Storting could convene again.

This gave King Haakon VII and the cabinet constitutional authority to reject the German emissary&#x27;s ultimatum to accept the German invasion. Although there were several German attempts to capture or kill the King and the Norwegian government, they managed to evade these attempts and travelled through Norway&#x27;s remote interior until leaving the country for London on the British heavy cruiser on 7 June.
Reserving the constitutional legitimacy of the Norwegian government also undermined Vidkun Quisling&#x27;s attempts at claiming the Norwegian government for himself. After Quisling had proclaimed his assumption of the government, several individuals on the Supreme Court took the initiative to establish an Administrative Council (&quot;Administrasjonsrådet&quot;) in an effort to stop him. This became a controversial initiative, in that the legitimate Norwegian government refused to give the council any legal backing, and the German authorities ended up disbanding it.

==Initial defence==
Although some politicians across the political spectrum had advocated strengthening the country&#x27;s defence capabilities, a longstanding policy of disarmament following World War I had left the Norwegian military underfunded and undertrained by the late 1930s. As a result, forces in Southern Norway were largely unprepared for the German invasion, and the invading German army met little initial resistance.

There was also spirited defence seen at other locations, including Midtskogen, Hegra and Narvik but these were largely the result of improvised missions by isolated military units and irregular volunteers. The battles slowed the German advance by several days, allowing the Norwegian government to evade capture and conduct critical constitutional business.

The British and French began landing on Norwegian soil within a week of the German invasion.

==Counter-attacks==
Several Norwegian military units that had mobilised as a precautionary measure in Northern Norway during the Winter War, in cooperation with Polish, French and British forces, launched several counterattacks with moderate success. Allied forces had several successes in Northern Norway, but were redirected for the futile defense of France. While Northern Norway ultimately fell, efforts there allowed the Norwegian government, including the Norwegian royal family, to escape and maintain the legitimate government in exile, as part of the Allies.

While on station in London, the government contributed to Norwegian forces with the Allied effort and ordered the Norwegian Merchant Fleet to assist in troop transportation. To expedite this ships operated under the Nortraship organisation, which at that time was the world&#x27;s largest shipping company. It created apprehension among the Nazi leadership that Allied forces might try to recapture Norway with the intention of denying German naval units access to the North Atlantic, tying up several hundred thousand troops that otherwise might have been deployed to other fronts.

==Armed resistance==
Although Norway did not have any major battles beyond those of the Norwegian Campaign, a number of military operations served to subvert the Nazi authorities and contribute to the larger war effort. Milorg started out as a small sabotage unit and ended up building a full military force in time for the liberation. Company Linge was a special operations unit that specialised in coastal insertions and combat. There were repeated raids in Lofoten, Måløy, and other coastal areas.

Norwegian spotters aided in the destruction of numerous German warships, such as the battleships and . The Norwegian resistance also smuggled people in and out of Norway during the war, through Sweden or by fishing boats to Shetland, nicknamed the &quot;Shetland bus&quot;. A number of saboteurs, most notably Max Manus and Gunnar Sønsteby, destroyed ships and supplies. Perhaps its most famous achievements were a series of operations to destroy Norsk Hydro&#x27;s heavy water plant and stockpile of heavy water at Vemork, crippling the German nuclear programme. The Germans attempted to stifle Resistance activities and executed several innocent Norwegian men, women, and children in retaliation after any Resistance act. Probably the worst act of reprisal was the assault on the fishing village of Telavåg in the spring of 1942.

To assist with the sabotage campaign, the United States sent OSS forces, including future CIA director William Colby, into Norway to support resistance. In the mid-1980s, it was revealed that Sweden aided the Norwegian resistance movement with training and equipment in a series of camps along the Norwegian border. To avoid suspicion, they were camouflaged as police training camps. By 1944, some 7,000–8,000 men had been secretly trained in Sweden.

During the Liberation of Finnmark from 1944 to 1945, 1,442 police troops from Sweden would be flown in to assist the Soviets and Free Norwegian Forces. In addition to forces brought in from abroad, local troops were also recruited.

Intelligence gathering within occupied Norway was very much needed for the Allied forces, and several organizations were established for this, the largest and most efficient of which was called XU. Established by Arvid Storsveen, its members were students from the University of Oslo. One interesting fact was that two of its four leaders were young women, among them Anne-Sofie Østvedt.

One of the leading sabotage organisations in Norway during most of World War II was the communist Osvald Group led by Asbjørn Sunde.

During the war years, the resistance movement in occupied Norway had 1,433 members killed, of whom 255 were women.

==Civil disobedience==
The first mass outbreak of civil disobedience occurred in the autumn of 1940, when students of Oslo University began to wear paper clips on their lapels to demonstrate their resistance to the German occupiers and their Norwegian collaborators. A seemingly innocuous item, the paper clip was a symbol of solidarity and unity (&quot;we are bound together&quot;), implying resistance. The wearing of paper clips, the popular H7 monogram and similar symbols (red garments, Bobble hats) was outlawed and could lead to arrest and punishment.

Of lesser military importance was the distribution of illegal newspapers (often with news items culled from Allied news broadcasts; possession of radios was illegal). The purpose of this was twofold: it counteracted Nazi propaganda, and it maintained nationalistic, anti-German feelings in the population at large. It has been suggested that combating the illegal press expended German resources out of proportion to the illegal media&#x27;s actual effects.

Finally, there was the attempt at maintaining an &quot;ice front&quot; against the German soldiers. This involved, among other things, never speaking to a German if it could be avoided (many pretended to speak no German, though it was then almost as prevalent as English is now) and refusing to sit beside a German on public transport. The latter was so annoying to the occupying German authorities that it became illegal to stand on a bus if seats were available.

Nazi authorities (both German and Norwegian) attempted to pressure school teachers into supporting the regime and its propaganda. Wages were withheld, and on 20 March 1942, 1100 male teachers were arrested, of which 642 were sent to Arctic Norway doing forced labour.

Towards the end of the war, the resistance became more open, with rudimentary military organizations set up in the forests around the larger cities. A number of Nazi collaborators and officials were killed, and those collaborating with the German or Quisling authorities were ostracized, both during and after the war.

The Norwegian Resistance Museum, at Akershus Fortress, Oslo, gives a good account of the activities of the Norwegian resistance movement.

==See also==

*Allied campaign in Norway
*Flight of the Norwegian National Treasury
*Free Norwegian Forces
*H7 (monogram)
*Milorg
*No. 10 (Inter-Allied) Commando
*Norway&#x27;s Resistance Museum
*Norwegian heavy water sabotage
*Norwegian Independent Company 1
*Operation Archery
*Oslo Gang
*Tarnschriften
*They Raid by Night
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===

==Further reading==
* Baard Herman Borge &amp; Lars-Erik Vaale (2020) &quot;Stretching the Rule of Law: How the Norwegian resistance movement influenced the provisional treason decrees of the exile government, 1944–1945.&quot; &quot;Scandinavian Journal of History&quot;.
* Herrington, Ian. &quot;Special Operations in Norway: SOE and Resistance in World War II&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, 2019) online book review
* Lovell, Stanley P. (1963), &quot;Of Spies and Stratagems&quot;, New York: Prentice Hall.

==External links==

*Norway&#x27;s Resistance Museum
*Archival papers of Dr. Christian Bay and his involvement in the Norwegian resistance movement in WWII held at the University of Toronto Archives and Records Management Services</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="4" end="24" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="26" end="35" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="77" end="97" title="German occupation of Norway" label="occupation of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="101" end="113" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="126" end="146" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Operation Weserübung"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="213" end="223" title="Legitimacy (political science)" label="legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="231" end="248" title="Government in exile" label="exiled government"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="295" end="310" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616953" start="318" end="333" title="Quisling regime" label="pro-Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q57874" start="338" end="352" title="Josef Terboven" label="Josef Terboven"/>
<link wikidata="Q335200" start="360" end="383" title="Reichskommissariat Norwegen" label="military administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q648851" start="408" end="423" title="Southern Norway" label="Southern Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q127598" start="585" end="592" title="Western Norway" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q214041" start="597" end="612" title="Northern Norway" label="Northern Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="690" end="706" title="Armed resistance" label="Armed resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="723" end="731" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="733" end="741" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="816" end="834" title="Civil disobedience" label="Civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="839" end="857" title="unarmed resistance" label="unarmed resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q317659" start="958" end="976" title="Johan Nygaardsvold" label="Johan Nygaardsvold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367562" start="1017" end="1029" title="Halvdan Koht" label="Halvdan Koht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438328" start="1054" end="1070" title="Birger Ljungberg" label="Birger Ljungberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1167" end="1179" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q215678" start="1511" end="1522" title="Curt Bräuer" label="Curt Bräuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="1994" end="2002" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="2015" end="2027" title="Haakon VII" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738335" start="2084" end="2089" title="Hamar" label="Hamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q109140" start="2105" end="2112" title="Elverum" label="Elverum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039034" start="2252" end="2264" title="Carl Joachim Hambro (1885-1964)" label="C. J. Hambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772590" start="2342" end="2363" title="Elverum Authorization" label="Elverum Authorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="2469" end="2484" title="Haakon VII" label="King Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2825" end="2831" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="2847" end="2860" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="2956" end="2971" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q331662" start="3616" end="3627" title="disarmament" label="disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3638" end="3649" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="3801" end="3816" title="Operation Weserübung" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061048" start="3946" end="3956" title="Battle of Midtskogen" label="Midtskogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871202" start="3958" end="3963" title="Battle of Hegra Fortress" label="Hegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q708217" start="3968" end="3974" title="Battles of Narvik" label="Narvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642655" start="4352" end="4384" title="6th Division (Norway)" label="Several Norwegian military units"/>
<link wikidata="Q214041" start="4434" end="4449" title="Nord-Norge" label="Northern Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="4461" end="4471" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="4674" end="4691" title="Battle of France" label="defense of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418613" start="4794" end="4816" title="Norwegian royal family" label="Norwegian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4921" end="4927" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770539" start="5117" end="5127" title="Nortraship" label="Nortraship"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="5370" end="5384" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="5573" end="5591" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norwegian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q708871" start="5705" end="5711" title="Milorg" label="Milorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780769" start="5821" end="5834" title="Norwegian Independent Company 1" label="Company Linge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5927" end="5941" title="British Commandos#Some World War II operations" label="repeated raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q186822" start="5945" end="5952" title="Lofoten" label="Lofoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q980129" start="5954" end="5959" title="Måløy" label="Måløy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="6050" end="6057" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="6211" end="6219" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427618" start="6241" end="6253" title="Shetland bus" label="Shetland bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q524200" start="6297" end="6306" title="Max Manus" label="Max Manus"/>
<link wikidata="Q562122" start="6311" end="6326" title="Gunnar Sønsteby" label="Gunnar Sønsteby"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="6402" end="6422" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="series of operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q511031" start="6434" end="6445" title="Norsk Hydro" label="Norsk Hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155890" start="6453" end="6464" title="heavy water" label="heavy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296772" start="6503" end="6509" title="Vemork" label="Vemork"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="6525" end="6549" title="German nuclear weapon project" label="German nuclear programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="6737" end="6745" title="reprisal" label="reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q663421" start="6788" end="6795" title="Telavåg" label="Telavåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="6881" end="6884" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q482827" start="6923" end="6936" title="William Colby" label="William Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7012" end="7018" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772020" start="7181" end="7202" title="Norwegian police troops in Sweden during World War II" label="police training camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020001" start="7283" end="7305" title="Liberation of Finnmark" label="Liberation of Finnmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060994" start="7401" end="7422" title="Free Norwegian Forces" label="Free Norwegian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357353" start="7699" end="7701" title="XU" label="XU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802447" start="7718" end="7733" title="Arvid Storsveen" label="Arvid Storsveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="7770" end="7788" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768104" start="7873" end="7891" title="Anne-Sofie Østvedt" label="Anne-Sofie Østvedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117525" start="7992" end="8004" title="Osvald Group" label="Osvald Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794642" start="8012" end="8025" title="Asbjørn Sunde" label="Asbjørn Sunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="8262" end="8277" title="Oslo University" label="Oslo University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353" start="8292" end="8303" title="paper clips" label="paper clips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628873" start="8589" end="8600" title="H7 (monogram)" label="H7 monogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q795738" start="8636" end="8646" title="Bobble hat" label="Bobble hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839607" start="8758" end="8776" title="Underground media in German-occupied Europe" label="illegal newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="8812" end="8818" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="8920" end="8935" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="9376" end="9382" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="9426" end="9433" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="9481" end="9497" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="10064" end="10076" title="Collaborationism" label="collaborator"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="10174" end="10184" title="Shunning" label="ostracized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781522" start="10222" end="10249" title="Norway&amp;#x27;s Resistance Museum" label="Norwegian Resistance Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q644464" start="10254" end="10271" title="Akershus Fortress" label="Akershus Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="10273" end="10277" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="10372" end="10397" title="Allied campaign in Norway" label="Allied campaign in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896625" start="10399" end="10440" title="Flight of the Norwegian National Treasury" label="Flight of the Norwegian National Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060994" start="10442" end="10463" title="Free Norwegian Forces" label="Free Norwegian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628873" start="10465" end="10478" title="H7 (monogram)" label="H7 (monogram)"/>
<link wikidata="Q708871" start="10480" end="10486" title="Milorg" label="Milorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042854" start="10488" end="10518" title="No. 10 (Inter-Allied) Commando" label="No. 10 (Inter-Allied) Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781522" start="10520" end="10551" title="Norway&amp;#x27;s Resistance Museum" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s Resistance Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="10553" end="10583" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="Norwegian heavy water sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780769" start="10585" end="10616" title="Norwegian Independent Company 1" label="Norwegian Independent Company 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964451" start="10618" end="10635" title="Operation Archery" label="Operation Archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355145" start="10637" end="10646" title="Oslo Gang" label="Oslo Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686468" start="10648" end="10661" title="Tarnschriften" label="Tarnschriften"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783751" start="10663" end="10681" title="They Raid by Night" label="They Raid by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q22234122" start="11313" end="11326" title="Christian Bay" label="Christian Bay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83936" wikidata="Q1671378" url="?curid=83936" title="Interstate 76">
<text>Interstate 76 or I-76 may refer to:

==Transportation==
* Interstate 76 (Colorado–Nebraska) (I-76), US
* Interstate 76 (Ohio–New Jersey) (I-76), running through Pennsylvania, US
* Japanese submarine &quot;I-76&quot;, later renamed Japanese submarine &quot;I-176&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Interstate &#x27;76&quot;, a vehicular combat video game for Windows

==See also==
* Ilyushin Il-76 (Il-76), a Soviet aircraft
* Illinois Route 76 (IL 76), Illinois, US</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1671378" start="0" end="13" title="Interstate 76" label="Interstate 76"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671378" start="17" end="21" title="Interstate 76" label="I-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q94732" start="58" end="91" title="Interstate 76 (Colorado–Nebraska)" label="Interstate 76 (Colorado–Nebraska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94752" start="105" end="136" title="Interstate 76 (Ohio–New Jersey)" label="Interstate 76 (Ohio–New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884878" start="180" end="215" title="Japanese submarine I-76" label="Japanese submarine &amp;quot;I-76&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431368" start="292" end="311" title="Interstate &amp;#x27;76" label="Interstate &amp;#x27;76"/>
<link wikidata="Q142549" start="377" end="391" title="Ilyushin Il-76" label="Ilyushin Il-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068635" start="421" end="438" title="Illinois Route 76" label="Illinois Route 76"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83938" wikidata="Q157146" url="?curid=83938" title="French Resistance">
<text>The French Resistance () was a collection of groups that fought the Nazi occupation and the collaborationist Vichy regime in France during the Second World War. Resistance cells were small groups of armed men and women (called the Maquis in rural areas) who conducted guerrilla warfare and published underground newspapers. They also provided first-hand intelligence information, and escape networks that helped Allied soldiers and airmen trapped behind Axis lines. The Resistance&#x27;s men and women came from many parts of French society, including émigrés, academics, students, aristocrats, conservative Roman Catholics (including clergy), Protestants, Jews, Muslims, liberals, anarchists, communists, and some fascists. The proportion of French people who participated in organized resistance has been estimated at from one to three percent of the total population.

The French Resistance played a significant role in facilitating the Allies&#x27; rapid advance through France following the invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944. Members provided military intelligence on German defences known as the Atlantic Wall, and on Wehrmacht deployments and orders of battle for the Allies&#x27; invasion of Provence on 15 August. The Resistance also planned, coordinated, and executed sabotage acts on electrical power grids, transport facilities, and telecommunications networks. The Resistance&#x27;s work was politically and morally important to France during and after the German occupation. The actions of the Resistance contrasted with the collaborationism of the Vichy régime.

After the Allied landings in Normandy and Provence, the paramilitary components of the Resistance formed a hierarchy of operational units known as the French Forces of the Interior (FFI) with around 100,000 fighters in June 1944. By October 1944, the FFI had grown to 400,000 members. Although the amalgamation of the FFI was sometimes fraught with political difficulties, it was ultimately successful and allowed France to rebuild the fourth-largest army in the European theatre (1.2 million men) by VE Day in May 1945.
==Nazi occupation==


After the Battle of France and the second French-German armistice, the lives of the French continued unchanged at first. The German occupation authorities and the Vichy régime became increasingly brutal and intimidating. Most civilians remained neutral, but both the occupation of French territory and German policy inspired the formation of paramilitary groups dedicated to both active and passive resistance.

One of the conditions of the armistice was that the French must pay for their own occupation. This amounted to about 20 million German Reichsmarks per day, a sum that, in May 1940, was approximately equivalent to four hundred million French francs. The artificial exchange rate of the Reichsmark versus the franc had been established as one mark to twenty francs. Due to the overvaluation of German currency, the occupiers were able to make seemingly fair and honest requisitions and purchases while operating a system of organized plunder. Prices soared, leading to widespread food shortages and malnutrition, particularly among children, the elderly, and members of the working class engaged in physical labour. Labour shortages also plagued the French economy because hundreds of thousands of French workers were requisitioned and transferred to Germany for compulsory labour under the &quot;Service du Travail Obligatoire&quot; (STO).

The labour shortage was worsened by the large number of French prisoners of war held in Germany. Beyond these hardships and dislocations, the occupation became increasingly unbearable. Regulations, censorship, propaganda and nightly curfews all played a role in establishing an atmosphere of fear and repression. French women consorting with German soldiers angered many French men, though often the women had to do so to acquire food for themselves and their families.

As reprisals for Resistance activities, the authorities established harsh forms of collective punishment. For example, the Soviet resistance in August 1941 led to thousands of hostages taken from the population. A typical policy statement read, &quot;After each further incident, a number, reflecting the seriousness of the crime, shall be shot.&quot; During the occupation, an estimated 30,000 French civilian hostages were shot to intimidate others who were involved in acts of resistance. German troops occasionally engaged in massacres such as the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre, in which an entire village was razed and almost every resident murdered because of persistent resistance in the vicinity.

In early 1943, the Vichy authorities created a paramilitary group, the &quot;Milice&quot; (militia), officially led by Pierre Laval, but operated by Joseph Darnand to combat the Resistance. This group worked alongside German forces that, by the end of 1942, were stationed throughout France. The group collaborated closely with the Nazis, similar to the Gestapo security forces in Germany. Their actions were often brutal and included torture and execution of Resistance suspects. After the liberation of France in the summer of 1944, the French executed many of the estimated 25,000 to 35,000 &quot;miliciens&quot; for their collaboration with the Nazis. Many of those who escaped arrest fled to Germany, where they were incorporated into the Charlemagne Division of the Waffen SS.

==History==
The Occupation was hard for the French to accept. Many Parisians remember the shock at seeing swastika flags hanging over the Hôtel de Ville and on top of the Eiffel Tower. At the Palais-Bourbon, where the National Assembly building was converted into the office of the &quot;Kommandant von Gross-Paris&quot;, a huge banner was spread across the facade of the building reading in capital letters: &quot;DEUTSCHLAND SIEGT AN ALLEN FRONTEN!&quot; (&quot;Germany is victorious on all fronts!&quot;), a sign that is mentioned by virtually all accounts by Parisians at the time. The &quot;résistant&quot; Henri Frenay wrote about seeing the tricolour flag disappear from Paris with the swastika flag flying in its place and German soldiers standing guard in front of buildings that once housed the institutions of the republic gave him &quot;un sentiment de viol&quot; (&quot;a feeling of rape&quot;). The British historian Ian Ousby wrote:

Ousby wrote that by the end of summer of 1940 &quot; the alien presence, increasingly hated and feared in private, could seem so permanent that, in the public places where daily life went on, it was taken for granted&quot;. At the same time, buildings were renamed, books banned, art was stolen and transferred to Germany and people started to disappear. Under the armistice of June 1940, the French were obliged to arrest and deport to the &quot;Reich&quot; those Germans and Austrians who fled to France in the 1930s.

Resistance when it first began in the summer of 1940 was based upon what the writer Jean Cassou called &quot;refus absurde&quot; (&quot;absurd refusal&quot;) of refusing to accept that the &quot;Reich&quot; would win and even if it did, it was better to resist. Many &quot;résistants&quot; often spoke of some &quot;climax&quot; when they saw some intolerable act of injustice, after which they could no longer remain passive. The &quot;résistant&quot; Joseph Barthelet told the British SOE agent George Miller that he made up his mind to join the resistance when he saw German military police march a group of Frenchmen, one of whom was a friend, into the &quot;Feldgendarmerie&quot; in Metz. Barthelt recalled: &quot;I recognized him only by his hat... I saw his face all right, but there was no skin on it, and he could not see me. Both his poor eyes had been closed into two purple and yellow bruises&quot;. The right-wing &quot;résistant&quot; Henri Frenay who had initially sympathized with the &quot;Révolution nationale&quot; stated that when he saw German soldiers in Paris in the summer of 1940, he knew he had to do something because of the look of contempt he saw on the faces of the Germans when viewing the French. In the beginning, resistance was limited to severing phone lines, vandalizing posters and slashing tyres on German vehicles. Another tactic was the publication of underground newspapers like &quot;Musée de l&#x27;Homme&quot; (Museum of Mankind). This paper was established by two professors, Paul Rivet and the Russian émigré Boris Vildé in July 1940. Jean Cassou also organized a resistance group in Paris that month and a liberal Catholic law professor François de Menthon founded the group &quot;Liberté&quot; in Lyon.

On 19 July 1940 the Special Operations Executive (SOE) was established in Britain with orders from Churchill to &quot;set Europe ablaze&quot;. The F Section of the SOE was headed by Maurice Buckmaster and provided invaluable support for the resistance. From May 1941, Frenay founded &quot;Combat&quot;, one of the first Resistance groups. Frenay recruited for &quot;Combat&quot; by asking people such questions as whether they believed that Britain would not be defeated and if they thought a German victory was worth stopping, and based on the answers he would ask: &quot;Men are already gathering in the shadows. Will you join them?&quot;. Frenay, one of the leading resistance &quot;chefs&quot;, later wrote: &quot;I myself never attacked a den of collaborators or derailed trains. I never killed a German or a Gestapo agent with my own hand&quot;. For security reasons, &quot;Combat&quot; was divided into a series of cells that were unaware of each other. Another early resistance group founded in the summer of 1940 was the ill-fated &quot;Interallié&quot; group led by a Polish émigré Roman Czerniawski that passed on intelligence from contacts in the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot; to Britain via couriers from Marseille. A member of the group, Frenchwoman Mathilde Carré codenamed &quot;La Chatte&quot; (the cat), was later arrested by the Germans and betrayed the group.

The French intelligence service, the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot; stayed loyal to the Allied cause despite nominally being under the authority of Vichy; the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot; continued to collect intelligence on Germany, maintained links with British and Polish intelligence and kept the secret that before World War II Polish intelligence had devised a method via a mechanical computer known as the &quot;Bombe&quot; to break the Enigma machine that was used to code German radio messages. A number of the Polish code-breakers who developed the &quot;Bombe&quot; machine in the 1930s continued to work for the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot; as part of the Cadix team breaking German codes. In the summer of 1940, many &quot;cheminots&quot; (railroad workers) engaged in impromptu resistance by helping French soldiers wishing to continue the struggle together with British, Belgian and Polish soldiers stranded in France escape from the occupied zone into the unoccupied zone or Spain. &quot;Cheminots&quot; also became the main agents for delivering underground newspapers across France.

The first &quot;résistant&quot; executed by the Germans was a Polish Jewish immigrant named Israël Carp, shot in Bordeaux on 28 August 1940 for jeering a German military parade down the streets of Bordeaux. The first Frenchman shot for resistance was 19 year-old Pierre Roche, on 7 September 1940 after he was caught cutting the phone lines between Royan and La Rochelle. On 10 September 1940, the military governor of France, General Otto von Stülpnagel announced in a press statement that no mercy would be granted to those engaging in sabotage and all saboteurs would be shot. Despite his warning, more continued to engage in sabotage. Louis Lallier, a farmer, was shot for sabotage on 11 September in Épinal, and Marcel Rossier, a mechanic, was shot in Rennes on 12 September. One more was shot in October 1940, and three more in November 1940.
Starting in the summer of 1940 anti-Semitic laws started to come into force in both the occupied and unoccupied zones. On 3 October 1940 Vichy introduced the law on the status of Jews, banning Jews from numerous professions including law, medicine and public service. Jewish businesses were &quot;Aryanized&quot; by being placed in the hands of &quot;Aryan&quot; trustees who engaged in blatant corruption. Jews were banned from cinemas, music halls, fairs, museums, libraries, public parks, cafes, theatres, concerts, restaurants, swimming pools and markets. Jews could not move without informing the police first, own radios or bicycles, were denied phone service, could not use phone booths marked &quot;Accès interdit aux Juifs&quot; and were only allowed to ride the last carriage on the Paris Metro. The French people at the time distinguished between &quot;Israélites&quot; (a polite term in French) who were &quot;properly&quot; assimilated French Jews and the &quot;Juifs&quot; (formerly a derogatory term in French, nowadays the standard name for Jewish people) who were the &quot;foreign&quot; and &quot;unassimilated&quot; Jews who were widely seen as criminals from abroad living in slums in the inner cities of France. All through the 1930s, the number of illegal Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe was vastly exaggerated. The French public was persuaded that the majority of Jews living in France were illegal immigrants causing social problems. When the first anti-Semitic laws were introduced in 1940: &quot;There was no sign of public opposition to what was happening, or even widespread unease at the direction in which events were heading ... Many people, perhaps even most people, were indifferent. In the autumn of 1940 they had other things to think about; later they could find little room for fellow-feeling or concern for the public good in their own struggle to survive. What happened to the Jews was a secondary matter; it was beyond their immediate affairs, it belonged to that realm of the &#x27;political&#x27; which they could no longer control or even bring themselves to follow with much interest&quot;.

From the beginning, the Resistance attracted people from all walks of life and with diverse political views. A major problem for the Resistance was that, with the exception of a number of Army officers who chose to go underground together with veterans of the Spanish Civil War, nobody had any military experience. About 60,000 Spanish Republican exiles fought in the Resistance. A further difficulty was the shortage of weapons, which explained why early resistance groups founded in 1940 focused on publishing journals and underground newspapers as the lack of guns and ammunition made armed resistance almost impossible. Although officially adhering to the Comintern instructions not to criticise Germany because of the Soviet non-aggression pact with Hitler, in October 1940 the French Communists founded the &quot;Special Organisation&quot; (OS), composed with many veterans from the Spanish Civil War, which carried out a number of minor attacks before Hitler broke the treaty and invaded Russia.

Life in the Resistance was highly dangerous and it was imperative for good &quot;resistants&quot; to live quietly and never attract attention to themselves. Punctuality was key to meetings in public as the Germans would arrest anyone who was seen hanging around in public as if waiting for someone. A major difficulty for the Resistance was the problem of denunciation. Contrary to popular belief, the Gestapo was not an omnipotent agency with its spies everywhere, but instead the Gestapo relied upon ordinary people to volunteer information. According to Abwehr officer Hermann Tickler, the Germans needed 32 000 &quot;indicateurs&quot; (informers) to crush all resistance in France, but he reported in the fall of 1940 that the Abwehr had already exceeded that target. It was difficult for Germans to pass themselves off as French, so the Abwehr, the Gestapo and the SS could not have functioned without French informers. In September 1940, the poet Robert Desnos published an article titled &quot;&quot;J&#x27;irai le dire à la Kommandantur&quot; in the underground newspaper &quot;Aujourd&#x27;hui&quot; appealing to ordinary French people to stop denouncing each other to the Germans. Desnos&#x27;s appeal failed, but the phrase &quot;J&#x27;irai le dire à la Kommandantur&quot;&quot; (&quot;I&#x27;ll go and tell the Germans about it&quot;) was a very popular one in occupied France as hundreds of thousands of ordinary French people denounced one another to the Germans. The problem of informers, whom the French called &quot;indics&quot; or &quot;mouches&quot;, was compounded by the writers of poison pen letters or &quot;corbeaux&quot;. These &quot;corbeaux&quot; were inspired by motivations such as envy, spite, greed, anti-Semitism, and sheer opportunism, as many ordinary French people wanted to ingratiate themselves with what they believed to be the winning side. Ousby noted &quot;Yet perhaps the most striking testimony to the extent of denunciation came from the Germans themselves, surprised at how ready the French were to betray each other&quot;. In occupied France, one had to carry at all times a huge cache of documents such as an ID card, a ration card, tobacco voucher (regardless if one was a smoker or not), travel permits, work permits, and so on. For these reasons, forgery became a key skill for the resistance as the Germans regularly required the French to produce their papers, and anyone whose papers seemed suspicious would be arrested.

As the franc was devalued by 20% to the &quot;Reichsmark&quot;, which together with German policies of food requisition both to support their own army and the German home front, &quot;France was slowly being bled dry by the outflow not just of meat and drink, fuel and leather, but of wax, frying pans, playing cards, axe handles, perfume and a host of other goods as well. Parisians, at least, had got the point as early as December 1940. When Hitler shipped back the Duc de Reichstadt&#x27;s remains for a solemn burial in Les Invalides, people said they would have preferred coal rather than ashes.&quot; People could not legally buy items without a ration book with the population being divided into categories A, B, C, E, J, T and V; among the products rationed included meat, milk, butter, cheese, bread, sugar, eggs, oil, coffee, fish, wine, soap, tobacco, salt, potatoes and clothing. The black market flourished in occupied France with the gangsters from the &quot;milieu&quot; (underworld) of Paris and Marseille soon becoming very rich by supplying rationed goods. The &quot;milieu&quot; established smuggling networks bringing in rationed goods over the Pyrenées from Spain, and it was soon learned that for the right price, they were also willing to smuggle people out of France like Allied airmen, refugees, Jews, and &quot;résistants&quot;. Later on in the war, they would smuggle in agents from the SOE. However, the &quot;milieu&quot; were only interested in making money, and would just as easily betray those who wanted to be smuggled in or out of France if the Germans or Vichy were willing to make a better offer.

On 10 November 1940, a jostle on the Rue de Havre in Paris broke out between some Parisians and German soldiers, which ended with a man raising his fist to a German sergeant, and which led to a man named Jacques Bonsergent, who seems only to have been a witness to the quarrel, being arrested in unclear circumstances. On 11 November 1940, to mark the 22nd anniversary of the French victory of 1918, university students demonstrated in Paris, and were brutally put down by the Paris police. In December 1940, the &quot;Organisation civile et militaire&quot; (OCM), which consisted of army officers and civil servants, was founded to provide intelligence to the Allies.

On 5 December 1940, Bonsergent was convicted by a German military court of insulting the Wehrmacht. He insisted on taking full responsibility, saying he wanted to show the French what sort of people the Germans were, and he was shot on 23 December 1940. The execution of Bonsergent, a man guilty only of being a witness to an incident that was in itself only very trivial, brought home to many of the French the precise nature of the &quot;New Order in Europe&quot;. All over Paris, posters warning that all who challenged the might of the Reich would be shot like Bonsergent were torn down or vandalized, despite the warnings from General von Stülpnagel that damaging the posters was an act of sabotage that would be punished by the death penalty; so many posters were torn down and/or vandalized that Stülpnagal had to post policemen to guard them. Writer Jean Bruller remembered being &quot;transfixed&quot; by reading about Bonsergent&#x27;s fate and how &quot;people stopped, read, wordlessly exchanged glances. Some of them bared their heads as if in the presence of the dead&quot;. On Christmas Day 1940, Parisians woke to find that in the previous night, the posters announcing Bonsergent&#x27;s execution had been turned into shrines, being in Bruller&#x27;s words &quot;surrounded by flowers, like on so many tombs. Little flowers of every kind, mounted on pins, had been struck on the posters during the night—real flowers and artificial ones, paper pansies, celluloid roses, small French and British flags&quot;. The writer Simone de Beauvoir stated that it was not just Bonsergent that people mourned, but also the end of the illusion &quot;as for the first time these correct people who occupied our country were officially telling us they had executed a Frenchman guilty of not bowing his head to them&quot;.

===1941: Armed resistance begins===
On 31 December 1940, de Gaulle, speaking on the BBC&#x27;s Radio Londres, asked that the French stay indoors on New Year&#x27;s Day between 3 and 4:00 pm as a show of passive resistance. The Germans handed out potatoes at that hour in an attempt to bring people away from their radios.

In March 1941, the Calvinist pastor Marc Boegner condemned the Vichy &quot;statut des Juifs&quot; in a public letter, one of the first times that French antisemitism had been publicly condemned during the occupation. On 5 May 1941, the first SOE agent (Georges Bégué) landed in France to make contact with the resistance groups (Virginia Hall was the first female SOE agent arriving in August 1941). The SOE preferred to recruit French citizens living in Britain or who had fled to the United Kingdom, as they were able to blend in more effectively; British SOE agents were people who had lived in France for a long time and could speak French without an accent. Bégué suggested that the BBC&#x27;s Radio Londres send personal messages to the Resistance. At 9:15 pm every night, the BBC&#x27;s French language service broadcast the first four notes of Beethoven&#x27;s Fifth Symphony (which sounded like the Morse code for V as in victory), followed by cryptic messages, which were codes for the &quot;personal messages&quot; to the resistance. By June 1941, the SOE had two radio stations operating in France. The SOE provided weapons, bombs, false papers, money and radios to the resistance, and the SOE agents were trained in guerrilla warfare, espionage and sabotage. One such SOE operative, American Virginia Hall, established the Heckler network in Lyon.

A major reason for young Frenchmen to become &quot;résistants&quot; was resentment of &quot;collaboration horizontale&quot; (&quot;horizontal collaboration&quot;), the euphemistic term for sexual relationships between German men and Frenchwomen. The devaluation of the franc and the German policy of requisitioning food created years of hardship for the French, so taking a German lover was a rational choice for many Frenchwomen. &quot;Horizontal collaboration&quot; was widespread, with 85,000 illegitimate children fathered by Germans born by October 1943. While this number isn&#x27;t particularly high for the circumstances, many young Frenchmen disliked the fact that some Frenchwomen seemed to find German men more attractive than them and wanted to strike back.

In Britain, the letter V had been adopted as a symbol of the will to victory, and in the summer of 1941, the V cult crossed the English Channel and the letter V appeared widely in chalk on the pavement, walls, and German military vehicles all over France. V remained one of the main symbols of resistance for the rest of the Occupation, although Ousby has noted that the French had their own &quot;revolutionary, republican, and nationalist traditions&quot; to draw upon for symbols of resistance. Starting in 1941, it was common for crowds to sing &quot;La Marseillaise&quot; on traditional holidays like May Day, Bastille Day, 6 September (the anniversary of the Battle of the Marne in 1914) and Armistice Day with a special emphasis on the line: &quot;&quot;Aux armes, citoyens&quot;!&quot; (Citizens to arms!). The underground press created what Ousby called &quot;the rhetoric of resistance to counter the rhetoric of the Reich and Vichy&quot; to inspire people, using sayings from the great figures of French history. The underground newspaper &quot;&quot; quoted Napoleon that &quot;To live defeated is to die every day!&quot;; &quot;Liberté&quot; quoted Foch that &quot;A nation is beaten only when it has accepted that it is beaten&quot; while &quot;Combat&quot; quoted Clemenceau: &quot;In war as in peace, those who never give up have the last word&quot;. The two most popular figures invoked by the resistance were Clemenceau and Maréchal Foch, who insisted even during the darkest hours of World War I that France would never submit to the &quot;Reich&quot; and would fight on until victory, which made them inspiring figures to the &quot;résistants&quot;.

On 22 June 1941, Germany launched Operation Barbarossa and invaded the Soviet Union. Well prepared for the resistance through the clandestinity in which they were forced during the Daladier government, the &quot;Parti Communiste Français&quot; (PCF) began fighting German occupation forces in May 1941, i.e. before the Comintern appeal that followed the German attack to the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, communists had a more prominent role in the resistance only after June 1941. As the Communists were used to operating in secret, were tightly disciplined, and had a number of veterans of the Spanish Civil War, they played a disproportionate role in the Resistance. The Communist resistance group was the FTP (&quot;Francs-Tireurs et Partisans Français&quot;-French Snipers and Partisans) headed by Charles Tillon. Tillon later wrote that between June–December 1941 the RAF carried out 60 bombing attacks and 65 strafing attacks in France, which killed a number of French people, while the FTP, during the same period, set off 41 bombs, derailed 8 trains and carried out 107 acts of sabotage, which killed no French people. In the summer of 1941, a brochure appeared in France entitled &quot;Manuel du Légionnaire&quot;, which contained detailed notes on how to fire guns, manufacture bombs, sabotage factories, carry out assassinations, and perform other skills useful to the resistance. The brochure was disguised as informational material for fascistic Frenchmen who had volunteered for the Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism on the Eastern Front; it took the occupation authorities some time to realize that the manual was a Communist publication meant to train the FTP for actions against them.

On 21 August 1941, a French Communist, Pierre Georges, assassinated the German naval officer Anton Moser in the Paris Metro, the first time the resistance had killed a German. The German Military Governor General Otto von Stülpnagel had three people shot in retaliation, none of whom were connected to his killing. General Stülpnagel announced on 22 August 1941 that for every German killed, he would execute at least ten innocent French people, and that all Frenchmen in German custody were now hostages. On 30 September 1941, Stülpnagel issued the &quot;Code of Hostages&quot;, ordering all district chiefs to draw up lists of hostages to be executed in the event of further &quot;incidents&quot;, with an emphasis on French Jews and people known for Communist or Gaullist sympathies. On 20 October 1941, Oberstleutnant Karl Friedrich Hotz, the &quot;Feldkommandant&quot; of Nantes, was assassinated on the streets of Nantes; the military lawyer Dr. was assassinated in Bordeaux on 21 October. In retaliation the Wehrmacht shot 50 unconnected French people in Nantes, and announced that if the assassin did not turn himself in by midnight of 23 October, another 50 would be shot. The assassin did not turn himself in, and so another 50 hostages were shot, among them Léon Jost, a former Socialist deputy and one-legged veteran of the First World War, who was serving a three-year prison sentence for helping Jews to escape into Spain. The same day, the &quot;Feldkommandant&quot; of Bordeaux had 50 French hostages shot in that city in retaliation for Reimers&#x27;s assassination. The executions in Nantes and Bordeaux started a debate about the morality of assassination that lasted until the end of the occupation; some French argued that since the Germans were willing to shoot so many innocent people in reprisal for killing only one German that it was not worth it, while others contended that to cease assassinations would prove that the Germans could brutally push the French around in their own country. General de Gaulle went on the BBC&#x27;s French language service on 23 October to ask that PCF to call in their assassins, saying that killing one German would not change the outcome of the war and that too many innocent people were being shot by Germans in reprisals. As the PCF did not recognize de Gaulle&#x27;s authority, the Communist assassins continued their work under the slogan &quot;an eye for an eye&quot;, and so the Germans continued to execute between 50 and 100 French hostages for every one of their number assassinated.

As more resistance groups started to appear, it was agreed that more could be achieved by working together than apart. The chief promoter of unification was a former &quot;préfet&quot; of Chartres, Jean Moulin. After identifying the three largest resistance groups in the south of France that he wanted to see co-operate, Moulin went to Britain to seek support. Moulin made a secret trip, visiting Lisbon on 12 September 1941, from whence he traveled to London to meet General de Gaulle on 25 October 1941. De Gaulle named Moulin his representative in France, and ordered him to return and unify all Resistance groups and have them recognize the authority of de Gaulle&#x27;s Free French National Committee in London, which few resistance groups did at the time. To lend further support, in October 1941 de Gaulle founded the BCRA (&quot;Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&#x27;Action&quot; – Central Office for Intelligence and Action) under André Dewavrin, who used the codename &quot;Colonel Passy&quot; to provide support for the Resistance. Though the BCRA was based in an office in Duke Street in London, its relations with the SOE were often strained, as de Gaulle made no secret of his dislike of British support for the resistance groups, which he saw as British meddling in France&#x27;s domestic affairs. Tensions between Gaullist and non-Gaullist resistance groups led to the SOE dividing its F section in two, with the RF section providing support for Gaullist groups and the F section dealing with the non-Gaullist groups.

British SOE agents parachuted into France to help organize the resistance often complained about what they considered the carelessness of the French groups when it came to security. A favorite tactic of the Gestapo and the Abwehr was to capture a &quot;résistant&quot;, &quot;turn&quot; him or her to their side, and then send the double agent to infiltrate the resistance network. Numerous resistance groups were destroyed by such double agents, and the SOE often charged that the poor security arrangements of the French resistance groups left them open to being destroyed by one double agent. For example, the &quot;Interallié&quot; group was destroyed when Carré was captured and turned by Abwehr Captain Hugo Bleicher on 17 November 1941, as she betrayed everyone. The same month, Colonel Alfred Heurtaux of the OCM was betrayed by an informer and arrested by the Gestapo. In November 1941, Frenay recruited Jacques Renouvin, whom he called an &quot;experienced brawler&quot;, to lead the new &quot;Groupes Francs&quot; paramilitary arm of the &quot;Combat&quot; resistance group. Renouvin taught his men military tactics at a secret boot camp in the countryside in the south of France and led the &quot;Groupes Francs&quot; in a series of attacks on collaborators in Lyon and Marseille. Frenay and Renouvin wanted to &quot;blind&quot; and &quot;deafen&quot; the French police by assassinating informers who were the &quot;eyes&quot; and &quot;ears&quot; of the police. Renouvin, who was a known &quot;tough guy&quot; and experienced killer, personally accompanied &quot;résistants&quot; on their first assassinations to provide encouragement and advice. If the would-be assassin was unable to take a life, Renouvin would assassinate the informer himself, then berate the would-be assassin for being a &quot;sissy&quot; who was not tough enough for the hard, dangerous work of the Resistance.

On 7 December 1941, the &quot;Nacht und Nebel&quot; decree was signed by Hitler, allowing the German forces to &quot;disappear&quot; anyone engaged in resistance in Europe into the &quot;night and fog&quot;. During the war, about 200,000 French citizens were deported to Germany under the &quot;Nacht und Nebel&quot; decree, about 75,000 for being &quot;résistants&quot;, half of whom did not survive. After Germany declared war on the United States on 11 December 1941, the SOE was joined by the American Office of Strategic Services (OSS) to provide support for the resistance. In December 1941, after the industrialist Jacques Arthuys, the chief of the OCM, was arrested by the Gestapo, who later executed him, leadership of the OCM was assumed by Colonel Alfred Touny of the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot;, which continued to provide intelligence to the Free French leaders in exile in Britain. Under the leadership of Touny, the OCM became one of the Allies&#x27; best sources of intelligence in France.

===1942: The struggle intensifies===
On the night of 2 January 1942, Moulin parachuted into France from a British plane with orders from de Gaulle to unify the Resistance and to have all of the resistance accept his authority. On 27 March 1942, the first French Jews were rounded up by the French authorities, sent to the camp at Drancy, then on to Auschwitz to be killed. In April 1942, the PCF created an armed wing of its &quot;Main d&#x27;Oeuvre Immigrée&quot; (&quot;Migrant Workforce&quot;) representing immigrants called the FTP-MOI under the leadership of Boris Holban, who came from the Bessarabia region, which belonged alternately to either Russia or Romania. On 1 May 1942, May Day, which Vichy France had tried to turn into a Catholic holiday celebrating St. Philip, Premier Pierre Laval was forced to break off his speech when the crowd began to chant &quot;Mort à Laval&quot; (death to Laval).

As millions of Frenchmen serving in the French Army had been taken prisoner by the Germans in 1940, there was a shortage of men in France during the Occupation, which explains why Frenchwomen played so a prominent role in the Resistance, with the &quot;résistante&quot; Germaine Tillion later writing: &quot;It was women who kick-started the Resistance.&quot; In May 1942, speaking before a military court in Lyon, the &quot;résistante&quot; Marguerite Gonnet, when asked about why she had taken up arms against the Reich, replied: &quot;Quite simply, colonel, because the men had dropped them.&quot; In 1942, the Royal Air Force (RAF) attempted to bomb the Schneider-Creusot works at Lyon, which was one of France&#x27;s largest arms factories. The RAF missed the factory and instead killed around 1,000 French civilians. Two Frenchmen serving in the SOE, Raymond Basset (codename Mary) and André Jarrot (codename Goujean), were parachuted in and were able to repeatedly sabotage the local power grid to sharply lower production at the Schneider-Creusot works. Frenay, who had emerged as a leading &quot;résistant&quot;, recruited the engineer Henri Garnier living in Toulouse to teach French workers at factories producing weapons for the Wehrmacht how best to drastically shorten the lifespan of the Wehrmacht&#x27;s weapons, usually by making deviations of a few millimetres, which increased strain on the weapons; such acts of quiet sabotage were almost impossible to detect, which meant no French people would be shot in reprisal.

To maintain contact with Britain, Resistance leaders crossed the English Channel at night on a boat, made their way via Spain and Portugal, or took a &quot;spy taxi&quot;, as the British Lysander aircraft were known in France, which landed on secret airfields at night. More commonly, contact with Britain was maintained via radio. The Germans had powerful radio detection stations based in Paris, Brittany, Augsburg, and Nuremberg that could trace an unauthorized radio broadcast to within of its location. Afterwards, the Germans would send a van with a radio detection equipment to find the radio operator, so radio operators in the Resistance were advised not to broadcast from the same location for long. To maintain secrecy, radio operators encrypted their messages using polyalphabetic ciphers. Finally, radio operators had a security key to begin their messages with; if captured and forced to radio Britain under duress, the radio operator would not use the key, which tipped London off that they had been captured.

On 29 May 1942 it was announced that all Jews living in the occupied zone had to wear a yellow star of David with the words &quot;Juif&quot; or &quot;Juive&quot; at all times by 7 June 1942. Ousby described the purpose of the yellow star &quot;not just to identify but also to humiliate, and it worked&quot;. On 14 June 1942, a 12-year-old Jewish boy committed suicide in Paris as his classmates were shunning the boy with the yellow star. As a form of quiet protest, many Jewish veterans started to wear their medals alongside the yellow star, which led the Germans to ban the practice as &quot;inappropriate&quot;, as it increased sympathy for men who fought and suffered for France. At times, ordinary people would show sympathy for Jews; as a Scot married to a Frenchman, Janet Teissier du Cros wrote in her diary about a Jewish woman wearing her yellow star of David going shopping:

By 1942, the Paris &quot;Kommandantur&quot; was receiving an average of 1,500 poison pen letters from &quot;corbeaux&quot; wishing to settle scores, which kept the occupation authorities informed about what was happening in France. One of these &quot;corbeaux&quot;, a Frenchwoman displaying the typically self-interested motives of her ilk, read:

In the spring of 1942, a committee consisting of SS &quot;Hauptsturmführer&quot; Theodor Dannecker, the Commissioner for Jewish Affairs Louis Darquier de Pellepoix, and general secretary of the police René Bousquet began planning a &quot;grande rafle&quot; (great round-up) of Jews to deport to the death camps. On the morning of 16 July 1942, the &quot;grande rafle&quot; began with 9,000 French policemen rounding up the Jews of Paris, leading to some 12,762 Jewish men, women and children being arrested and brought to the Val d&#x27;Hiv sports stadium, from where they were sent to the Drancy camp and finally Auschwitz. The &quot;grand rafle&quot; was a Franco-German operation; the overwhelming majority of those who arrested the Jews were French policemen. Some 100 Jews warned by friends in the police killed themselves, while 24 Jews were killed resisting arrest. One Jewish Frenchwoman, Madame Rado, who was arrested with her four children, noted about the watching bystanders: &quot;Their expressions were empty, apparently indifferent.&quot; When taken with the other Jews to the Place Voltaire, one woman was heard to shout &quot;Well done! Well done!&quot; while the man standing to her warned her &quot;After them, it&#x27;ll be us. Poor people!&quot;. Rado survived Auschwitz, but her four children were killed in the gas chambers.

Cardinal Pierre-Marie Gerlier of Lyon, a staunch antisemite who had supported Vichy&#x27;s efforts to solve the &quot;Jewish question&quot; in France, opposed the &quot;rafles&quot; of Jews, arguing in a sermon that the &quot;final solution&quot; was taking things too far; he felt it better to convert Jews to Roman Catholicism. Archbishop Jules-Géraud Saliège of Toulouse, in a pastoral letter of 23 August 1942, declared: &quot;You cannot do whatever you wish against these men, against these women, against these fathers and mothers. They are part of mankind. They are our brothers.&quot; Pastor Marc Boegner, president of the National Protestant Federation, denounced the &quot;rafles&quot; in a sermon in September 1942, asking Calvinists to hide Jews. A number of Catholic and Calvinist schools and organizations such as the Jesuit Pierre Chaillet&#x27;s &quot;l&#x27;Amitié Chrétienne&quot; took in Jewish children and passed them off as Christian. Many Protestant families, with memories of their own persecution, had already begun to hide Jews, and after the summer of 1942, the Catholic Church, which until then had been broadly supportive of Vichy&#x27;s antisemitic laws, began to condemn antisemitism, and organized efforts to hide Jews. The official story was that the Jews were being &quot;resettled in the East&quot;, being moved to a &quot;Jewish homeland&quot; somewhere in Eastern Europe. As the year continued, the fact that no one knew precisely where this Jewish homeland was, together with the fact that those sent to be &quot;resettled&quot; were never heard from again, led more and more people to suspect that rumors of the Jews being exterminated were true.

Ousby argued that, given the widespread belief that the Jews in France were mostly illegal immigrants from Eastern Europe who ought to be sent back to where they came from, it was remarkable that so many ordinary people were prepared to attempt to save them. Perhaps the most remarkable example was the effort of the Calvinist couple André and Magda Trocmé, who brought together an entire commune, Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, to save between 800 and 1,000 Jews. The Jews in France, whether they were &quot;Israélites&quot; or immigrant &quot;Juifs&quot;, had begun the occupation discouraged and isolated, cut off and forced to become &quot;absent from the places they lived in. Now, as the threat of absence become brutally literal, their choices were more sharply defined, more urgent even than for other people in France.&quot; As an example of the &quot;differing fates&quot; open to French Jews from 1942 onward, Ousby used the three-part dedication to the memoir Jacques Adler wrote in 1985: the first part dedicated to his father, who was killed at Auschwitz in 1942; the second to the French family who sheltered his mother and sister, who survived the Occupation; and the third to the members of the Jewish resistance group Adler joined later in 1942.

As in World War I and the Franco-Prussian War, the Germans argued that those engaging in resistance were &quot;bandits&quot; and &quot;terrorists&quot;, maintaining that all &quot;Francs-tireurs&quot; were engaging in illegal warfare and therefore had no rights. On 5 August 1942, three Romanians belonging to the FTP-MOI tossed grenades into a group of Luftwaffe men watching a football game at the Jean-Bouin Stadium in Paris, killing eight and wounding 13. The Germans claimed three were killed and 42 wounded; this let them execute more hostages, as Field Marshal Hugo Sperrle demanded three hostages be shot for every dead German and two for each of the wounded. The Germans did not have that many hostages in custody and settled for executing 88 people on 11 August 1942. The majority of those shot were communists or relatives of communists, along with the father and father-in-law of Pierre Georges and the brother of the communist leader Maurice Thorez. A number were Belgian, Dutch, and Hungarian immigrants to France; all went before the firing squads singing the French national anthem or shouting &quot;Vive la France!&quot;, a testament to how even the communists by 1942 saw themselves as fighting for France as much as for world revolution.

Torture of captured &quot;résistants&quot; was routine. Methods of torture included beatings, shackling, being suspended from the ceiling, being burned with a blowtorch, allowing dogs to attack the prisoner, being lashed with ox-hide whips, being hit with a hammer, or having heads placed in a vice, and the &quot;baignoire&quot;, whereby the victim was forced into a tub of freezing water and held nearly to the point of drowning, a process repeated for hours. A common threat to a captured &quot;résistant&quot; was to have a loved one arrested or a female relative or lover sent to the Wehrmacht field brothels. The vast majority of those tortured talked. At least 40,000 French died in such prisons. The only way to avoid torture was to be &quot;turned&quot;, with the Germans having a particular interest in turning radio operators who could compromise an entire Resistance network. Captured &quot;résistants&quot; were held in filthy, overcrowded prisons full of lice and fleas and fed substandard food or held in solitary confinement.

On 1 December 1942, a new resistance group, the ORA, &quot;Organisation de résistance de l&#x27;armée&quot; (Army Resistance Organization), was founded. The ORA was headed by General Aubert Frère and recognized General Henri Giraud as France&#x27;s leader. For a time in 1942–1943, there were two rival leaders of the Free French movement in exile: General Giraud, backed by the United States, and General de Gaulle, backed by Great Britain. For these reasons, the ORA had bad relations with the Gaullist resistance while being favored by the OSS, as the Americans did not want de Gaulle as France&#x27;s postwar leader. By the end of 1942, there were 278 sabotage actions in France vs. 168 Anglo-American bombings in France.

===1943: A mass movement emerges===
On 26 January 1943, Moulin persuaded the three main resistance groups in the south of France—&quot;Franc-Tireur&quot;, &quot;Liberation&quot; and &quot;Combat&quot;—to unite as the MUR (&quot;Mouvements Unis de Résistance&quot; or United Resistance Movement), whose armed wing was the AS (&quot;Armée Secrète&quot; or Secret Army). The MUR recognised General de Gaulle as the leader of France and selected General Charles Delestraint (codename Vidal) as the commander of the AS. Moulin followed this success by contacting resistance groups in the north such as &quot;Ceux de la Résistance&quot;, &quot;Ceux de la Libération&quot;, &quot;Comité de Coordination de Zone Nord&quot;, and &quot;Libération Nord&quot; to ask to join.

Reflecting the growth of the Resistance, on 30 January 1943, the &quot;Milice&quot; was created to hunt down the &quot;résistants,&quot; although initially that was only one of the &quot;Milice&quot;″s tasks; it was first presented as an organisation to crack down on the black market. The &quot;Milice&quot;, commanded by Joseph Darnand, was a mixture of fascists, gangsters, and adventurers with a &quot;sprinkling of the respectable bourgeoisie and even the disaffected aristocracy&quot; committed to fight to the death against the &quot;Jews, Communists, Freemasons and Gaullists&quot;; the oath of those who joined required to them to commit to work for the destruction in France of the &quot;Jewish leprosy&quot;, the Gaullists and the Communists. The &quot;Milice&quot; had 29,000 members, of whom 1,000 belonged to the elite &quot;Francs-Gardes&quot; and wore a uniform of khaki shirts, black berets, black ties, blue trousers and blue jackets. Their symbol was the white gamma, the zodiacal sign of the Ram, symbolising renewal and power. The Germans did not want any of the French to be armed, even collaborators, and initially refused to provide the &quot;Milice&quot; with weapons.

On 16 February 1943, the &quot;Service du Travail Obligatoire&quot; (STO) organisation was created, requiring able-bodied Frenchmen to work in Germany. In the &quot;Reich&quot;, with so many men called up for service with the Wehrmacht and the Nazi régime reluctant to have German women work in factories (Hitler believed working damaged a woman&#x27;s womb), the German state brought foreign workers to Germany to replace the men serving in the Wehrmacht. At the Dora works near the Buchenwald concentration camp, about 10,000 slave workers, mostly French and Russian, built V2 rockets in a vast subterranean factory; they lived in quarters meant to house only 2,500, were allowed to sleep only four and half hours every night, and were regularly brutalised by the guards. The chief pleasure of the slaves was urinating on the machinery when the guards were not looking. The underground press gave much coverage to the conditions at the Dora works, pointing out those Frenchmen who went to work in Germany were not paid the generous wages promised by the Organisation Todt and instead were turned into slaves, all of which the underground papers used as reasons for why the French should not go to work in Germany. Under the law of 16 February 1943, all able-bodied Frenchmen aged 20–22 who were not miners, farmers or university students had to report to the STO to do two years labour in Germany.

As the occupation went on, service with the STO was widened, with farmers and university students losing their exempt status until 1944, when all fit men aged 18–60 and women aged 18–45 were being called up for service with the STO. Men over 45 and women serving in the STO were guaranteed not to go to Germany and many were put to work building the Atlantic Wall for the Organisation Todt, but had no way of knowing where they would go. The so-called &quot;réfractaires&quot; attempted to avoid being called up and often went into hiding rather work for the &quot;Reich&quot;. At least 40,000 Frenchmen (80% of the resistance were people under thirty) fled to the countryside, becoming the core of the &quot;maquis&quot; guerrillas. They rejected the term &quot;réfractaire&quot; with its connotations of laziness and called themselves the &quot;maquis&quot;, which originated as Corsican Italian slang for bandits, whose root word was &quot;macchia&quot;, the term for the scrubland and forests of Corsica. Those who lived in the &quot;macchia&quot; of Corsica were usually bandits, and those men fleeing to the countryside chose the term &quot;maquis&quot; as a more romantic and defiant term than &quot;réfractaire&quot;. By June 1943, the term &quot;maquis,&quot; which had been a little-known word borrowed from the Corsican dialect of Italian at the beginning of 1943, became known all over France. It was only in 1943 that guerilla warfare emerged in France as opposed to the more sporadic attacks against the Germans that had continued since the summer of 1941, and the Resistance changed from an urban movement to a rural movement, most active in central and southern France.

Fritz Sauckel, the General Plenipotentiary for Labour Deployment and the man in charge of bringing slaves to German factories, demanded the flight of young men to the countryside be stopped and called the &quot;maquis&quot; &quot;terrorists&quot;, &quot;bandits&quot; and &quot;criminals&quot;. One of every two French people called to serve in the STO failed to do so. Sauckel had been ordered by Hitler in February 1943 to produce half a million workers from France for German industry by March, and it was he who had pressured Laval to create the STO with the law of 16 February 1943. Sauckel had joined the NSDAP in 1923, making him an &quot;Alter Kämpfer&quot; (Old Fighter), and like many other &quot;Alte Kämpfer&quot; (who tended to be the most extreme Nazis), Sauckel was a hard man. Despite warnings from Laval, Sauckel took the view that he was ordered by Albert Speer to produce a quota of slaves for German industry, that the men joining the &quot;maquis&quot; were sabotaging German industry by fleeing to the countryside, and the solution was simply to kill them all. Sauckel believed that once the &quot;maquis&quot; were wiped out, Frenchmen would obediently report to the STO and go to work in Germany. When Laval was presented with Sauckel&#x27;s latest demand for French labor for German industry, he remarked: &quot;Have you been sent by de Gaulle?&quot;. Laval argued the &quot;réfractaires&quot; were not political opponents and should not be treated as such, arguing that an amnesty and a promise that the &quot;réfractaires&quot; would not be sent as slaves to Germany would nip the budding &quot;maquis&quot; movement.

As Laval predicted, the hardline policies that Sauckel advocated turned the basically apolitical &quot;maquis&quot; political, driving them straight into the resistance as the &quot;maquisards&quot; turned to the established resistance groups to ask for arms and training. Sauckel decided that if Frenchmen would not report to the STO, he would have the Todt organisation use the &quot;shanghaillage&quot; (shanghaiing), storming into cinemas to arrest the patrons or raiding villages in search of bodies to turn into slaves to meet the quotas. Otto Abetz, the Francophile German ambassador to Vichy, had warned that Sauckel was driving the &quot;maquis&quot; into the resistance with his hardline policies and joked to Sauckel that the &quot;maquis&quot; should put up a statue of him with the inscription &quot;To our number one recruitment agent&quot;. The French called Sauckel &quot;the slave trader&quot;. Furthermore, as Laval warned, the scale of the problem was beyond Vichy&#x27;s means to solve. The &quot;prefets&quot; of the departments of the Lozère, the Hérault, the Aude, the Pyrénées-Orientales and Aveyron had been given a list of 853 &quot;réfractaires&quot; to arrest, and managed during the next four months to arrest only 1 &quot;réfractaire&quot;.

After the Battle of Stalingrad, which ended with the destruction of the entire German 6th Army in February 1943, many had started to doubt the inevitability of an Axis victory, and most French gendarmes were not willing to hunt the down the &quot;maquis&quot;, knowing that they might be tried for their actions if the Allies won. Only the men of the &quot;Groupe mobile de réserve&quot; paramilitary police were considered reliable, but the force was too small to hunt down thousands of men. As the Germans preferred to subcontract the work of ruling France to the French while retaining ultimate control, it was the &quot;Milice&quot; that was given the task of destroying the &quot;maquis&quot;. The &quot;Milice&quot; was in Ousby&#x27;s words &quot;Vichy&#x27;s only instrument for fighting the &quot;Maquis&quot;. Entering the popular vocabulary at more or less the same time, the words &quot;maquis&quot; and &quot;milice&quot; together defined the new realities: the one a little-known word for the back country of Corsica, which became a synonym for militant resistance; the other a familiar word meaning simply &quot;militia&quot;, which became a synonym for militant repression. The &quot;Maquis&quot; and the &quot;Milice&quot; were enemies thrown up by the final chaos of the Occupation, in a sense twins symbiotically linked in a final hunt.&quot;

The established Resistance groups soon made contact with the &quot;maquis&quot;, providing them with paramilitary training. Frenay remembered:

The terrain of central and southern France with its forests, mountains, and shrubland were ideal for hiding. The Germans could not spare thousands of men to hunt the &quot;maquis&quot; down, and instead sent spotter planes to find them. The &quot;maquis&quot; were careful about concealing fires and could usually avoid aerial detection. The only other way of breaking up the &quot;maquis&quot; bands was to send in a spy, which was highly dangerous work as the &quot;maquisards&quot; would execute infiltrators. Joining the men fleeing the service with the STO were others targeted by the &quot;Reich&quot;, such as Jews, Spanish Republican refugees, and Allied airmen shot down over France. One &quot;maquis&quot; band in the Cévennes region consisted of German communists who had fought in the Spanish Civil War and fled to France in 1939. Unlike the urban resistance groups that emerged in 1940–42, who took political names such as &quot;Combat&quot;, &quot;Liberté&quot; or &quot;Libération&quot;, the &quot;maquis&quot; bands chose apolitical names, such as the names of animals (&quot;Ours&quot;, &quot;Loup&quot;, &quot;Tigre&quot;, &quot;Lion&quot;, &quot;Puma&quot;, &quot;Rhinocéros&quot; and &quot;Eléphant)&quot; or people (&quot;Maquis Bernard&quot;, the &quot;Maquis Socrate&quot;, the &quot;Maquis Henri Bourgogne,&quot; or one band whose leader was a doctor, hence the name &quot;Maquis le Doc)&quot;. The &quot;maquis&quot; bands that emerged in the countryside soon formed a subculture with its own slang, dress and rules. The most important &quot;maquis&quot; rule was the so-called &quot;24-hour rule&quot;, under which a captured &quot;maquisard&quot; had to hold out under torture for 24 hours to give time for his comrades to escape. An underground pamphlet written for young men considering joining the &quot;maquis&quot; advised:

Another pamphlet written for the &quot;maquis&quot; advised:

One &quot;maquisard&quot; recalled his first night out in the wilderness:

Ousby stated that the &quot;breathless prose&quot; in which this &quot;maqusiard&quot; remembered his first night out in the forest was typical of the &quot;maqusiards&quot; whose main traits were their innocence and naivety; many seemed not to understand just precisely who they were taking on or what they were getting themselves into by fleeing to the countryside.

Unlike the &quot;andartes,&quot; who were resisting Axis rule in Greece and preferred a democratic decision-making progress, the &quot;maquis&quot; bands tended to be dominated by a charismatic leader, usually an older man who was not a &quot;réfractaire;&quot; a &quot;chef&quot; who was commonly a community leader; somebody who before the war had been a junior political or military leader under the Third Republic; or somebody who had been targeted by the &quot;Reich&quot; for political or racial reasons. Regardless whether they had served in the military, the &quot;maquis chefs&quot; soon started calling themselves &quot;capitaines&quot; or &quot;colonels&quot;. The aspect of life in the &quot;maquis&quot; best remembered by veterans was their youthful idealism, with most of the &quot;maquisards&quot; remembering how innocent they were, seeing their escape into the countryside as a grand romantic adventure, by which, as Ousby observed, &quot;they were nervously confronting new dangers they barely understood; they were proudly learning new techniques of survival and battle. These essential features stand out in accounts by &quot;maquisards&quot; even after innocence had quickly given way to experience, which made them regard danger and discipline as commonplace.&quot; The innocence of the &quot;maquisards&quot; was reflected in the choice of names they took, which were usually whimsical and boyish names, unlike those used by the &quot;résistants&quot; in the older groups, which were always serious. The &quot;maquis&quot; had little in the way of uniforms, with the men wearing civilian clothing with a beret being the only common symbol of the &quot;maquis,&quot; as a beret was sufficiently common in France not to be conspicuous, but uncommon enough to be the symbol of a &quot;maquisard&quot;. To support themselves, the &quot;maquis&quot; took to theft, with bank robbery and stealing from the &quot;Chantiers de Jeunesse&quot; (the Vichy youth movement) being especially favored means of obtaining money and supplies. Albert Spencer, a Canadian airman shot down over France while on a mission to drop leaflets over France who joined the &quot;maquis,&quot; discovered the distinctive slang of the &quot;maquisards&quot;, learning that the leaflets he had been dropping over France were &quot;torche-culs&quot; (ass-wipes) in &quot;maquis&quot; slang.

As the &quot;maquis&quot; grew, the &quot;Milice&quot; was deployed to the countryside to hunt them down and the first &quot;milicien&quot; was killed in April 1943. As neither the &quot;maquis&quot; or the &quot;milice&quot; had many guns, the casualties were low at first, and by October 1943 the &quot;Milice&quot; had suffered only ten dead. The SOE made contact with the &quot;maquis&quot; bands, but until early 1944 the SOE were unable to convince Whitehall that supplying the Resistance should be a priority.

Until 1944, there were only 23 Halifax bombers committed to supplying Resistance groups for &quot;all&quot; of Europe, and many in the SOE preferred arming resistance groups in Yugoslavia, Italy and Greece rather than French ones. On 16 April 1943, the SOE agent Odette Sansom was arrested with her fellow SOE agent and lover Peter Churchill by the Abwehr Captain Hugo Bleicher. After her arrest, Sansom was tortured for several months, which she recounted in the 1949 book &quot;Odette: The Story of a British Agent.&quot; Sansom recalled:

On 26 May 1943, in Paris, Moulin chaired a secret meeting attended by representatives of the main resistance groups to form the CNR (&quot;Conseil National de la Résistance&quot;-National Council of the Resistance). With the National Council of the Resistance, resistance activities started to become more coordinated. In June 1943, a sabotage campaign began against the French rail system. Between June 1943 – May 1944, the Resistance damaged 1,822 trains, destroyed 200 passenger cars, damaged about 1,500 passenger cars, destroyed about 2,500 freight cars and damaged about 8,000 freight cars.

The &quot;résistant&quot; René Hardy had been seduced by the French Gestapo agent whose true loyalty was to her German lover, Gestapo officer Harry Stengritt. Hardy was arrested on 7 June 1943 when he walked into a trap laid by Bastien. After his arrest, Hardy was turned by the Gestapo as Bastien tearfully told him that she and her parents would all be sent to a concentration camp if he did not work for the Gestapo. Hardy was unaware that Bastien really loathed him and was only sleeping with him under Stengritt&#x27;s orders. On 9 June 1943, General Delestraint was arrested by the Gestapo following a tip-off provided by the double agent Hardy and was sent to the Dachau concentration camp. On 21 June 1943, Moulin called a secret meeting in Caluire-et-Cuire suburb of Lyon to discuss the crisis and try to find the traitor who betrayed Delestraint. At the meeting, Moulin and the rest were arrested by the Gestapo. Moulin was brutally tortured, but never talked. Moulin was beaten into a coma and died near or in the train station of Metz on 8 July 1943 as a result of brain damage. Moulin was not the only Resistance leader arrested in June 1943. That same month, General Aubert Frère, the leader of the ORA, was arrested and later executed.

In the summer of 1943, leadership of the FTP-MOI was assumed by an Armenian immigrant Missak Manouchian, who become so famous for organizing assassinations that the FTP-MOI came to be known to the French people as the &quot;Groupe Manouchian&quot;. In July 1943, the Royal Air Force attempted to bomb the Peugeot works at Sochaux, which manufactured tank turrets and engine parts for the Wehrmacht. The RAF instead hit the neighborhood next to the factory, killing hundreds of French civilians. To avoid a repeat, the SOE agent Harry Rée contacted industrialist Rudolphe Peugeot to see if he was willing to sabotage his own factory. To prove that he was working for London, Rée informed Peugeot that the BBC&#x27;s French language &quot;personal messages&quot; service would broadcast a message containing lines from a poem that Rée had quoted that night; after hearing the poem in the broadcast, Peugeot agreed to co-operate. Peugeot gave Rée the plans for the factory and suggested the best places to sabotage his factory without injuring anyone by selectively placing plastic explosives. The Peugeot works were largely knocked out in a bombing organised by Rée on 5 November 1943 and output never recovered. The Michelin family were approached with the same offer and declined. The RAF bombed the Michelin factory at Clermont-Ferrand—France&#x27;s largest tyre factory and a major source of tyres for the Wehrmacht—into the ground.

Despite the blow inflicted by arresting Moulin, by 1 October 1943 the AS had grown to 241,350 members, though most were still unarmed. For the most part, the AS refrained from armed operations as it was no match for the Wehrmacht. Instead the AS forced on preparing for &quot;Jour J,&quot; (D Day) when the Allies landed in France, after which the AS would begin action. In the meantime, the AS focused on training its members and conducting intelligence-gathering operations for the Allies. In October 1943, Joseph Darnand, the chief of the &quot;Milice&quot; who had long been frustrated at the unwillingness of the Germans to arm his force, finally won the trust of the &quot;Reich&quot; by taking a personal oath of loyalty to Hitler and being commissioned as a Waffen-SS officer together with 11 other &quot;Milice&quot; leaders. With that, the Germans started to arm the &quot;Milice&quot;, which turned its guns on the Resistance. The weapons the German provided the &quot;Milice&quot; with were mostly British weapons captured at Dunkirk in 1940, and as the &quot;maquis&quot; received many weapons from the SOE, it was often the case that in the clashes between &quot;Milice&quot; and the &quot;Maquis&quot;, Frenchmen fought Frenchmen with British guns and ammunition.

In October 1943, following a meeting between General Giraud and General de Gaulle in Algiers, orders went out for the AS and ORA to cooperate in operations against the Germans. One of the most famous Resistance actions took place on 11 November 1943 in the town of Oyonnax in the Jura Mountains, where about 300 &quot;maqusiards&quot; led by Henri Romans-Petit arrived to celebrate the 25th anniversary of France&#x27;s victory over Germany in 1918, wearing improvised uniforms. There were no Germans in Oyonnax that day and the gendarmes made no effort to oppose the Resistance, who marched through the streets to lay a wreath shaped like the Cross of Lorraine at a local war memorial bearing the message &quot;Les vainqueurs de demain à ceux de 14–18&quot; (&quot;From tomorrow&#x27;s victors to those of 14–18&quot;). Afterwards, the people of Oyonnax joined the &quot;maquisards&quot; in singing the French national anthem as they marched, an incident given much play on the BBC&#x27;s French language service about how one town had been &quot;liberated&quot; for a day. The next month, the SS arrested 130 Oyonnax residents and sent them to the concentration camps, shot the town&#x27;s doctor, and tortured and deported two other people, including the gendarme captain who failed to resist the &quot;maquis&quot; on 11 November. On 29 December 1943, the AS and the Communist FTP agreed to cooperate; their actions were controlled by the COMAC (&quot;Comité Militaire d&#x27;Action&quot;-Committee for Military Action), which in turn took its orders from the CNR. The Communists agreed to unity largely in the belief that they would obtain more supplies from Britain, and in practice the FTP continued to work independently. The SOE provided training for the Resistance; however, as the SOE agent Roger Miller noted after visiting a resistance workshop making bombs in late 1943:

===1944: The height of the Resistance===

By the beginning of 1944, the BCRA was providing the Allies with two intelligence assessments per day based on information provided by the Resistance. One of the BCRA&#x27;s most effective networks was headed by Colonel Rémy who headed the &quot;Confrérie de Notre Dame&quot; (Brotherhood of Notre Dame) which provided photographs and maps of German forces in Normandy, most notably details of the Atlantic Wall. In January 1944, following extensive lobbying by the SOE, Churchill was persuaded to increase by 35 the number of planes available to drop in supplies for the &quot;maquis&quot;. By February 1944, supply drops were up by 173%. The same month, the OSS agreed to supply the &quot;maquis&quot; with arms. Despite the perennial shortage of arms, by the early 1944 there were parts of rural areas in the south of France that were more under the control of the &quot;maquis&quot; than the authorities. By January 1944, a civil war had broken out with the &quot;Milice&quot; and &quot;maquis&quot; assassinating alternatively leaders of the Third Republic or collaborators that was to become increasingly savage as 1944 went on. The &quot;Milice&quot; were loathed by the resistance as Frenchmen serving the occupation and unlike the Wehrmacht and the SS, were not armed with heavy weapons nor were especially well trained, making them an enemy who could be engaged on more or less equal terms, becoming the preferred opponent of the &quot;Maquis&quot;. The men of the Wehrmacht were German conscripts whereas the &quot;Milice&quot; were French volunteers, thus explains why the &quot;résistants&quot; hated the &quot;Milice&quot; so much. On 10 January 1944, the &quot;Milice&quot; &quot;avenged&quot; their losses at the hands of the &quot;maquis&quot; by killing Victor Basch and his wife outside Lyon. The 80 year-old Basch was a French Jew, a former president of the League for the Rights of Men and had been a prominent &quot;dreyfusard&quot; during the Dreyfus affair, marking him out as an enemy of the &quot;New Order in Europe&quot; by his very existence, though the elderly pacifist Basch was not actually involved in the resistance. The &quot;milicien&quot; who killed Basch was an anti-Semitic fanatic named Joseph Lécussan who always kept a Star of David made of human skin taken from a Jew he killed earlier in his pocket, making him typical of the &quot;Milice&quot; by this time.

As the Resistance had not been informed of the details of Operation Overlord, many Resistance leaders had developed their own plans to have the &quot;maquis&quot; seize large parts of central and southern France, which would provide a landing area for Allied force to be known as &quot;Force C&quot; and supplies to be brought in, allowing &quot;Force C&quot; and the &quot;maquis&quot; to attack the Wehrmacht from the rear. The Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) had rejected this plan under the grounds that the disparity between the firepower and training of the Wehrmacht vs. the &quot;maquisards&quot; meant that the Resistance would be unable to hold their own in sustained combat. The &quot;maquis&quot; unaware of this tried to seize &quot;redoubts&quot; several times in 1944 with disastrous results. Starting in late January 1944, a group of &quot;maquisards&quot; led by Théodose Morel (codename Tom) began to assemble on the Glières Plateau near Annecy in the Haute-Savoie. By February 1944, the &quot;maquisards&quot; numbered about 460 and had only light weapons, but received much media attention with the Free French issuing a press release in London saying &quot;In Europe there are three countries resisting: Greece, Yugoslavia and the Haute-Savoie&quot;. The Vichy state sent the &quot;Groupes Mobiles de Réserve&quot; to evict the &quot;maquis&quot; from the Glières plateau and were repulsed. After Morel had been killed by a French policeman during a raid, command of the Maquis des Glières was assumed by Captain Maurice Anjot. In March 1944, the Luftwaffe started to bomb the &quot;maquisards&quot; on the Glières plateau and on 26 March 1944 the Germans sent in an Alpine division of 7,000 men together with various SS units and about 1,000 &quot;miliciens&quot;, making for about 10,000 men supported by artillery and air support which soon overwhelmed the &quot;maquisards&quot; whose lost about 150 killed in action and another 200 captured who were then shot. Anjot knew the odds against his &quot;maquis&quot; band were hopeless, but decided to take a stand to uphold French honor. Anjot himself was one of the &quot;maquisards&quot; killed on the Glières plateau.

In February 1944, all of the Resistance governments agreed to accept the authority of the Free French government based in Algiers (until 1962 Algeria was considered to be part of France) and the Resistance was renamed FFI (&quot;Forces Françaises de l&#x27;Intérieur&quot;-Forces of the Interior). The Germans refused to accept the Resistance as legitimate opponents and any &quot;résistant&quot; captured faced the prospect of torture and/or execution as the Germans maintained that the Hague and Geneva conventions did not apply to the Resistance. By designating the Resistance as part of the French armed forces was intended to provide the Resistance with legal protection and allow the French to threaten the Germans with the possibility of prosecution for war crimes. The designation did not help. For example, the &quot;résistante&quot; Sindermans was arrested in Paris on 24 February 1944 after she was found to be carrying forged papers. As she recalled: &quot;Immediately, they handcuffed me and took me to be interrogated. Getting no reply, they slapped in the face with such force that I fell from the chair. Then they whipped me with a rubber hose, full in the face. The interrogation began at 10 o&#x27;clock in the morning and ended at 11 o&#x27;clock that night. I must tell you I had been pregnant for three months&quot;.

As part of the preparations for Operation Overlord, Resistance attacks on the rail system increased with the Resistance in the first three months of 1944 damaging 808 locomotives compared to 387 damaged by air attack. Starting with the clearer weather in the spring, between April–June 1944 the Resistance damaged 292 locomotives compared to 1,437 damaged in air strikes. These statistics do not completely tell the story as Resistance sabotage attacks on the rail system in the first half of 1944 were so pervasive that the Germans had to import workers from the &quot;Reichsbahn&quot; (the German state railroad) and put soldiers on trains as they no longer trusted the &quot;Cheminots&quot;. On 23 March 1944, General Pierre Koenig was appointed commander of the FFI and flew to London from Algiers to co-ordinate the operations of the FFI at the SHAEF commanded by General Dwight Eisenhower at a section known as &quot;État Major des Forces Françaises de l&#x27;Intérieur&quot; (General Staff, French Forces of the Interior). The American and British officers at SHAEF distrusted the Resistance with the OSS agent William J. Casey writing that many in the Resistance appeared more interested in post-war politics than in fighting the Germans. Despite the mistrust, SHAEF planned to use the Resistance to tie down German forces. In April 1944, there were 331 drops of weapons by the SOE to the &quot;marquis&quot;, in May 531 drops and in June 866 drops. The most common weapon provided by the SOE was the Sten machine gun, which though inaccurate except at short ranges and prone to breakdown was cheap, light, easy to assemble and disassemble and required no special skills to use. Other weapons dropped by the SOE were the Webley revolver, the Bren machine gun, the Lee-Enfield rifle and the PIAT anti-tank grenade launcher while the OSS provided the M3 &quot;Greasegun&quot;, the Browning handgun, the M1 rifle and the bazooka anti-tank rocket launcher. In general, American weaponry was preferred to British weaponry, but the British-built Bren gun emerged as one of the favorite weapons of the resistance. Reflecting the importance of weapons, organizing supply drops was the main concern for the Resistance in the spring of 1944. André Hue, a dual citizen of France and the United Kingdom serving in the SOE who parachuted into Brittany to lead the Hillbilly resistance circuit recalled his principal duty in the spring of 1944 was organizing supply drops and attempting to avoid the Wehrmacht and the &quot;Milice&quot;. Hue had been born in Wales to a French father and a Welsh mother, and like many other Anglo-French dual citizens had volunteered for the SOE. The Communist FTP often complained that they were being starved of arms by the BCRA with Charles Tillon noting that the BCRA had organized hundreds of supply drops, of which only six were for the FTP.

The spring of 1944 is remembered in France as time of the &quot;mentalité terrible&quot;, the period of &quot;la guerre franco-française&quot; when the &quot;Milice&quot; and the &quot;Maquis&quot; fought one another without mercy. The &quot;Milice&quot; and &quot;maquis&quot; were caught up in ever-escalating cycle of violence with Ousby commenting: &quot;1944 had simply become the time for settling scores, any scores, for revenging grudges, any grudges. Agreed on this common imperative, the sides in the conflict blur and become almost indistinguishable from each other. The &quot;Milice&quot; hit squads pretended to be the &quot;Maquis&quot;; the &quot;Maquis&quot; hit squads pretended to be the &quot;Milice&quot;. Sometimes it was impossible to tell which was really which, and sometimes it hardly mattered&quot;. As it was starting to become more and more clear that the Allies were going to win the war, the &quot;Milice&quot; become more desperate and vicious as the knowledge that when the Allies won, the &quot;miliciens&quot; would be tried for treason if they were not killed first. This caused the &quot;Milice&quot; to engage in increasingly savage torture and killings of the &quot;maquisards&quot;. They hoped that they could annihilate all of their enemies before the Allies won. For their part, some of the &quot;maquisards&quot; struck back in kind against the &quot;Milice&quot;. In the town of Voiron, close to Grenoble, in April 1944, a &quot;Maquis&quot; assassination squad entered the home of the local &quot;Milice&quot; chief and killed him, his wife, their infant daughter, their 10-year-old son, and his 82-year-old mother. Outside the village of Saint-Laurent in the Haute-Savoie, a mass grave was discovered in May 1944 of eight gendarmes known for their loyalty to Vichy kidnapped by the &quot;Maquis&quot; from Bonneville who had been lined up and shot by their captors. The killing of the gendarmes was denounced by the chief collaborationist propagandist Philippe Henriot on the radio as the &quot;French Katyn&quot;, who used the killings as an example of the sort of &quot;Bolshevik terrorism&quot; that he maintained was typical of the resistance. In the south of France, the &quot;Maquis&quot; had started to form an alternative government to Vichy, which still controlled the French civil service. Georges Guingouin, the Communist &quot;maquis&quot; leader of the Maquis du Limousin in the Limousin region, styled himself a &quot;préfet&quot; and imposed his own system of rationing on the local farmers that flouted the rationing system imposed by Vichy. In the Auxois region, the &quot;Maquis Bernard&quot; had created its system of taxation with people being taxed on the basis of their willingness to collaborate with the authorities or support the resistance. When the British philosopher A. J. Ayer arrived in Gascony as a SOE agent in the spring of 1944, he described a power structure established by the &quot;maquis&quot; that placed power &quot;in the hands of a series of feudal lords whose power and influence were strangely similar to that of their fifteenth-century Gascon counterparts.&quot;

Reflecting their weakening power, the authorities grew harsher in their punishments. At the village of Ascq, close to Lille, 86 people were killed in the Ascq massacre on April 1, 1944, by the 12th Waffen SS Division &quot;Hitlerjugend&quot; (&quot;Hitler Youth&quot;). This massacre was committed in reprisal for resistance attacks on the railroads, the first of many &quot;villages martyrisés&quot; of 1944. Starting on May 20, 1944, there occurred another major clash between the Germans and the &quot;maquis&quot; at Mont Mouchet when the &quot;maquis&quot; seized another &quot;redoubt&quot; which led to overwhelming force being brought to bear against them. Émile Coulaudon, the chief of the FFI in the Auvergne, believed that continuing inaction was bad for morale and starting on May 20, 1944, began to concentrate the &quot;maquis&quot; at Mont Mouchet under the slogan &quot;Free France starts here!&quot; At Mont Mouchet, he gathered about 2,700 men, who formed the Maquis du Mont Mouchet. German attacks forced the Resistance off Mont Mouchet by June, killing about 125 &quot;maquisards&quot; and wounding about another 125 with the rest escaping. The Germans burned down several small villages in the Mont Mouchet region and executed 70 peasants suspected of aiding the &quot;maquis&quot;. The &quot;résistants&quot; answered by waging a ferocious guerrilla war against the Germans.

Until the end of May 1944, SHAEF had a &quot;Block Planning&quot; policy for the Resistance under which the Resistance would lie low until Operation Overlord was launched and then afterwards, the Resistance was to launch a full blown guerilla war in all of the French provinces one by one. At the end of May 1944, Eisenhower changed his plans and instead wanted a nationwide guerilla war launched in all of the regions of France with the start of Overlord. The SOE had informed the Resistance leaders to listen to the BBC&#x27;s &quot;personal messages&quot; French language broadcasts on the 1st, 2nd, 15th and 16th of every month for the messages telling them when Overlord was due to start. If the phrase &quot;l&#x27;heure des combats viendra&quot; (&quot;the hour of battle will come&quot;), which was broadcast on 1 June 1944, that was the signal that the Allies would land within the next 15 days. If a line from a poem by Verlaine &quot;Les sanglots longs des violons de l&#x27;automne&quot; (&quot;The long sobs of the violins of autumn&quot;) was read on the BBC, that was the signal that the invasion was imminent and if the following verse &quot;blessent mon cœur d&#x27;une langueur monotone&quot; (wound my heart with a monotonous languor&quot;), which was broadcast on 5 June 1944, then the invasion would occur the next day. In the spring of 1944, a number of uniformed American, French and British soldiers known as the &quot;Jedburgh&quot; teams as part of Operation Jedburgh were landed in France to make contact with the &quot;maquis&quot; guerillas. A Jedburgh team was a three men crew consisting of a commander, his deputy and a radio operator. One of the &quot;Jeds&quot; was always French with the other two being either British or American whose job was to maintain radio contact with Britain, to provide professional military training to the &quot;maquis&quot; and in the words of the British historian Terry Crowdy to &quot;tactfully&quot; give professional military leadership. One &quot;Jed&quot;, the British officer Tommy Macpherson observed that the FTP used rough methods to motivate people, writing:

The plans for the Resistance in Operation Overlord were:
* &quot;Plan Vert&quot;: a systematic sabotage campaign to destroy the French railroad system.
* &quot;Plan Rouge&quot;: to attack and destroy all German ammunition dumps across France.
* &quot;Plan Bleu&quot;: to attack and destroy all power lines across France.
* &quot;Plan Violet&quot;: to attack and destroy phone lines in France.
* &quot;Plan Jaune&quot;: to attack German command posts.
* &quot;Plan Noir&quot;: to attack German fuel depots.
* &quot;Plan Tortue&quot;: to sabotage the roads of France.

General de Gaulle himself was only informed by Churchill on June 4, 1944, that the Allies planned to land in France on 6 June. Until then the Free French leaders had no idea when and where Operation Overlord was due to take place. On 5 June 1944, orders were given to activate &quot;Plan Violet&quot;. Of all the plans, &quot;Plan Violet&quot; was most important to Operation Overlord, since destroying telephone lines and cutting underground cables prevented phone calls and orders transmitted by telex from getting through and forced the Germans to use their radios to communicate. As the codebreakers of Bletchley Park had broken many of the codes encrypted by the Enigma Machine, this gave a considerable intelligence advantage to the Allied generals. During the Normandy campaign, the Resistance was so effective in blowing up telephone lines and cables that the Wehrmacht and Waffen SS largely abandoned the French phone system as too unreliable and used the radio instead, thereby allowing Bletchley Park to listen in. On 9 June 1944 Eisenhower reached an agreement recognizing the FFI was part of the Allied order of battle and that Koenig was to operate under his command. On 10 June 1944, Koenig ordered the Resistance not to engage in &quot;insurrection nationale&quot; like those attempted on the Glières plateau or at Mont Mouchet, instead ordering: &quot;Keep guerilla activity below its maximum level... Do not mass together... Form small separate groups&quot;. A statement issued by de Gaulle declared the FFI was part of the French Army and resistance leaders were now all Army officers with those &quot;résistants&quot; commanding 30 men becoming &quot;sous-lieutenants&quot;; those commanding 100 becoming &quot;lieutenants&quot;; those commanding 300 becoming &quot;capitaines&quot;; those commanding 1,000 men becoming &quot;commandants&quot; and those commanding 2,000 men becoming &quot;lieutenant-colonels&quot;. In a press communiqué issued on June 12, 1944, Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt declared that he did not recognize the FFI as part of the French Army and ordered the Wehrmacht to summary execute any Frenchman or Frenchwoman serving in the FFI.

The other major Resistance operations were &quot;Plan Vert&quot; and &quot;Plan Tortue&quot;. In June 1944, the Resistance destroyed French railroads at 486 points and by 7 June 1944, the day after D-Day, the Wehrmacht complained that due to sabotage that the main railroad lines between Avranches and St. Lô, between Cherbourg and St. Lô and between Caen and St. Lô were now out of action. As the Wehrmacht was forced to use the roads instead of railroads, &quot;Plan Tortue&quot; focused on ambushing the Wehrmacht and the Waffen SS as they travelled to the battlefields of Normandy. The &quot;maquis&quot; were joined in their guerrilla campaign by the Jedburgh teams, SOE agents, the &quot;Operational Groups&quot; of the OSS and by teams from the elite British Special Air Service (SAS) regiment. The SAS commandos had jeeps armored with machine guns that they used to travel across French countryside and ambush German convoys. One SAS group, operating in Brittany, had an artillery gun flown in, which they used to destroy German tanks, much to the surprise of the Germans who were not expecting this much firepower to be used in ambushes. A SAS officer, Ian Wellsted, described the &quot;maquis&quot; band which he operated with:

Sometimes, the &quot;maquis&quot; wore armbands featuring the tricolor with either a Cross of Lorraine or the initials FFI stamped on them, so they could maintain that they had insignia and thus a sort of uniform, making them entitled to legal protection under the Geneva and Hague conventions.&quot;

Usually, the &quot;maquis&quot; and their Anglo-American allies would cut down a tree to block a road in the wooded section of the French countryside, sometimes an anti-tank mine would be planted under the tree trunk and the Germans would be ambushed with machine gun and sniper fire when they attempted to remove the tree blocking the road. Such operations seriously delayed the Germans, with the elite 2nd Waffen SS Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; taking 18 days to travel from Toulouse to Caen, a journey that was expected to take only 3 days. The &quot;Jed&quot; Tommy Macpherson who was attached to a &quot;maquis&quot; band of 27 French and Spanish communists taught the &quot;maquisards&quot; to fire their Sten guns with wet clothes wrapped around the barrels, which made the Sten guns sound like heavy machine guns to experienced troops. As such, when the &quot;maquis&quot; ambushed the men of the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division, the SS took cover and responded far more cautiously than they would have if they had known that they were only under fire from Sten guns. In a typical ambush of the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division, Macpherson had a bomb planted on a bridge to knock out a half-truck while having the &quot;maquis&quot; fire on the SS. When a Panther tank came up to engage the &quot;maquis&quot;, one of the &quot;maquisards&quot; threw a &quot;Gammon grenade&quot;, which knocked out the tank tracks. As more of the SS tanks began to shell the &quot;maquis&quot;, Macpherson ordered his men to retreat, content to know he had delayed the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division by several hours and that he would do the same again the next day, and the next. On 9 June 1944, the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division took revenge for &quot;maquis&quot; attacks by hanging 99 people selected at random in the town of Tulle from all the lampposts in the town.

The next day, the &quot;Der Führer&quot; regiment of the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division destroyed the town of Oradour-sur-Glane, killing 642 people including 246 women and 207 children. SS &quot;Sturmbannführer&quot; Adolf Diekmann, the commanding officer of the &quot;Der Führer&quot; regiment of the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division had wanted to destroy another French town Oradour-sur-Vayres, whose people were said to be providing food and shelter to the &quot;maquis&quot;, but had taken a wrong turn on the road, which led him and his men to Oradour-sur-Glane, whose people had never supported the &quot;maquis&quot;. One Wehrmacht division transferred from the Eastern Front to the Western Front took a week to move from the Soviet Union to the borders of France and another three weeks to move from the French border to the Battle of Caen as Resistance attacks slowed down its movement. An estimate by SHAEF stated the Germans were moving at only 25% of their normal daily speed due to the constant attacks of the &quot;maquis&quot; all across France.

Though the &quot;maquis&quot; caused the Germans much difficulty, the guerrillas tended not to fare well in sustained combat. The SOE agent André Hue who was leading a &quot;maquis&quot; band in Brittany later recalled the Battle of Saint Marcel as the firefight on 18 June 1944 at a farmhouse outside Saint Marcel he was using as his base:

As the snipers continued to cut down his men while he could hear the sound of panzers coming up in the distance, Hue ordered his men to retreat into the woods under the cover of darkness while using his radio to call in a RAF airstrike that disorganized the Germans enough to make escape possible. Summarizing up the Battle of Saint Marcel, Hue wrote:

All over France, the &quot;maquis&quot; attempted to seize towns in June 1944, expecting the Allies to be there soon, often with tragic results. For instance, in Saint-Amand-Montrond, the &quot;maquis&quot; seized the town and took 13 &quot;miliciens&quot; and their associated women prisoners, including the wife of Francis Bout de l&#x27;An, a senior leader of the &quot;Milice&quot; who intervened to take personal charge of the situation to get his wife back. A joint German-&quot;milice&quot; force marched on Saint-Amand-Montrond, causing the &quot;maquis&quot; to retreat and when the Axis forces arrived, eleven people were shot on the spot while a number of hostages were taken. The &quot;Milice&quot; chief of Orléans and the archbishop of Bourges were able to negotiate an exchange on 23 June 1944, where the &quot;maquis&quot; released their female hostages (except for one woman who chose to join the &quot;maquis&quot;) in exchange for the &quot;Milice&quot; releasing their hostages, though the Germans refused to free any of their hostages and instead deported them to the concentration camps. As for the &quot;miliciens&quot; taken hostage, the &quot;maquisards&quot; knew if they were freed, they would reveal their hideout and their names as both the &quot;miliciens&quot; and &quot;maquisards&quot; had grown up in the same town and knew each other well (men on both sides had once been friends) while at the same time food was in short supply, making their hostages a drain on their food supplies; leading to the &quot;maquisards&quot; to hang their hostages (shooting them would make too much noise) out in the woods. Bout de l&#x27;An decided to seek revenge for his wife&#x27;s captivity by sending a force of &quot;miliciens&quot; under Lécussan to round up the surviving Jews of Bourges and buried 36 Jews alive out in the woods, as Bout de l&#x27;An believed that the Resistance was all the work of the Jews.

On 23 June 1944, Koenig began to operate, giving orders to all the SOE and OSS agents via the Special Forces Headquarters. By this time, the &quot;maquis&quot; had formed assassination squads to kill collaborators and on 28 June 1944, a group of &quot;maquisards&quot; disguised as &quot;miliciens&quot; were able to enter the apartment of the radio newscaster Philippe Henriot, who was serving as Minister of Information and Propaganda in the Vichy government, and shot him down in front of his wife. Darnard had the &quot;Milice&quot; go on a rampage after Henriot&#x27;s assassination, massacring &quot;résistants&quot; in Toulouse, Clermont-Ferrand, Grenoble, Lyon and other places. For example, seven &quot;résistants&quot; were publicity shot by the &quot;Milice&quot; in the town square of Mâcon. All over France, the Germans lashed out against the Resistance in an spree of killings, of which the massacre at Oradour-sur-Glane is merely the most infamous. Speaking of an atrocity committed outside of Nice in July 1944, one man testified at Nurnberg:

The reference to the &quot;Mongolians&quot; were to Asians serving in the Red Army who been captured by the Wehrmacht and joined either the German Army&#x27;s &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; or the SS; the French called all these men &quot;Mongols&quot; regardless if they were Mongols or not. The &quot;Milice&quot; was especially hated by the Resistance and captured &quot;miliciens&quot; could expect little mercy. One &quot;maquisard&quot; fighting in the Haute-Savoie wrote in his diary about the fate of a &quot;milicien&quot; taken prisoner in July 1944:

The rejection of the &quot;Force C&quot; plan had not reached many of the &quot;maquis&quot; leaders operating out in the countryside and after the news of D-Day, the &quot;maquis&quot; attempted to seize &quot;redoubts&quot;, most notably at the Vercors plateau. Eugène Chavant, the FFI chief in the Isère region ordered all &quot;maquis&quot; bands to concentrate on the Vercors plateau after hearing of D-Day. By 9 June 1944, some 3,000 &quot;maquisards&quot; had heeded the call and 3 July 1944 the &quot;Free Republic of the Vercors&quot; was proclaimed. Though the Allies did try to fly in supplies to the &quot;redoubts&quot; and the &quot;marquis&quot; fought bravely, all these operations ended with the Resistance defeated. In the middle of June, the Wehrmacht had taken the village of Saint-Nizier-du-Moucherotte from the Maquis du Vercors, which severed the link between the Vercors plateau and Grenoble. To celebrate Bastille Day, the US Army Air Force sent in 360 B-17s to drop supplies of weapons to the &quot;maquisards&quot; on the Vercors plateau. However, the weapons the American dropped were all light weapons and Chavant sent a radio message to Algiers on the night of 21 July 1944 asking for heavy weapons to be air-dropped, called the leaders in Algiers criminals and cowards for not arranging more support, and ended with the line: &quot;That&#x27;s what we are saying criminals and cowards&quot;. In the Battle of the Vercors Plateau, the SS landed a glider company and the &quot;maquis&quot; suffered very heavy losses. Many of the &quot;German&quot; units fighting on the Vercors were &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; (Eastern Legions), Red Army POWs, mostly Russians and Ukrainians, who had joined the SS after being taken prisoner in 1942 or 1943. By this point the Germans had taken such heavy losses on the Eastern Front that they needed the manpower of the &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; to compensate. While the same Alpine division that had taken the Glières plateau in March stormed up the Vercors plateau supported by a tank unit based in Lyon, the SS landed via glider. The &quot;maquis&quot; lost about 650, killed during the fighting on the Vercors plateau and afterwards, the Germans shot about 200 &quot;maquisards&quot;, mostly wounded who had been unable to escape together with the medical team that had stayed behind to take care of them. In the aftermath of the Battle of the Vercors, the local people were victims of massive reprisals which included numerous cases of looting, rape and extrajudicial executions.

In early August 1944, Hitler ordered Field Marshal Günther von Kluge to launch Operation Lüttich against the Americans. As the Resistance had severed the telephone lines, the orders for Lüttich were transmitted via the radio in a code that had been broken by the Government Code and Cypher School, leading to Ultra intelligence that gave the Americans advanced notice and time to prepare for the coming offensive. After the breakout from Normandy, Eisenhower had planned to by-pass Paris while Hitler had ordered General Dietrich von Choltitz to destroy Paris rather than allow the city be liberated, stating &quot;Paris must be destroyed from top to bottom, before the Wehrmacht leaves, do not leave a church or cultural monument standing&quot;. The FFI in Paris led by Alexandre Parodi and Jacques Chaban-Delmas urged patience while Henri Tanguy (codename Colonel Rol), the FTP chief in Paris wanted to start a revolt, being deterred only by the fact that the Resistance in Paris had about 15,000 men, but only 600 guns, mostly rifles and machine guns. On 19 August 1944, the Paris police, until then still loyal to Vichy, went over to the Resistance as a group of policemen hosted the &quot;tricolore&quot; over the Préfecture de Police on the Ile de la Cité, which was the first time the tricolor had flown in Paris since June 1940. All over Paris, the outlawed &quot;tricolore&quot; started to fly over schools, &quot;mairies&quot; and police stations, an open challenge to German power, and a sign that the French civil service was shifting its loyalty. Emboldened, Tanguy and his men started to attack German forces on the Boulevard Saint-Michel and Boulevard Saint-Germain, leading to a mass insurrection as Parisians started to build barricades in the streets. By the end of the day, about 50 Germans and 150 &quot;résistants&quot; had been killed and not wanting the Communists to have the credit for liberating Paris, the Gaullist Parodi sanctioned the uprising. Faced with an urban uprising that he was unprepared for, Choltitz arranged a truce with Parodi via the Swedish consul Raoul Nordling, marking the first time that the Germans had treated the resistance as a legitimate opponent.

On 21 August 1944, Koenig was given command of all the BCRA agents, the SOE&#x27;s F section and RF section agents and the Jedburgh teams, which reflected the political need to put all of the resistance under French control. By the end of August 1944, the SOE had a total of 53 radio stations operating in France, up from the two it had begun with in May 1941.

De Gaulle disapproved of the truce as he used the uprising to order on 22 August General Philippe Leclerc&#x27;s 2nd Armored Division to liberate Paris, stating he did not want the Communists to liberate the city. On 24 August, French soldiers entered Paris, which led to some hours of intense fighting before Choltitz surrendered on 25 August, though pockets of German and &quot;milice&quot; forces fought on for several more days as Choltiz simply did not inform his forces of his plans to surrender. On the afternoon of August 25, 1944 de Gaulle returned to Paris, a city he not set foot in since June 1940, to be greeted by vast cheering crowds as he walked down the Champs-Élysées.

As various cities, towns and villages were liberated in France, the Resistance was usually the most organized force that took over. Many &quot;résistants&quot; were disgusted by the mass influx of new members in the dying days of the struggle, contemptuously calling them the FFS (&quot;Forces Françaises de Septembre&quot;-French Forces of September) or the &quot;Septemberists&quot; for short, as all these people had conveniently only discovered their French patriotism in September 1944. In the middle of 1944, Chaban-Delmas had reported to de Gaulle that the FFI numbered 15,000 in Paris, but the time of the liberation of Paris on 25 August 1944, between 50,000 and 60,000 people were wearing FFI armbands. The liberation of France began with D-Day on 6 June 1944, but different areas of France were liberated at different times. Strasbourg was not liberated until November 1944, and some coastal towns on the English Channel and the Atlantic like Dunkirk were still in German hands when the war ended on 8 May 1945. Ousby observed: &quot;There was no national day for Liberation. Each town and village still celebrates a different day, the gaps between them marking advances that often looked bogged down, pockets of German defense that often turned out to be unexpectedly tough. It proved the bitterest of ends to a bitter war.&quot; As France was liberated, many &quot;résistants&quot; enlisted in the French Army, with 75,000 &quot;résistants&quot; fighting as regular soldiers by November 1944, and by the end of the war, 135,000 &quot;résistants&quot; were serving with the French forces advancing into Germany. For many resistance leaders who gave themselves the title of captain or colonel, it was quite a comedown to be reduced to a private.

Besides attempting to establish a government, the Resistance took its revenge on collaborators who were often beaten or killed in extrajudicial executions. &quot;Miliciens&quot; were usually shot without the bother of a trial, and at least 10,000 &quot;miliciens&quot; were shot in 1944. The young women who had engaged in &quot;collaboration horizontale&quot; by sleeping with the Germans were singled out and had their heads publicly shaven as a mark of their disgrace, which meant that a good percentage of the young women in France were shaven bald in 1944. The attacks on the young women who had German lovers had the &quot;atmosphere of a savage carnival&quot; as the women were rounded by mobs to be insulted, beaten and shaven. One &quot;résistant&quot; in the Gard region explained the violence to a reporter in September 1944: &quot;I&#x27;ll simply say that the majority of the FFI have been outlaws. They are lads from the mining areas...they have been hunted; they have been imprisoned; they have been tortured by &quot;miliciens&quot; whom they now recognize. It is understandable that they should now want to beat them up&quot;. At the time, many feared that France was on the verge of civil war as it was felt that the FTP might attempt to seize power, but owing to the shortage of arms and loyalty to Moscow which recognized General de Gaulle as France&#x27;s leader, the Communists chose to pursue power via ballots rather than bullets.

In the aftermath of the Liberation, the SOE agents were all ordered out of France as the Anglophobic de Gaulle wished to maintain a version of history where the SOE never existed and the Resistance was entirely a French affair. De Gaulle also promoted a version of history where France for the entire occupation from 1940 to 1944 had been a &quot;nation in arms&quot; with the Resistance representing almost the entirety of the French people had been waging a guerrilla struggle from the beginning of the occupation right to its end. His concern was then to rebuild France not only on the material and international level, but also morally, pushing him to put forward the actions of the Resistance to re-establish national unity and pride, which the war had damaged. On 17 September 1944, in Bordeaux, the SOE agent Roger Landes, who become the leader of the Resistance in Bordeaux after André Grandclément, the previous leader had been exposed as a Gestapo informer, was taking part in the celebrations of the liberation of Bordeaux when General de Gaulle motioned to him to come aside for a chat. De Gaulle told Landes, who was wearing the uniform of a British Army officer that he was not welcome in France and had two hours to leave the city and two days to leave France. The Francophile Landes who had been born in Britain, but grew up in France was profoundly hurt by this request, and sadly left the nation he loved so much. De Gaulle had wanted a resistance to give proof of &quot;France éternelle&quot; that held out against the occupation; however, he was angered by the fact that the &quot;résistants&quot; often seemed to consider themselves as the new legitimate authorities of the towns and cities they had liberated. Therefore, in the wake of the liberation of the national territory, he openly considered them as troublemakers hindering the return to normalcy and rule of law which he pursued. Everywhere, the &quot;résistants&quot; were pushed out of power to be replaced by the same civil servants who had served first the Third Republic to be followed by Vichy or the &quot;naphtalinés&quot;, Army officers who had gone into retirement in 1940, and resumed their service with the liberation.

==Factions==

The French Resistance involved men and women representing a broad range of ages, social classes, occupations, religions and political affiliations. In 1942, one resistance leader claimed that the movement received support from four groups: the &quot;lower middle&quot; and &quot;middle middle&quot; classes, university professors and students, the entire working class and a large majority of the peasants.

Resistance leader Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier de La Vigerie observed that the Resistance had been composed of social outcasts or those on the fringes of society, saying &quot;one could be a resister only if one was maladjusted&quot;. Although many, including d&#x27;Astier himself, did fit this description, most members of the Resistance came from traditional backgrounds and were &quot;individuals of exceptional strong-mindedness, ready to break with family and friends&quot; to serve a higher purpose.

The question of how many were active in the Resistance has been raised. While stressing that the issue was sensitive and approximate, François Marcot, a professor of history at the Sorbonne, ventured an estimate of 200,000 activists and a further 300,000 with substantial involvement in Resistance operations. Historian Robert Paxton estimated the number of active resisters at &quot;about 2% of the adult French population (or about 400,000)&quot;, and went on to observe that &quot;there were, no doubt, wider complicities, but even if one adds those willing to read underground newspapers, only some two million persons, or around 10% of the adult population&quot;, had been willing to risk any involvement at all. The post-war government of France officially recognised 220,000 men and women.

===Gaullist resistance===

The doctrine of Gaullism was born during the Second World War as a French movement of patriotic resistance to the German invasion of 1940. Men of all political stripes who wanted to continue the fight against Adolf Hitler and who rejected the armistice concluded by Maréchal Philippe Pétain rallied to General Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s position. As a consequence, on 2 August 1940, de Gaulle was condemned to death &quot;in absentia&quot; by the Vichy régime.

Between July and October 1940, de Gaulle rejected the unconstitutional, repressive and racist laws instituted by Pétain, and established his own &quot;bona fides&quot; (good faith) as the principal defender of republican values. He asked, in his &quot;Appeal of 18 June 1940&quot;, that every patriot who could reach British territory should do so and join the Free French Army to fight in company with the Allies. The Free French forces also rallied the various French overseas colonies to fight back against the Vichy régime. His approval of this link between the Resistance and the colonials legitimised it.

De Gaulle&#x27;s influence grew, despite few in France knowing what he looked like or anything about him. The first open defiance of Nazi rule in Paris was in November 1940, when 3,000 students at the Arc de Triomphe shouted &quot; and &quot;, some carrying two fishing rods (). Vichy police called arrested subversives &quot;Gaullists&quot;; although Pétain never mentioned his rival&#x27;s name in public, everyone knew what &quot;dissidents&quot; meant in speeches. In 1942 Richard de Rochemont quoted a resistance leader describing de Gaulle as &quot;the only possible leader for the France that fights&quot;. Most Gaullists could not join him in Britain and remained in the territories ruled by Vichy. The Allies helped build networks of propagandists, spies and saboteurs to harass and discomfit the occupiers. Eventually, leaders of all of these separate and fragmented Resistance organizations were gathered and coordinated by Jean Moulin under the auspices of the National Council of Resistance (CNR), de Gaulle&#x27;s formal link to the irregulars throughout occupied France.

During the Italian campaign of 1943, 130,000 Free French soldiers fought on the Allied side and, by the time of the Normandy invasion, Free French forces numbered approximately half a million regulars and more than 100,000 French Forces of the Interior (FFI). The Free French 2nd Armored Division, under General Philippe Leclerc, landed in Normandy, and, in the waning days of summer 1944, led the drive toward Paris. The FFI in Normandy and the Île-de-France region surrounding Paris began to harass German forces intensively, cutting roads and railways, setting ambushes and fighting conventional battles alongside their allies.

The Free French 2nd Armored Division rolled ashore in Normandy on 1 August 1944, and served under General Patton&#x27;s Third Army. The division played a critical role in Operation Cobra, the Allies&#x27; &quot;breakout&quot; from its Normandy beachhead, where it served as a link between American and Canadian armies and made rapid progress against German forces. The 2nd Armored all but destroyed the 9th Panzer Division and mauled several other German units as well. During the battle for Normandy this German division lost 133 killed, 648 wounded and 85 missing. The division&#x27;s matériel losses included 76 armored vehicles, seven cannons, 27 half-tracks and 133 other vehicles.

The most celebrated moment in the unit&#x27;s history involved the liberation of Paris. Allied strategy emphasized destroying German forces retreating towards the Rhine, but when the French Resistance under Henri Rol-Tanguy staged an uprising in the city, De Gaulle, upon receiving intelligence that the French Resistance had openly risen up against the German occupiers, and unwilling to allow his countrymen to be slaughtered against the entrenched and better-armed Germans, as had happened to the Polish Resistance in the Warsaw Uprising, petitioned Eisenhower for an immediate frontal assault. He threatened to detach the French 2nd Armored Division (2e DB) and order them to single-handedly attack Paris, bypassing the SHAEF chain of command, if he delayed approval unduly. Eisenhower relented, and Leclerc&#x27;s forces headed toward Paris. After hard fighting that cost the 2nd Division 35 tanks, 6 self-propelled guns and 111 vehicles, Dietrich von Choltitz, the military governor of Paris, surrendered the city in a ceremony at the Hotel Meurice. Jubilant crowds greeted the French forces, and de Gaulle led a renowned victory parade through the city.

De Gaulle not only kept the patriotic resistance alive; he also did everything possible to re-establish the French claim to independence and sovereignty. As a leader, the American and British governments preferred the less popular, but less abrasively vindictive, General Giraud to de Gaulle, but for the French population de Gaulle was almost universally recognised as the true leader in their victory. These events forced Roosevelt to recognise, finally and fully, the provisional government installed in France by de Gaulle.

===Communists===

After the signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact and the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the French Communist Party (PCF) was declared a proscribed organisation by Édouard Daladier&#x27;s government. Many of its leaders were arrested and imprisoned or forced to go underground. The PCF adopted an antiwar position on orders of the Comintern in Moscow, which remained in place for the first year of the German occupation, reflecting the September 1939 nonaggression pact between Germany and the USSR. Conflicts erupted within the party, as many of its members opposed collaboration with the Germans while others toed the party line of neutrality as directed by Stalin in Moscow. On Armistice Day, November 11, 1940, communists were among the university students demonstrating against German repression by marching along the Champs-Élysées. It was only when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 that French communists actively began to organize a resistance effort. They benefited from their experience in clandestine operations during the Spanish Civil War.

On 21 August 1941, Colonel Pierre-Georges Fabien committed the first overt violent act of communist resistance by assassinating a German officer at the Barbès-Rochechouart station of the Paris Métro. The attack, and others perpetrated in the following weeks, provoked fierce reprisals, culminating in the execution of 98 hostages after the Feldkommandant of Nantes was shot on 20 October.

The military strength of the communists was still relatively feeble at the end of 1941, but the rapid growth of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTP), a radical armed movement, ensured that French communists regained their reputation as an effective anti-fascist force. The FTP was open to non-communists but operated under communist control, with its members predominantly engaged in acts of sabotage and guerrilla warfare. By 1944, the FTP had an estimated strength of 100,000 men.

Towards the end of the occupation the PCF reached the height of its influence, controlling large areas of France through the Resistance units under its command. Some in the PCF wanted to launch a revolution as the Germans withdrew from the country, but the leadership, acting on Stalin&#x27;s instructions, opposed this and adopted a policy of cooperating with the Allied powers and advocating a new Popular Front government.

During the Nazi occupation of France, the French Trotskyist group Parti Ouvrier Internationaliste printed the clandestine magazine &quot;Arbeiter und Soldat&quot; (&quot;Worker and Soldier&quot;) for German troops. The publication opposed both fascism and western imperialism, and 12 issues were distributed from July 1943 through July 1944.

Many well-known intellectual and artistic figures were attracted to the Communist party during the war, including the artist Pablo Picasso and the writer and philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. Philosophers Georges Politzer and Valentin Feldman and writer Jacques Decour were among others. After the German invasion of the USSR, many Russian white émigrés, inspired by Russian patriotic sentiment, would support the Soviet war effort. A number of them formed the Union of Russian Patriots, which adopted pro-Soviet positions and collaborated closely with the French Communist Party.

===Socialists===

At the end of the summer of 1940, Daniel Mayer was asked by Leon Blum to reconstitute the SFIO (in ruins because of Paul Faure&#x27;s defection to the Vichy régime). In March 1941 Daniel Mayer created, with other socialists like Suzanne Buisson and Félix Gouin, the Comité d&#x27;action socialiste (CAS) in Nîmes. The same thing was created by Jean-Baptiste Lebas in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais (administratively joined with Belgium) in January 1941, along the lines of a prior network created in September 1940.

In 1942, &quot;Le Populaire&quot;, newspaper of the SFIO from 1921 to 1940, was publishing again, clandestinely. The same year, André Philip became &quot;commissaire national à l&#x27;Intérieur&quot; of the Free French (France libre), and Félix Gouin joined Charles de Gaulle in London to represent the socialists. In Algeria, left-wing networks of resistance were already formed. As the Riom trial began in 1942, the fervour and the number of socialists in the Resistance grew. The CAS-Sud became the secret SFIO in March 1943.

There was a majority from the SFIO in , one of the eight great networks to make up the National Council of the Resistance, and in the Brutus network. Socialists were also important in the organisation civile et militaire (OCM) and in Libération-Sud.

Other socialist leaders in the Resistance included Pierre Brossolette, Gaston Defferre, Jean Biondi, Jules Moch, Jean Pierre-Bloch, Tanguy-Prigent, Guy Mollet and Christian Pineau. François Camel and Marx Dormoy were assassinated, while Jean-Baptiste Lebas, Isidore Thivrier, Amédée Dunois, Claude Jordery and Augustin Malroux died during their deportation.

===Vichy nationalists===

Before the war, there were several ultrarightist organisations in France. Another among the most influential factions of the right was Croix-de-Feu (Cross of Fire), which gradually moderated its positions during the early years of the war and grew increasingly popular among the aging veterans of the First World War.

Despite some differences in their positions on certain issues, these organizations were united in their opposition to parliamentarism, a stance that had led them to participate in demonstrations, most notably the &quot;political disturbance&quot; riots of 6 February 1934. At about the same time, La Cagoule, a fascist paramilitary organisation, launched various actions aimed at destabilising the Third Republic. These efforts continued until La Cagoule could be infiltrated and dismantled in 1937. Thousands not only welcomed the Vichy régime, but collaborated with it to one degree or another. But the powerful appeal of French nationalism drove others to engage in resistance against occupying German forces.

In 1942, after an ambiguous period of collaboration, the former leader of Croix de Feu, François de La Rocque, founded the Klan Network, which provided information to the British intelligence services. Georges Loustaunau-Lacau and Marie-Madeleine Fourcade—who had both supported La Cagoule—founded the Alliance network, and Colonel of the Vichy secret services founded the Gilbert network. Some members of Action Française engaged in the Resistance with similar nationalistic motives. Some prominent examples are Daniel Cordier, who became Jean Moulin&#x27;s secretary, and Colonel Rémy, who founded the Confrérie Notre-Dame. These groups also included Pierre de Bénouville, who, together with Henri Frenay, led the &quot;Combat&quot; group, and Jacques Renouvin, who founded the group of resisters known as &quot;Liberté&quot;.

Sometimes contact with others in the Resistance led some operatives to adopt new political philosophies. Many gradually moved away from their antisemitic prejudices and their hatred of &quot;démocrassouille&quot;, &#x27;dirty democracy&#x27; (which many equated with &quot;mob rule&quot;), or simply away from their traditional grass-roots conservatism. Bénouville and Marie-Madeleine Fourcade became députés in the French parliament after the war; François Mitterrand moved towards the left, joined the Resistance and eventually became the first socialist president of the Fifth Republic, Henri Frenay evolved towards European socialism, and Daniel Cordier, whose family had supported Charles Maurras for three generations, abandoned his views in favor of the ideology of the republican Jean Moulin.

The historian Jean-Pierre Azéma coined the term &quot;vichysto-résistant&quot; to describe those who at first supported the Vichy régime (mostly based on the patriotic image of Pétain rather than the Révolution Nationale) but later joined the Resistance. The founder of Ceux de la Libération (&quot;Those of the Liberation&quot;), Maurice Ripoche, initially defended Vichy but soon placed the liberation of France above all other goals and in 1941 opened his movement to leftists. In contrast, many extreme right-wing members of the Resistance, such as Gabriel Jeantet and Jacques Le Roy Ladurie, never renounced their tolerant attitudes towards Vichy.

====Affiche Rouge====
The &quot;Affiche Rouge&quot; (red placard) was a famous propaganda poster distributed by the Vichy French and German authorities in the spring of 1944 in occupied Paris. It was intended to discredit a group of 23 Franc-Tireurs known as the &quot;Manouchian group&quot;. After its members were arrested, tortured and publicly tried, they were executed by firing squad in Fort Mont-Valérien on 21 February 1944. The poster emphasised the composition of the group&#x27;s membership, many of whom were Jews and communists, to discredit the Resistance as not &quot;French&quot; enough in its fundamental allegiance and motivations.

===Jews===
The Vichy régime had legal authority in both the north of France, which was occupied by the German Wehrmacht; and the southern &quot;free zone&quot;, where the régime&#x27;s administrative center, Vichy, was located. Vichy voluntarily and willfully collaborated with Nazi Germany and adopted a policy of persecution towards Jews, demonstrated by the passage of antisemitic legislation as early as October 1940. The law on the status of Jews, which legally redefined French Jews as a non-French underclass, deprived them of citizenship. According to Philippe Pétain&#x27;s chief of staff, &quot;Germany was not at the origin of the anti-Jewish legislation of Vichy. That legislation was spontaneous and autonomous.&quot; The laws led to confiscations of property, arrests, and deportations to concentration camps. As a result of the fate promised them by Vichy and the Germans, Jews were over-represented at all levels of the French Resistance. Studies show that although Jews in France constituted only one percent of the French population, they comprised ≈15–20 percent of the Resistance. Among these were many Jewish émigrés, such as Hungarian artists and writers.

The Jewish youth movement &quot;Eclaireuses et Eclaireurs israélites de France&quot; (EEIF), equivalent to Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts in other countries, had, during the early years of the occupation, shown support for the traditional values of the Vichy régime, until it was banned in 1943, after which its older members soon formed armed resistance units.

A militant Jewish Zionist resistance organisation, the Jewish Army (Armée Juive), was founded in 1942. It was established and led by Abraham Polonski, Eugénie Polonski, Lucien Lublin, David Knout and Ariadna Scriabina (daughter of the Russian composer Alexander Scriabin). They continued armed resistance under a Zionist flag until liberation finally arrived. The &quot;Armée juive&quot; organised escape routes across the Pyrenées to Spain and smuggled about 300 Jews out of the country during 1943–1944. They distributed millions of dollars from the American Joint Distribution Committee to relief organisations and fighting units within France. In 1944, the EIF and the Jewish Army combined to form the &quot;Organisation Juive de Combat&quot; (OJC). The OJC had four hundred members by the summer of 1944, and participated in the liberations of Paris, Lyon, Toulouse, Grenoble and Nice.

In the southern occupation zone, the Œuvre de Secours aux Enfants (roughly, &quot;Children&#x27;s Relief Effort&quot;), a French-Jewish humanitarian organisation commonly called OSE, saved the lives of between 7,000 and 9,000 Jewish children by forging papers, smuggling them into neutral countries and sheltering them in orphanages, schools, and convents.

===Armenians===
The Armenian community of France played an active role in the Resistance. Armenian poet and communist Missak Manouchian became one of the leaders of the French Resistance and commander of the Manouchian Group (the family of Charles Aznavour had supported Missak and his wife Meliné when they were in hiding). Arpen Tavitian, another executed member of the Manouchian group, industrialist Napoléon Bullukian (1905–1984), poets Kégham Atmadjian (1910–1940) and Rouben Melik were other famous participants in the French Resistance. The Anti-Fascist Underground Patriotic Organization was also commanded by Armenian officers. Armenian-French writer Louise Aslanian (1906–1945), another French Resistance activist, was arrested along with her husband Arpiar Aslanian on July 24, 1944, taken to the Nazi concentration camps by Nazis and killed in 1945. Many of Louise&#x27;s manuscripts and diaries were confiscated and destroyed by Nazis. Resisters Alexander Kazarian and Bardukh Petrosian were awarded by the highest military orders of France by General Charles de Gaulle. Henri Karayan (1921–2011), a member of the Manouchian Group, participated in illegal distribution of &quot;L&#x27;Humanité&quot; in Paris and was engaged in armed struggle until the Libération. In 2012, 95-year-old Arsene Tchakarian, the last survivor of the Manouchian resistance group who fought against occupying Nazi German forces during the Second World War, was decorated as Officer of the Legion of Honour by the president of France.

===Georgians===
Georgians living in France and the French colonies and people of Georgian ethnicity played an active and symbolic role in the French resistance. One of the most renowned figures of the Free French Forces was Prince Dimitri Amilakhvari, who participated in every important operation that involved French forces until 1942 and led the Légion étrangère into battle in the Norwegian and later African campaigns against Erwin Rommel&#x27;s Africa Corps. Under General Koenig, he and his heavily outnumbered troops committed daring raids, dealing decisive losses to the Germans at the Battle of Bir Hakeim. During the battle he is said to have written: &quot;We, foreigners, have only one way to prove to France our gratitude: to be killed ...&quot; General de Gaulle personally awarded Amilakhvari the Order of Liberation and posthumously named him and his men the honour of France. He was also known by the French populace as &quot;Bazorka&quot;. The lieutenant colonel was one of the 66 French recipients of the Norwegian War Cross and was also posthumously awarded the Legion of Honour. He led his troops by example and died in combat during the Second Battle of El Alamein in October 1942. Another known resistance fighter was Beglar Samkharadze, a captured Soviet soldier who was transferred to France where he escaped and joined the Resistance. Upon return to his homeland, he was imprisoned by Soviet authorities on charges of high treason, but two commanders of the French Resistance testified to his commitment in the fight against Nazi Germany.

===Women===

Although inequalities persisted under the Third Republic, the cultural changes that followed the First World War allowed differences in the treatment of men and women in France to narrow gradually, with some women assuming political responsibilities as early as the 1930s. The defeat of France in 1940 and the appointment of the Vichy régime&#x27;s conservative leader, Philippe Pétain, undermined feminism, and France began a restructuring of society based on the &quot;femme au foyer&quot; or &quot;women at home&quot; imperative. On at least one occasion, Pétain spoke out to French mothers about their patriotic duty:

Despite opposing the collaborationist régime, the French Resistance generally sympathised with its antifeminism and did not encourage the participation of women in war and politics, following, in the words of historian Henri Noguères, &quot;a notion of inequality between the sexes as old as our civilisation and as firmly implanted in the Resistance as it was elsewhere in France&quot;. Consequently, women in the Resistance were less numerous than men and averaged only 11% of the members in the formal networks and movements. 

Madeleine Ruffaud recalled, as a 19 year-old courier for the FTP, &quot;cross at being told always to carry weapons across town for the men to use&quot;. She secured permission to use a gun herself, and 23 July 1944, in broad daylight on a bridge overlooking the river Seine, shot a lone German NCO. After being arrested, and tortured unsuccessfully for her contacts, she was released in a prisoner exchange (negotiated by the Swedish consul Raoul Nordling) and she returned immediately to the struggle. On 23 August, she commanded an FTP operation that trapped a train in the Buttes-Chaumont tunnel and secured the surrender of the 80 German soldiers aboard. On the 25th, she also took part in an attack on the barracks on Place de la République. Yet, after the Liberation of Paris, she was unable to finish the war with the rest of her resistance group, now part of the regular French army. At a time when women in France did not yet have the right to vote, she was told that she did not have her father&#x27;s permission.

Some the women involved in the Resistance did assume prominent roles. Intellectuals like Germaine Tillion and Suzanne Hiltermann-Souloumiac, highly aware of the signification of Nazism and collaboration, were among the few early resistants. Suzanne Hiltermann-Souloumiac played an important role in the Dutch-Paris movement, specialised in rescuing Allied pilots. Lucie Aubrac, the iconic resister and co-founder of Libération-Sud, was never assigned a specific role in the hierarchy of the movement. Hélène Viannay, one of the founders of Défense de la France and married to a man who shared her political views, was never permitted to express her opinions in the underground newspaper, and her husband took two years to arrive at political conclusions she had held for many years.

Marie-Madeleine Fourcade, the only major female leader in the Resistance, headed the Alliance network. The Organisation Civile et Militaire had a female wing headed by Marie-Hélène Lefaucheux, who took part in setting up the Œuvre de Sainte-Foy to assist prisoners in French jails and German concentration camps. But no women were chosen to lead any of the eight major Resistance movements. After the liberation of France, the provisional government appointed no women ministers or &quot;commissaires de la République&quot;. However, as head of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, general de Gaulle, as a recognition of and a reward for their role in the Resistance, granted women the right to vote in 1945.

== Terminology ==
Charles de Gaulle spoke of &quot;French resistance&quot; in his broadcast on 18 June 1940. English-language use of the phrase &quot;the Resistance&quot; in reference to French anti-Axis activity dates back to at least 1944. Boris Kovalyov has stated that the Resistance movement in France and its name originated among White Movement Russian émigrés. The Russian Boris Vildé co-founded one of the first anti-occupation groups, and in December 1940 started co-publishing the underground newspaper &quot;Résistance&quot;.

==Networks and movements==

In this context, it is customary to distinguish the various organisations of the French Resistance as &quot;movements&quot; or &quot;networks&quot;. A Resistance &quot;network&quot; was an organisation created for a specific military purpose, usually intelligence-gathering, sabotage or aiding Allied air crews who had been shot down behind enemy lines. A Resistance &quot;movement&quot;, on the other hand, was focused on educating and organizing the population, i.e., &quot;to raise awareness and organise the people as broadly as possible.&quot;

===BCRA networks===


In July 1940, after the defeat of the French armies and the consequent armistice with Germany, British prime minister Winston Churchill asked the Free French government-in-exile (headed by General Charles de Gaulle) to set up a secret service agency in occupied France to counter the threat of a German operation code-named Operation Sea Lion, the expected cross-channel invasion of Britain. Colonel André Dewavrin (also known as Colonel Passy), who had previously worked for France&#x27;s military intelligence service, the &quot;Deuxième Bureau&quot;, took on the responsibility for creating such a network. Its principal goal was to inform London of German military operations on the Atlantic coast and in the English Channel. The spy network was called the &quot;Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&#x27;Action&quot; (BCRA), and its actions were carried out by volunteers who were parachuted into France to create and nourish local Resistance cells.

Of the nearly 2,000 volunteers who were active by the end of the war, one of the most effective and well-known was the agent Gilbert Renault, who was awarded the Ordre de la Libération and later the Legion of Honour for his deeds. Known mainly by the pseudonym Colonel Rémy, he returned to France in August 1940 not long after the surrender of France, where the following November he organised one of the most active and important Resistance networks of the BCRA, the &quot;Confrérie de Notre Dame&quot; (Brotherhood of Our Lady), which provided the Allies with photographs, maps and important information on German defenses in general and the Atlantic Wall in particular. From 1941 on, networks such as these allowed the BCRA to send armed paratroopers, weapons and radio equipment into France to carry out missions.

Another important BCRA operative, Henri Honoré d&#x27;Estienne d&#x27;Orves, a naval officer, developed a 26-person network in France. He was betrayed, arrested in May 1941, and shot on 29 August 1941.

Christian Pineau, one of the founders of the Libération Nord movement, also had BCRA roots. During his trip to London in April 1942, the BCRA entrusted him with the creation of two new intelligence systems, and . Both networks proved vital later in the war.

&quot;Mouvements Unis de la Résistance&quot; (Unified Movements of the Resistance, MUR) was a French Resistance organisation resulting from the regrouping of three major Resistance movements (&quot;Combat&quot;, &quot;Franc-Tireur&quot; and &quot;Libération-Sud&quot;) in January 1943. Later that year, the BCRA and the United Movements of Resistance merged their intelligence networks.

Another BCRA appendage was called , a fact-gathering network specializing in military intelligence and police activities. Its importance increased throughout the second half of 1943 and into the spring of 1944. It eventually became the largest BCRA network in the Vichy zone, employing about 2,500 sources, contacts, couriers and analysts. Gallia&#x27;s work did not stop after the 1944 landings in Normandy and Provence; it provided information to the Allies that allowed for the bombing of the retreating German armies&#x27; military targets.

===Foreigners in the Resistance===
====Dutch====
Dutch-Paris built an important network in France to help the resistance, Jews and allied pilots to cross the Pyrenees and flee to Britain. 800 Jews and 142 pilots were saved. Near the end of the war, because of a denunciation, nearly all members of the network were caught and deported to concentration camps, where many died.

====Armenians====
Armenians living in France took up arms and fought the resistance against the Axis forces. The most significant Armenian resistant were 23 strong men led by Missak Manouchian, who were hanged on February 21, 1944.

====Spanish maquis====

Following their defeat in the Spanish Civil War in early 1939, about half a million Spanish Republicans fled to France to escape imprisonment or execution. On the north side of the Pyrenees, such refugees were confined in internment camps such as Camp Gurs and Camp Vernet. Although over half of these had been repatriated to Spain (or elsewhere) by the time Pétain proclaimed the Vichy régime in 1940, the 120,000 to 150,000 who remained became political prisoners, and the foreign equivalent to the &quot;Service du Travail Obligatoire&quot;, the &quot;Compagnies de Travailleurs Étrangers&quot; (Companies of Foreign Workers) or CTE, began to pursue them for slave labor. The CTE was initially seen as a welcome break from the monotony of the camps by many. Lluís Montagut, a member of the C.T.E, described how &quot;we (the Spanish Republican internees) held so much desire to not to see the camps that we accepted (the positions offered by the C.T.E) without the slightest objection...we went out of the way to lose the shameful tag of undesirables&quot;.

The CTE permitted prisoners to leave the internment camps if they agreed to work in German factories, but as many as 60,000 Republicans recruited for the labor service managed to escape and join the French Resistance. Thousands of suspected anti-fascist Republicans were deported to German concentration camps instead, however. Most were sent to Mauthausen where, of the 10,000 Spaniards registered, only 2,000 survived the war.

Many Spanish escapees joined French Resistance groups; others formed their own autonomous groups which became known as the Spanish maquis. In April 1942, Spanish communists formed an organisation called the XIV Corps, an armed guerrilla movement of about 3,400 combatants by June 1944. Although the group first worked closely with the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTP), it re-formed as the &quot;Agrupación de Guerrilleros Españoles&quot; (Spanish Guerrilla Group, AGE) in May 1944. The name change was intended to convey the group&#x27;s composition: Spanish soldiers ultimately advocating the fall of General Francisco Franco. After the German Army had been driven from France, the Spanish maquis refocused on Spain.

====Czechs and Slovaks====
Among Czechs and Slovaks who joined the French Resistance were Otakar Hromádko, Věra Waldes and Artur London.

====German anti-nazis====
From spring 1943, German and Austrian anti-nazis who had fought in the International Brigades during the Spanish Civil War fought in Lozère and the Cévennes alongside the French Resistance in the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans. During the first years of the occupation, they had been employed in the CTE, but following the German invasion of the southern zone in 1942 the threat increased, and many joined the maquis. They were led by militant German communist Otto Kühne, a former member of the Reichstag in the Weimar Republic who had over 2,000 Germans in the FTP under his command by July 1944. He fought the Nazis directly, as in an April 1944 battle in Saint-Étienne-Vallée-Française in which his soldiers destroyed a Feldgendarmerie unit, or in an ambush of the Waffen-SS on June 5, 1944.

====Luxembourgers====
400 men from Luxembourg (which was annexed into Germany), many of whom had refused to serve in, or who had deserted from, the German Wehrmacht, left their tiny country to fight in the French maquis, where they were particularly active in the regions of Lyon, Grenoble and the Ardennes although many of them were killed in the war. Others, like Antoine Diederich, rose to high rank in the Resistance. Diederich, known only as &quot;Capitaine Baptiste&quot;, had 77 maquis soldiers under his command and is best known for attacking Riom prison, where he and his fighters freed every one of 114 inmates who had been sentenced to death.

====Hungarians====
Many Hungarian émigrés, some of them Jewish, were artists and writers working in Paris at the time of the occupation. They had gone to Paris in the 1920s and 1930s to escape repression in their homeland. Many joined the Resistance, where they were particularly active in the regions of Lyon, Grenoble, Marseille and Toulouse. Jewish resisters included Imre Epstein in the Hungarian group at Toulouse; György Vadnai (future Lausanne rabbi) at Lyon; the writer Emil Szittya at Limoges. Also participating were the painter Sándor Józsa, the sculptor István Hajdú (Étienne Hajdu), the journalists László Kőrös and Imre Gyomrai; the photographers Andor (André) Steiner, Lucien Hervé and Ervin Martón. Thomas Elek (1924–1944), Imre Glasz (1902–1944) and József Boczor (1905–1944) were among 23 resisters executed for their work with the legendary Manouchian Group. The Germans executed nearly 1,100 Jewish resisters of different nationalities during the occupation, while others were killed in action.

====Italian anti-fascists====
On 3 March 1943, representatives of the Italian Communist Party and Italian Socialist Party who had taken refuge in France, signed the &quot;Pact of Lyon&quot; which marked the beginning of their participation in the Resistance. Italians were particularly numerous in the Hitler-annexed Moselle industrial area, where they played a determining role in the creation of the Département&#x27;s main resistance organisation, &quot;Groupe Mario&quot;. Vittorio Culpo is an example of Italians in the French Resistance.

====Polish resistance in France during World War II====
The majority of the Polish soldiers, and some Polish civilians, who stayed in France after the German victory in 1940, as well as one Polish pilot shot down over France (one of many Polish pilots flying for the RAF), joined the French Resistance, notably including Tony Halik and Aleksander Kawałkowski.

====Cajun Americans====
While not part of the French Resistance, French-speaking Cajun soldiers in the United States military posed as local civilians in France to channel American assistance to the Resistance.

===Beginnings of a coordinated resistance===
From 1940 to 1942, the first years of the German occupation of France, there was no systematically organised Resistance capable of coordinated fighting throughout France. Active opposition to the German and Vichy authorities was sporadic and carried out only by a tiny and fragmented set of operatives. Most French men and women put their faith in the Vichy government and its figurehead, Marshal Pétain, who continued to be widely regarded as the &quot;savior&quot; of France, opinions which persisted until their unpopular policies, and their collaboration with the foreign occupiers, became broadly apparent.

The earliest Resistance organisations had no contact with the western Allies and received no material aid from London or anywhere else. Consequently, most focused on generating nationalist propaganda through the distribution of underground newspapers. Many of the major movements, such as Défense de la France, were primarily engaged in publishing and distributing their newspapers. Even after they became more intensively activist, propaganda and the cultivation of positive morale remained, until the very end of the war, their most important concerns.

Early acts of violent resistance were often motivated more by instinct and fighting spirit than by any formal ideology, but later several distinct political alignments and visions of post-liberation France developed among the Resistance organisations. These differences sometimes resulted in conflicts, but the differences among Resistance factions were usually papered over by their shared opposition to Vichy and the Germans; and over time, the various elements of the Resistance began to unite.

Many of the networks recruited and controlled by the British and Americans were not perceived by the French as particularly interested in establishing a united or integrated Resistance operation, and the guerrilla groups controlled by the communists were only slightly more attracted by the idea of joining of a Resistance &quot;umbrella&quot; organisation. Nonetheless, a contact between de Gaulle&#x27;s envoys and the communists was established at the end of 1942. The liberation of Corsica in September 1943, a clear demonstration of the strength of communist insurgency, was accomplished by the FTP, an effective force not yet integrated into the Secret Army and not involved with General Henri Giraud, the Free French or the political unification of the Resistance.

The French Resistance began to unify in 1941. This was evidenced by the formation of movements in the Vichy zone centred on such figures as Henri Frenay (&quot;Combat&quot;), Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier de La Vigerie (&quot;Libération-Sud&quot;) and François de Menthon, (&quot;Liberté&quot;), each of whom was, independently, an agent of the Free French. Formal consolidation was accomplished through the intervention of Jean Moulin.

Prefect of Eure-et-Loir in 1939, Moulin was subsequently a part of the Air Ministry of Pierre Cot. In this context, he had forged a strong network of relationships in anti-fascist circles. Some time after November 1940, the idea of teaming up with his former colleague, , to identify and contact a number of potential Resistance &quot;centres of influence&quot; occurred to him; but only during the summer of 1941 was he able to make the most critical contacts, including contact with Henri Frenay, leader of the movement not yet called &quot;Combat&quot; but still known as the . He also established contact with de Menthon and Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier. In the report he wrote for de Gaulle, he spoke of these three movements and entertained the possibility of bringing them together under the acronym &quot;LLL&quot;.

===Maquis===
The Maquis () were rural guerrilla bands of French Resistance fighters, called &quot;maquisards&quot;, during the Occupation of France in World War II. Initially, they were composed of men who had escaped into the mountains to avoid conscription into Vichy France&#x27;s Service du travail obligatoire (STO) to provide forced labor for Nazi Germany. To avert capture and deportation to Germany, they became increasingly organized into non-active resistance groups.

===Jean Moulin&#x27;s intercession===
The majority of resistance movements in France were unified after Moulin&#x27;s formation of the &quot;Conseil National de la Résistance&quot; (CNR) in May 1943. CNR was coordinated with the Free French forces under the authority of French Generals Henri Giraud and Charles de Gaulle and their body, the &quot;Comité Français de Libération Nationale&quot; (CFLN).

==Activities==
===Economic resistance===
By June 1941, 81% of the miners employed by the national coal mining company, Charbonnages de France, were on strike, slowing deliveries of coal to German industrial plants supporting the war effort.

===Clandestine press===
The first action of many Resistance movements was the publication and distribution of clandestine press material. This was not the case with all movements, since some refused civil action and preferred armed resistance by groups such as CDLR and CDLL. Most clandestine newspapers were not consistent in their editorial stance and often consisted of only a single sheet, because the sale of all raw materials—paper, ink, stencils—was prohibited.

By 1942, however, about 300,000 copies of underground publications reached around two million readers. Resistance workers used friendly print-shop facilities at night. Staff risked the Germans noticing that a resistance newspaper used the same type face as officially sanctioned documents. Profession-specific newspapers also existed. &quot;Le Médecin Français&quot; advised doctors to immediately approve known collaborators for &quot;Service du travail obligatoire&quot; while medically disqualifying everyone else. &quot;La Terre&quot; advised farmers on how to send food to resistance members. &quot;Bulletin des Chemins de Fer&quot; encouraged railroad workers to sabotage German transportation. &quot;Unter Uns&quot; (&quot;Among Us&quot;), published in German for the occupiers, printed stories of German defeats on the Eastern Front.

In September 1940, Agnès Humbert and Jean Cassou, then employed at the &quot;Musée national des Arts et Traditions Populaires&quot; in Paris and finding they were to be replaced by German-approved staff, used a roneo machine belonging to the Museum to publish an open letter by Paul Rivet to Marshal Pétain. This was followed by their first tract, &quot;Vichy fait la guerre&quot; (&quot;Vichy Wages War&quot;), written by Cassou. At the end of 1940, a group of 10, including Humbert, Cassou, Marcel Abraham and Claude Aveline founded a clandestine newsletter called &quot;Résistance&quot;, respecting and supporting De Gaulle but circumspect in references to &quot;that ridiculous old fool Pétain&quot;. It ran to five issues before the arrest of the editors in March 1940.

In the northern zone, &quot;Pantagruel&quot;, the newspaper of Franc-Tireur, had a circulation of 10,000 by June 1941 but was quickly replaced by &quot;Libération-Nord&quot; which attained a circulation of 50,000, and by January 1944 &quot;Défense de la France&quot; was distributing 450,000 copies. In the southern zone, François de Menthon&#x27;s newspaper &quot;Liberté&quot; merged with Henri Frenay&#x27;s &quot;Vérité&quot; to form Combat in December 1941, which grew to a circulation of 200,000 by 1944. During the same period &quot;Pantagruel&quot; brought out 37 issues, &quot;Libération-Sud&quot; 54 and &quot;Témoignage chrétien&quot; 15.

The underground press brought out books as well as newspapers through publishing houses, such as Les Éditions de Minuit (the Midnight Press), which had been set up to circumvent Vichy and German censorship. The 1942 novel &quot;Le Silence de la Mer&quot; (&quot;The Silence of the Sea&quot;), by Jean Bruller, quickly became a symbol of mental resistance through its story of how an old man and his niece refused to speak to the German officer occupying their house.

===Intelligence===
The intelligence networks were by far the most numerous and substantial of Resistance activities. They collected information of military value, such as coastal fortifications of the Atlantic Wall or Wehrmacht deployments. The BCRA and the different British intelligence services often competed with one another to gather the most valuable information from their Resistance networks in France.

The first agents of the Free French to arrive from Britain landed on the coast of Brittany as early as July 1940. They were Lieutenants Mansion, Saint-Jacques and Corvisart and Colonel Rémy, and didn&#x27;t hesitate to get in touch with the anti-Germans within the Vichy military such as Georges Loustaunau-Lacau and Georges Groussard.

The various Resistance movements in France had to understand the value of intelligence networks in order to be recognized or receive subsidies from the BCRA or the British. The intelligence service of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans was known by the code letters FANA and headed by Georges Beyer, the brother-in-law of Charles Tillon. Information from such services was often used as a bargaining chip to qualify for airdrops of weapons.

The transmission of information was first done by radio transmitter. Later, when air links by the Westland Lysander became more frequent, some information was also channeled through these couriers. By 1944, the BCRA was receiving 1,000 telegrams by radio every day and 2,000 plans every week. Many radio operators, called &quot;pianistes&quot;, were located by German goniometers. Their dangerous work gave them an average life expectancy of around six months. Even children partook in radio work (see Eddy Palacci). According to the historian Jean-François Muracciole, &quot;Throughout the war, how to communicate remained the principal difficulty of intelligence networks. Not only were the operators few and inept, but their information was dangerous.&quot;

===Sabotage===
Sabotage was a form of resistance adopted by groups who wanted to go beyond just distributing clandestine press publications. Many laboratories were set up to manufacture explosives. In August 1941, the Parisian chemist France Bloch-Sérazin assembled a small laboratory in her apartment to provide explosives to communist Resistance fighters. The lab also produced cyanide capsules to allow the fighters to evade torture if arrested. Indeed, she herself was arrested in February 1942, tortured, and deported to Hamburg where she was beheaded by guillotine in February 1943. In the southern occupation zone, Jacques Renouvin engaged in the same activities on behalf of groups of francs-tireurs.

Stealing dynamite from the Germans eventually took preference over handcrafting explosives. The British Special Operations Executive also parachuted tons of explosives to its agents in France for essential sabotage missions. The railways were a favorite target of saboteurs, who soon understood that removing bolts from the tracks was far more efficient than planting explosives.

Train-derailment strategies varied considerably in their effectiveness. The Germans managed to repair the tracks quickly in agricultural areas with level ground, since the salvage of some matériel was a relatively easy proposition in such terrain. But unbolting a connector plate on an outside rail in a mountainous area (given the higher speed of trains going downhill) could result in the derailment of an entire train with considerable amounts of front-ready matériel strewn far down the mountainside. Among the SNCF employees who joined the resistance, a subset were in Resistance-Fer which focused on reporting the movement of German troops to the Allied forces and sabotaging the railways&#x27; rolling stock as well as their infrastructure. Following the invasions of Normandy and Provence in 1944, the sabotage of rail transport became much more frequent and effectively prevented some German troop deployments to the front and hindered the subsequent retreat of German occupying forces.

Generally, the sabotage of equipment leaving armaments factories and derailment in areas where equipment could not readily be salvaged was a more discreet form of resistance, and probably at least as effective as bombing. Sabotage by resistants freed up vulnerable and expensive aircraft for other uses rather than risk heavy losses by attacking heavily defended targets. It was also preferred since it caused less collateral damage and fewer civilian casualties than Allied bombing.

===Guerrilla warfare===

After the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, communists engaged in guerrilla warfare, attacking German forces in French cities. In July 1942, the Allies&#x27; failure to open a second front resulted in a wave of communist guerrilla attacks aimed at maximizing the number of Germans deployed in the West to give the USSR military relief.

The assassinations that took place during summer and autumn 1941, starting with Colonel Pierre-Georges Fabien&#x27;s shooting of a German officer in the Paris Métro, caused fierce reprisals and executions of hundreds of French hostages. As a result, the clandestine press was very discreet about the events and the communists soon decided to discontinue the assassinations.

From July to October 1943, groups in Paris engaging in attacks against occupying soldiers were better organized. Joseph Epstein was assigned responsibility for training Resistance fighters across the city, and his new commandos of fifteen men perpetrated a number of attacks that could not have been carried out before. The commandos were drawn from the foreign branch of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans, and the most famous of them was the Manouchian Group.

==Role in the liberation of France and casualties==

Defining the precise role of the French Resistance during the German occupation, or assessing its military importance alongside the Allied Forces during the liberation of France, is difficult. The two forms of resistance, active and passive, and the north–south occupational divide, allow for many interpretations, but what can broadly be agreed on is a synopsis of the events which took place.

Following the surrender of Fascist Italy in September 1943, a significant example of Resistance strength was displayed when the Corsican Resistance joined forces with the Free French to liberate the island from General Albert Kesselring&#x27;s remaining German forces.

On mainland France itself, in the wake of the D-Day landings in Normandy in June 1944, the FFI and the communist fighting groups FTP, theoretically unified under the command of General Pierre Kœnig, fought alongside the Allies to free the rest of France. Several color-coded plans were co-ordinated for sabotage, most importantly &quot;Plan Vert&quot; (green) for railways, &quot;Plan Bleu&quot; (blue) for power installations and &quot;Plan Violet&quot; (purple) for telecommunications. To complement these missions, smaller plans were drafted: &quot;Plan Rouge&quot; (red) for German ammunition depots, &quot;Plan Jaune&quot; (yellow) for German command posts, &quot;Plan Noir&quot; (black) for German fuel depots and &quot;Plan Tortue&quot; (Tortoise) for road traffic. Their paralysis of German infrastructure is widely thought to have been very effective. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill later wrote in his memoirs praising the role the Resistance played in the liberation of Brittany, &quot;The French Resistance Movement, which here numbered 30,000 men, played a notable part, and the peninsula was quickly overrun.&quot;


The Liberation of Paris on August 25, 1944, with the support of Leclerc&#x27;s French 2nd Armored Division, was one of the most famous and glorious moments of the French Resistance. Although it is again difficult to gauge their effectiveness precisely, popular anti-German demonstrations, such as general strikes by the Paris Métro, the gendarmerie and the police, took place, and fighting ensued.

The liberation of most of southwestern, central and southeastern France was finally fulfilled with the arrival of the 1st French Army of General de Lattre de Tassigny, which landed in Provence in August 1944 and was backed by over 25,000 maquis.

One source often referred to is General Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s comment in his military memoir, &quot;Crusade in Europe&quot;:

General Eisenhower also estimated the value of the Resistance to have been equal to ten to fifteen divisions at the time of the landings. (One infantry division comprised about ten thousand soldiers.) Eisenhower&#x27;s statements are all the more credible since he based them on his GHQ&#x27;s formal analyses and published them only after the war, when propaganda was no longer a motive. Historians still debate how effective the French Resistance was militarily, but the neutralization of the Maquis du Vercors alone involved the commitment of over 10,000 German troops within the theater, with several more thousand held in reserve, as the Allied invasion was advancing from Normandy and French Operation Jedburgh commandos were being dropped nearby to the south to prepare for the Allied landing in Provence. One American officer, Ralph Ingersoll who served in SHEAF wrote in his book &quot;Top Secret&quot;:

It is estimated that FFI killed some 2,000 Germans, a low estimate based on the figures from June 1944 only. Estimates of the casualties among the Resistance are made harder by the dispersion of movements at least until D-Day, but credible estimates start from 8,000 dead in action, 25,000 shot and several tens of thousands deported. For perspective, the best estimate is that 86,000 were deported from France without racial motive, overwhelmingly comprising resistance fighters and more than the number of Gypsies and Jews deported from France.

==Legacy==
===Épurations (&quot;purges&quot;)===

Immediately following the liberation, France was swept by a wave of executions, public humiliations, assaults and detentions of suspected collaborators, known as the &quot;épuration sauvage&quot; (wild purge). This period succeeded the German occupational administration but preceded the authority of the French Provisional Government, and consequently lacked any form of institutional justice. Approximately 9,000 were executed, mostly without trial as summary executions, notably including members and leaders of the pro-Nazi milices. In one case, as many as 77 milices members were summarily executed at once. An inquest into the issue of summary executions launched by Jules Moch, the Minister of the Interior, came to the conclusion that there were 9,673 summary executions. A second inquest in 1952 separated out 8,867 executions of suspected collaborators and 1,955 summary executions for which the motive of killing was not known, giving a total of 10,822 executions. Head-shaving as a form of humiliation and shaming was a common feature of the purges, and between 10,000 and 30,000 women accused of having collaborated with the Germans or having had relationships with German soldiers or officers were subjected to the practice, becoming known as &quot;les tondues&quot; (the shorn).

The official &quot;épuration légale&quot; (&quot;legal purge&quot;) began following a June 1944 decree that established a three-tier system of judicial courts: a High Court of Justice which dealt with Vichy ministers and officials; Courts of Justice for other serious cases of alleged collaboration; and regular Civic Courts for lesser cases of alleged collaboration. Over 700 collaborators were executed following proper legal trials. This initial phase of the purge trials ended with a series of amnesty laws passed between 1951 and 1953 which reduced the number of imprisoned collaborators from 40,000 to 62, and was followed by a period of official &quot;repression&quot; that lasted between 1954 and 1971.

===Historical analysis===
During this period, and particularly after de Gaulle&#x27;s return to power in 1958, the collective memory of &quot;Résistancialisme&quot; tended toward a highly resistant France opposed to the collaboration of the Vichy régime. This period ended when the aftermath of the events of May 1968, which had divided French society between the conservative &quot;war generation&quot; and the younger, more liberal students and workers, led many to question the Resistance ideals promulgated by the official history.

In coming to terms with the events of the occupation, several attitudes have emerged in France, in an evolution the historian Henry Rousso has called the &quot;Vichy syndrome&quot;. The questioning of France&#x27;s past had become a national obsession by the 1980s, fueled by the highly publicized trials of war criminals such as Paul Touvier and Maurice Papon.Although the occupation is often still a sensitive subject in the early 21st century, contrary to some interpretations the French as a whole have acknowledged their past and no longer deny their conduct during the war.

After the war, the influential French Communist Party (PCF) projected itself as &quot;Le Parti des Fusillés&quot; (The Party of Those Shot), in recognition of the thousands of communists executed for their Resistance activities. The number of communists killed was in reality considerably less than the Party&#x27;s figure of 75,000. It is now estimated that close to 30,000 Frenchmen of all political movements combined were shot, of whom only a few thousand were communists. Others were deported, though, many of which died in concentration camps.

The Vichy régime&#x27;s prejudicial policies had discredited traditional conservatism in France by the end of the war, but following the liberation many former &quot;Pétainistes&quot; became critical of the official &quot;résistancialisme&quot;, using expressions such as &quot;le mythe de la Résistance&quot; (the myth of the Resistance), one of them even concluding, &quot;The &#x27;Gaullist&#x27; régime is therefore built on a fundamental lie.&quot;

===Literature and films===
The French Resistance has had a great influence on literature, particularly in France. A famous example is the poem &quot;Strophes pour se souvenir&quot;, which was written by the communist academic Louis Aragon in 1955 to commemorate the heroism of the Manouchian Group, whose 23 members were shot by the Nazis. The Resistance is also portrayed in Jean Renoir&#x27;s wartime &quot;This Land is Mine&quot; (1943), which was produced in the US. In the immediate postwar years, French cinema produced a number of films that portrayed a France broadly present in the Resistance. &quot;La Bataille du rail&quot; (1946) depicted the courageous efforts of French railway workers to sabotage German reinforcement trains, and in the same year &quot;Le Père tranquille&quot; told the story of a quiet insurance agent secretly involved in the bombing of a factory. Collaborators were unflatteringly portrayed as a rare unpopular minority, as played by Pierre Brewer in &quot;Jéricho&quot; (also 1946) or Serge Reggiani in &quot;Les Portes de la nuit&quot; (1946 as well), and movements such as the Milice were rarely evoked.

In the 1950s, a less heroic interpretation of the Resistance to the occupation gradually began to emerge. In Claude Autant-Lara&#x27;s &quot;La Traversée de Paris&quot; (1956), the portrayal of the city&#x27;s black market and the prevailing general mediocrity disclosed the reality of war-profiteering during the occupation. In the same year, Robert Bresson presented &quot;A Man Escaped&quot;, in which an imprisoned Resistance activist works with a reformed collaborator inmate to help him escape. A cautious reappearance of the image of Vichy emerged in &quot;Le Passage du Rhin&quot; (The Crossing of the Rhine)(1960), in which a crowd successively acclaims both Pétain and de Gaulle.

After General de Gaulle&#x27;s return to power in 1958, the portrayal of the Resistance returned to its earlier &quot;résistancialisme&quot;. In this manner, in &quot;Is Paris Burning?&quot; (1966), &quot;the role of the resistant was revalued according to [de Gaulle&#x27;s] political trajectory&quot;. The comic form of films such as &quot;La Grande Vadrouille&quot; (also 1966) broadened the image of Resistance heroes in the minds of average Frenchmen. The most famous and critically acclaimed of all the &quot;résistancialisme&quot; movies is &quot;L&#x27;armée des ombres&quot; (Army of Shadows) by French filmmaker Jean-Pierre Melville in 1969, a film inspired by Joseph Kessel&#x27;s 1943 book as well as Melville&#x27;s own experience as a Resistance fighter who participated in Operation Dragoon. A 1995 television screening of &quot;L&#x27;armée des ombres&quot; described it as &quot;the best film made about the fighters of the shadows, those anti-heroes.&quot; The shattering of France&#x27;s &quot;résistancialisme&quot; following the civil unrest of May 1968 was made particularly clear in French cinema. The candid approach of the 1971 documentary &quot;The Sorrow and the Pity&quot; shone a spotlight on antisemitism in France and disputed the official Resistance ideals. &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s positive review of the film wrote that director Marcel Ophüls &quot;tries to puncture the bourgeois myth—or protectively askew memory—that allows France generally to act as if hardly any Frenchmen collaborated with the Germans.&quot;

Franck Cassenti, with &quot;L&#x27;Affiche Rouge&quot; (1976); Gilson, with &quot;La Brigade&quot; (1975); and Mosco with the documentary &quot;Des terroristes à la retraite&quot; addressed foreign resisters of the EGO, who were then relatively unknown. In 1974, Louis Malle&#x27;s &quot;Lacombe, Lucien&quot; caused scandal and polemic for his lack of moral judgment regarding the behavior of a collaborator. Malle later portrayed the resistance of Catholic priests who protected Jewish children in his 1987 film &quot;Au revoir les enfants&quot;. François Truffaut&#x27;s 1980 film &quot;Le Dernier Métro&quot; was set during the German occupation of Paris and won ten Césars for its story of a theatrical production staged while its Jewish director is concealed by his wife in the theater&#x27;s basement. The 1980s began to portray the resistance of working women, as in &quot;Blanche et Marie&quot; (1984). Later, Jacques Audiard&#x27;s &quot;Un héros très discret&quot; (1996) told the story of a young man&#x27;s traveling to Paris and manufacturing a Resistance past for himself, suggesting that many heroes of the Resistance were impostors. In 1997 Claude Berri produced the biopic &quot;Lucie Aubrac&quot; based on the life of the Resistance heroine of the same name, which was criticized for its Gaullist portrayal of the Resistance and its overemphasizing the relationship between Aubrac and her husband.

In 2003, Kimberly Brubaker Bradley first published a book entitled &quot;For Freedom: The Story of a French Spy&quot;. Though classified as a work of fiction, the book is based on the real-life memories of Suzanne David Hall. Training to become an opera singer, Suzanne was traveling for rehearsals, costume fittings, and lessons when she was recruited by an organizer of the French Resistance and became a secret courier.

===Museums and memorials===

After the war, museums and memorials commemorating the events and the people involved in the resistance were established throughout France.

==Cultural personalities==
The well-known personalities of France—intellectuals, artists, and entertainers—faced a serious dilemma in choosing to emigrate or to remain in France during the country&#x27;s occupation. Among those who actively fought in the Resistance, a number died for it—for instance the writer Jean Prévost, the philosopher and mathematician Jean Cavaillès, the historian Marc Bloch, and the philosopher Jean Gosset; among those who survived and went on to reflect on their experience, a particularly visible one was André Malraux.

Among prominent foreign figures who participated in the French Resistance was the political scientist and later Iranian Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar. After serving as the prime minister and strong man of the authoritarian Shah regime in Iran, he was forced back into Paris in the aftermath of the Islamic Revolution. He was assassinated on order of the Iranian Islamic Republic in 1991.

==Popular culture==
The Resistance features in the Kevin Doherty novels &quot;Villa Normandie&quot; (Endeavour Press, 2015), which depicts a female Resistance cell leader as the novel&#x27;s main character, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s War&quot; (Endeavour Press, 2016), and &quot;Landscape of Shadows&quot; (Oceanview Publishing, 2022), and also in films such as the 1964 film &quot;The Train&quot;, based on fact about the Resistance&#x27;s efforts to prevent a train carrying looted French art from getting to Germany, and the 2011 film &quot;15 Lads&quot;, about a group of young Resistance fighters, inspired by the real-life experiences of director Romain Cogitore&#x27;s grandfather, Antoine Cogitore, as a Resistance fighter in the maquis of Grande Chartreuse when he was a teenager.

In television, the series &quot;Un village français&quot; (English: &quot;A French Village&quot;) tells the extended story of a community of resistance members and the harsh realities that such a group faced during the entirety of the French occupation, and &quot;Resistance&quot;, created by TF1 in France (as &quot;Résistance&quot;), is a drama set in German-occupied Paris in 1940 depicting the lives of students and teachers within the Resistance, loosely based on the activities of the Groupe du musée de l&#x27;Homme. &quot;&#x27;Allo &#x27;Allo!&quot;, a British sitcom featuring Resistance activities, was conceived as a parody of the earlier BBC drama series &quot;Secret Army&quot;, and a number of characters in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; television franchise are members of the maquis.

Emmanuel d&#x27;Astier de La Vigerie, credited as &quot;Bernard&quot;, wrote the original French lyrics of Anna Marly&#x27;s 1943 song &quot;La Complainte du partisan&quot;, which later gained worldwide popularity as &quot;The Partisan&quot; with English lyrics adapted by Hy Zaret. The song describes the trials of a Resistance member from their perspective. Many artists have released versions of the song, in many languages, with the most well-known release being by Leonard Cohen in 1969.

==See also==
* 
* 
* &quot;&quot;
* 


==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Danan, Professeur Yves Maxime, &quot;République Française Capitale Alger, 1940–1944, Souvenirs&quot;, L&#x27;Harmattan, Paris, 2019.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* American title: &quot;Resistance: A Frenchwoman&#x27;s Journal of the War&quot;, Bloomsbury, US, 2008; Dutch: &quot;Resistance. Dagboek van een Parisienne in het verzet&quot; (Amsterdam: De Bezige Bij, 2008)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* Gildea, Robert. &quot;Fighters in the shadows: a new history of the French resistance&quot; (Faber &amp; Faber, 2015).
* 
* Marco, Jorge (2020) &quot;An Army of mutes in disguise: Languages and transnational resistance in France during the Second World War&quot;, &quot;Languages and Intercultural Communication&quot;
* 
* 
* Wieviorka, Olivier. &quot;The French Resistance&quot; (Harvard University Press, 2016).

===Historiography===
* Bracher, Nathan. &quot;Remembering the French resistance: ethics and poetics of the epic&quot;. &quot;History &amp; Memory&quot; 19.1 (2007): 39–67 online also online.
* Douzou, Laurent. &quot;A Perilous History: A Historiographical Essay on the French Resistance.&quot; &quot;Contemporary European History&quot; 28.1 (2019): 96–106. 
* Millington, Chris. &quot;Were we terrorists? History, terrorism, and the French Resistance&quot;. &quot;History Compass&quot; 16.2 (2018): e12440 online.
* Poznanski, Renée. &quot;Rescue of the Jews and the resistance in France: From history to historiography.&quot; &quot;French Politics, Culture &amp; Society&quot; 30.2 (2012): 8–32 online.


==External links==

* &quot;The Kellner Affair: Matters of Life and Death&quot; by Peter M. Larsen and Ben Erickson. Published by Dalton Watson Fine Books.
* &quot;Encarta Encyclopedia&quot; – History of France – The Resistance (Archived 2009-10-31)
* &quot;Spartacus Educational&quot; – The French Resistance
* &quot;Geocities.com&quot; – 
* &quot;SOE Agents in France&quot; – Secret agents sent to work with the French Resistance
* &quot;Northwest Historical Association&quot; – Building the French Resistance Movement, 1940–1944
* &quot;Order of the Liberation&quot; – Chronology 1940–1945
* &quot;European Resistance Archive&quot; – Video Interviews with Resistance Members
* &quot;Pierre Albert&quot; – The Journalism of the French Resistance 
* &quot;Rebecca Halbreich, The San Francisco State University&quot; – Women in the French Resistance
* &quot;European Centre of Deported Resistance Members&quot; – History and memory of the European Resistance movements and deportation.
* &quot;Ambush at Thorame-Haute: archaeological traces of a fifteen minute Ambush by the French resistance&quot; by Jean-Loup Gassend</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="4" end="21" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="68" end="83" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92" end="108" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy#France" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="109" end="121" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="143" end="159" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944071" start="172" end="177" title="Clandestine cell system" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="231" end="237" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="268" end="285" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q438760" start="300" end="322" title="Underground press" label="underground newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="412" end="418" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="454" end="458" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="552" end="558" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="582" end="592" title="aristocrat" label="aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="608" end="622" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331995" start="644" end="654" title="Protestantism in France" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q702758" start="657" end="661" title="History of the Jews in France" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q583544" start="663" end="670" title="Islam in France" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237981" start="672" end="680" title="Liberalism and radicalism in France" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q892502" start="682" end="692" title="Anarchism in France" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753626" start="694" end="704" title="Communism in France" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062653" start="715" end="723" title="History of far-right movements in France" label="fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="996" end="1016" title="Operation Overlord" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1050" end="1071" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="1104" end="1117" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1126" end="1135" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167066" start="1152" end="1168" title="Order of battle" label="orders of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="1177" end="1210" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Allies&amp;#x27; invasion of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="1731" end="1760" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="2081" end="2087" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="VE Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="2133" end="2149" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="2158" end="2188" title="Second Armistice at Compiègne" label="second French-German armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="2465" end="2477" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="2663" end="2680" title="German Reichsmark" label="German Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="2769" end="2782" title="French Franc" label="French francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="2799" end="2812" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q525212" start="3430" end="3460" title="Service du Travail Obligatoire" label="Service du Travail Obligatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3538" end="3554" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690716" start="4029" end="4050" title="collective punishment" label="collective punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q836897" start="4498" end="4524" title="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre" label="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="4726" end="4732" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q151983" start="4768" end="4780" title="Pierre Laval" label="Pierre Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q703281" start="4798" end="4812" title="Joseph Darnand" label="Joseph Darnand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="5003" end="5010" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="5084" end="5091" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="5096" end="5105" title="execution" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q225723" start="5393" end="5413" title="Charlemagne Division" label="Charlemagne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="5421" end="5430" title="Waffen SS" label="Waffen SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="5539" end="5547" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="5571" end="5585" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="5604" end="5616" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q936633" start="5625" end="5639" title="Palais-Bourbon" label="Palais-Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="5651" end="5668" title="French National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015164" start="6364" end="6373" title="Ian Ousby" label="Ian Ousby"/>
<link wikidata="Q965990" start="6987" end="6998" title="Jean Cassou" label="Jean Cassou"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="7591" end="7595" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q463367" start="7852" end="7864" title="Henri Frenay" label="Henri Frenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q386196" start="7910" end="7930" title="Révolution nationale" label="Révolution nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q694431" start="8424" end="8434" title="Paul Rivet" label="Paul Rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q565712" start="8458" end="8469" title="Boris Vildé" label="Boris Vildé"/>
<link wikidata="Q315029" start="8587" end="8606" title="François de Menthon" label="François de Menthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="8675" end="8703" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8754" end="8763" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763603" start="8837" end="8855" title="Maurice Buckmaster" label="Maurice Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q463367" start="8923" end="8929" title="Henri Frenay" label="Frenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q573162" start="8938" end="8956" title="Combat (French Resistance)" label="&amp;quot;Combat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440842" start="9747" end="9764" title="Roman Czerniawski" label="Roman Czerniawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298950" start="9917" end="9931" title="Mathilde Carré" label="Mathilde Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206616" start="10077" end="10092" title="Deuxième Bureau" label="Deuxième Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="10474" end="10488" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="11244" end="11252" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q81909" start="11480" end="11485" title="Royan" label="Royan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="11490" end="11501" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q68590" start="11566" end="11585" title="Otto von Stülpnagel" label="Otto von Stülpnagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173695" start="11836" end="11842" title="Épinal" label="Épinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="11888" end="11894" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="12011" end="12023" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19217057" start="12138" end="12163" title="law on the status of Jews" label="law on the status of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q664017" start="12277" end="12286" title="Aryanization" label="Aryanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="12331" end="12336" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="14382" end="14399" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186988" start="14623" end="14669" title="Clandestine press of the French Resistance" label="publishing journals and underground newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898994" start="14941" end="14961" title="Special Organisation (Algeria)" label="Special Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="15604" end="15615" title="Gestapo" label="the Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="15683" end="15689" title="Abwehr" label="Abwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="15980" end="15987" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170095" start="16079" end="16092" title="Robert Desnos" label="Robert Desnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871742" start="16212" end="16228" title="Aujourd&amp;#x27;hui" label="Aujourd&amp;#x27;hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q188977" start="18127" end="18140" title="Les Invalides" label="Les Invalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q120896503" start="18499" end="18511" title="Black market in wartime France" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239017" start="18570" end="18588" title="Milieu (organized crime in France)" label="&amp;quot;milieu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="18768" end="18776" title="Pyrenées" label="Pyrenées"/>
<link wikidata="Q822327" start="19442" end="19460" title="Jacques Bonsergent" label="Jacques Bonsergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355964" start="19757" end="19789" title="Organisation civile et militaire" label="Organisation civile et militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q462634" start="20766" end="20778" title="Jean Bruller" label="Jean Bruller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="21444" end="21462" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="21817" end="21820" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q826265" start="21828" end="21841" title="Radio Londres" label="Radio Londres"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="22075" end="22084" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q260458" start="22092" end="22104" title="Marc Boegner" label="Marc Boegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407986" start="22131" end="22147" title="statut des Juifs" label="statut des Juifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="22298" end="22301" title="Special Operations Executive" label="SOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102408" start="22309" end="22322" title="Georges Bégué" label="Georges Bégué"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198070" start="22385" end="22398" title="Virginia Hall" label="Virginia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188709" start="22925" end="22939" title="Symphony No. 5 (Beethoven)" label="Fifth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="22964" end="22974" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="23285" end="23302" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198070" start="23361" end="23374" title="Virginia Hall" label="Virginia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628148" start="23510" end="23535" title="collaboration horizontale" label="collaboration horizontale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="24317" end="24332" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41180" start="24744" end="24759" title="La Marseillaise" label="La Marseillaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q900013" start="24795" end="24802" title="May Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="24804" end="24816" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="25259" end="25267" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="25468" end="25478" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25692" end="25703" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="25894" end="25914" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213526" start="26041" end="26049" title="Daladier" label="Daladier"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="26072" end="26097" title="Parti Communiste Français" label="Parti Communiste Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="26179" end="26188" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="26454" end="26471" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="26567" end="26570" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q970284" start="26661" end="26675" title="Charles Tillon" label="Charles Tillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="26732" end="26735" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q568676" start="27356" end="27402" title="Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism" label="Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="27410" end="27423" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q319927" start="27614" end="27628" title="Pierre Georges" label="Pierre Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="27687" end="27698" title="Paris Metro" label="Paris Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q68590" start="27788" end="27807" title="Otto von Stülpnagel" label="Otto von Stülpnagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="28341" end="28349" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="28382" end="28396" title="Oberstleutnant" label="Oberstleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="28452" end="28458" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="28547" end="28555" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28844" end="28853" title="Léon Jost" label="Léon Jost"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="30317" end="30325" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q632" start="30327" end="30338" title="Jean Moulin" label="Jean Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985550" start="30810" end="30835" title="French National Committee" label="French National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="30967" end="31016" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q518345" start="31075" end="31089" title="André Dewavrin" label="André Dewavrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312872" start="31220" end="31231" title="Duke Street, Marylebone" label="Duke Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="31465" end="31473" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="31520" end="31523" title="Special Operations Executive" label="SOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="31597" end="31605" title="Gaullist" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="31893" end="31899" title="Abwehr" label="Abwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="32001" end="32013" title="double agent" label="double agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142362" start="32379" end="32392" title="Hugo Bleicher" label="Hugo Bleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q474389" start="32464" end="32479" title="Alfred Heurtaux" label="Alfred Heurtaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355964" start="32487" end="32490" title="Organisation civile et militaire" label="OCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159859" start="32583" end="32599" title="Jacques Renouvin" label="Jacques Renouvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="32943" end="32947" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="32952" end="32961" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q579924" start="33599" end="33614" title="Nacht und Nebel" label="Nacht und Nebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="34075" end="34103" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158151" start="34191" end="34206" title="Jacques Arthuys" label="Jacques Arthuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835488" start="34328" end="34340" title="Alfred Touny" label="Alfred Touny"/>
<link wikidata="Q567078" start="35108" end="35115" title="FTP-MOI" label="FTP-MOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q830793" start="35140" end="35152" title="Boris Holban" label="Boris Holban"/>
<link wikidata="Q900013" start="35262" end="35269" title="May Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q151983" start="35364" end="35376" title="Pierre Laval" label="Pierre Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q271991" start="35756" end="35772" title="Germaine Tillion" label="Germaine Tillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="35895" end="35899" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66763737" start="35928" end="35945" title="Marguerite Gonnet" label="Marguerite Gonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="36655" end="36663" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373850" start="37211" end="37219" title="Westland Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="37432" end="37440" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="37446" end="37455" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24260806" start="38826" end="38848" title="Janet Teissier du Cros" label="Janet Teissier du Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q62471" start="39369" end="39386" title="Theodor Dannecker" label="Theodor Dannecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q560658" start="39424" end="39451" title="Louis Darquier de Pellepoix" label="Louis Darquier de Pellepoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q665228" start="39489" end="39502" title="René Bousquet" label="René Bousquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q650696" start="40646" end="40666" title="Pierre-Marie Gerlier" label="Pierre-Marie Gerlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q780892" start="40978" end="40998" title="Jules-Géraud Saliège" label="Jules-Géraud Saliège"/>
<link wikidata="Q260458" start="41237" end="41249" title="Marc Boegner" label="Marc Boegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384352" start="41476" end="41491" title="Pierre Chaillet" label="Pierre Chaillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="42641" end="42650" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056043" start="42658" end="42680" title="André and Magda Trocmé" label="André and Magda Trocmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q155549" start="42722" end="42743" title="Le Chambon-sur-Lignon" label="Le Chambon-sur-Lignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="43607" end="43626" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="43761" end="43775" title="Francs-tireurs" label="Francs-tireurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="43935" end="43944" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43981" end="43999" title="Jean-Bouin Stadium" label="Jean-Bouin Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q58651" start="44149" end="44161" title="Hugo Sperrle" label="Hugo Sperrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319927" start="44473" end="44487" title="Pierre Georges" label="Pierre Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q345408" start="44528" end="44542" title="Maurice Thorez" label="Maurice Thorez"/>
<link wikidata="Q41180" start="44656" end="44678" title="La Marseillaise" label="French national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q119169" start="45941" end="45983" title="Organisation de résistance de l&amp;#x27;armée" label="Organisation de résistance de l&amp;#x27;armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870574" start="46065" end="46077" title="Aubert Frère" label="Aubert Frère"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="46101" end="46113" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="46425" end="46428" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46837" end="46866" title="Mouvements Unis de Résistance" label="Mouvements Unis de Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q517073" start="46940" end="46953" title="Armée Secrète" label="Armée Secrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q534343" start="47059" end="47078" title="Charles Delestraint" label="Charles Delestraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="47445" end="47451" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q703281" start="47697" end="47711" title="Joseph Darnand" label="Joseph Darnand"/>
<link wikidata="Q525212" start="48600" end="48630" title="Service du Travail Obligatoire" label="Service du Travail Obligatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155433" start="49625" end="49642" title="Organisation Todt" label="Organisation Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="50320" end="50333" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q77093" start="51657" end="51670" title="Fritz Sauckel" label="Fritz Sauckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q438070" start="52303" end="52316" title="Alter Kämpfer" label="Alter Kämpfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="52524" end="52536" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213615" start="53848" end="53858" title="Otto Abetz" label="Otto Abetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="54360" end="54366" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q12545" start="54372" end="54379" title="Hérault" label="Hérault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207" start="54385" end="54389" title="Aude" label="Aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709" start="54395" end="54414" title="Pyrénées-Orientales" label="Pyrénées-Orientales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216" start="54419" end="54426" title="Aveyron" label="Aveyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="54585" end="54605" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117889" start="54932" end="54956" title="Groupe mobile de réserve" label="Groupe mobile de réserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="56810" end="56818" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q289892" start="61609" end="61622" title="Odette Hallowes" label="Odette Sansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376501" start="61672" end="61687" title="Peter Churchill" label="Peter Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142362" start="61710" end="61723" title="Hugo Bleicher" label="Hugo Bleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="62027" end="62060" title="Conseil National de la Résistance" label="Conseil National de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="62113" end="62147" title="National Council of the Resistance" label="National Council of the Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q567029" start="62512" end="62522" title="René Hardy" label="René Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="63157" end="63182" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q244717" start="63235" end="63251" title="Caluire-et-Cuire" label="Caluire-et-Cuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="63262" end="63266" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="63528" end="63532" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q708078" start="63824" end="63841" title="Missak Manouchian" label="Missak Manouchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="64043" end="64050" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q281863" start="64060" end="64067" title="Sochaux" label="Sochaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127904" start="64266" end="64275" title="Harry Rée" label="Harry Rée"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64300" end="64316" title="Rudolphe Peugeot" label="Rudolphe Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="65038" end="65046" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="65058" end="65074" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q703281" start="65683" end="65697" title="Joseph Darnand" label="Joseph Darnand"/>
<link wikidata="Q191856" start="66719" end="66726" title="Oyonnax" label="Oyonnax"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="66734" end="66748" title="Jura Mountains" label="Jura Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q166208" start="67098" end="67115" title="Cross of Lorraine" label="Cross of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q573584" start="70154" end="70166" title="Victor Basch" label="Victor Basch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="70844" end="70862" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530804" start="71697" end="71711" title="Tom Morel" label="Théodose Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391934" start="71752" end="71767" title="Glières Plateau" label="Glières Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q50189" start="71773" end="71779" title="Annecy" label="Annecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751" start="71787" end="71799" title="Haute-Savoie" label="Haute-Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q931676" start="72309" end="72327" title="Maquis des Glières" label="Maquis des Glières"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="73229" end="73232" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="FFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q433116" start="75071" end="75084" title="Marie-Pierre Kœnig" label="Pierre Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="75227" end="75244" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q983721" start="75468" end="75484" title="William J. Casey" label="William J. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="75859" end="75863" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q589148" start="76079" end="76094" title="Webley revolver" label="Webley revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q482428" start="76100" end="76116" title="Bren machine gun" label="Bren machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q723346" start="76122" end="76139" title="Lee-Enfield rifle" label="Lee-Enfield rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326166" start="76148" end="76152" title="PIAT" label="PIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q865005" start="76216" end="76225" title="Greasegun" label="Greasegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q248874" start="76237" end="76253" title="Browning Hi-Power" label="Browning handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="76259" end="76267" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319432" start="76276" end="76283" title="bazooka" label="bazooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777314" start="76590" end="76599" title="André Hue" label="André Hue"/>
<link wikidata="Q970284" start="77113" end="77127" title="Charles Tillon" label="Charles Tillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q238205" start="78648" end="78654" title="Voiron" label="Voiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="78665" end="78673" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751" start="78930" end="78942" title="Haute-Savoie" label="Haute-Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q460795" start="79077" end="79087" title="Bonneville, Haute-Savoie" label="Bonneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q527116" start="79223" end="79239" title="Philippe Henriot" label="Philippe Henriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102839" start="79571" end="79588" title="Georges Guingouin" label="Georges Guingouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q597448" start="79637" end="79655" title="Maquis du Limousin" label="Maquis du Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190" start="79663" end="79671" title="Limousin" label="Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q789720" start="79836" end="79842" title="Auxois" label="Auxois"/>
<link wikidata="Q243757" start="80067" end="80077" title="A. J. Ayer" label="A. J. Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="80089" end="80096" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q723363" start="80484" end="80488" title="Ascq" label="Ascq"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="80499" end="80504" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q706535" start="80535" end="80548" title="Ascq massacre" label="Ascq massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321968" start="80902" end="80914" title="Mont Mouchet" label="Mont Mouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q90754" start="80964" end="80971" title="redoubt" label="redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588433" start="81046" end="81061" title="Émile Coulaudon" label="Émile Coulaudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="81091" end="81099" title="Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890796" start="81359" end="81381" title="Maquis du Mont Mouchet" label="Maquis du Mont Mouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628983" start="83254" end="83272" title="Operation Jedburgh" label="Operation Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819653" start="83827" end="83843" title="Tommy Macpherson" label="Tommy Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="85089" end="85103" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="85249" end="85257" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="86480" end="86498" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="87430" end="87449" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="88684" end="88692" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="88696" end="88700" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819653" start="88771" end="88787" title="Tommy Macpherson" label="Tommy Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157713" start="90027" end="90032" title="Tulle" label="Tulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190974" start="90180" end="90197" title="Oradour-sur-Glane" label="Oradour-sur-Glane"/>
<link wikidata="Q70316" start="90287" end="90301" title="Adolf Diekmann" label="Adolf Diekmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777314" start="91270" end="91279" title="André Hue" label="André Hue"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="91325" end="91333" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q127954" start="91432" end="91444" title="Saint-Marcel, Morbihan" label="Saint Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209109" start="91987" end="92007" title="Saint-Amand-Montrond" label="Saint-Amand-Montrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="93630" end="93637" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q527116" start="94123" end="94139" title="Philippe Henriot" label="Philippe Henriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="94559" end="94564" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q695836" start="94987" end="94998" title="Ostlegionen" label="Ostlegionen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435063" start="95624" end="95639" title="Vercors Massif" label="Vercors plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059779" start="95641" end="95655" title="Eugène Chavant" label="Eugène Chavant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12559" start="95678" end="95683" title="Isère" label="Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q817606" start="96173" end="96200" title="Saint-Nizier-du-Moucherotte" label="Saint-Nizier-du-Moucherotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="96210" end="96227" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435063" start="96264" end="96279" title="Vercors plateau" label="Vercors plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="96284" end="96292" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q695836" start="96996" end="97007" title="Ostlegionen" label="Ostlegionen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57141" start="97973" end="97990" title="Günther von Kluge" label="Günther von Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q698220" start="98001" end="98018" title="Operation Lüttich" label="Operation Lüttich"/>
<link wikidata="Q61222" start="98443" end="98464" title="Dietrich von Choltitz" label="Dietrich von Choltitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833947" start="98693" end="98709" title="Alexandre Parodi" label="Alexandre Parodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12940" start="98714" end="98735" title="Jacques Chaban-Delmas" label="Jacques Chaban-Delmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q558245" start="98757" end="98769" title="Henri Rol-Tanguy" label="Henri Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469003" start="100014" end="100028" title="Raoul Nordling" label="Raoul Nordling"/>
<link wikidata="Q312391" start="100575" end="100591" title="Philippe Leclerc" label="Philippe Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="102128" end="102135" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="105180" end="105188" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439164" start="105204" end="105216" title="Roger Landes" label="Roger Landes"/>
<link wikidata="Q536102" start="107040" end="107076" title="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie" label="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="107658" end="107673" title="François Marcot" label="François Marcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="107705" end="107713" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229212" start="107844" end="107857" title="Robert Paxton" label="Robert Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q438760" start="108093" end="108114" title="underground newspaper" label="underground newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="108558" end="108570" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="108624" end="108639" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="108659" end="108676" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="108794" end="108806" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="108960" end="108970" title="bona fides" label="bona fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078515" start="109061" end="109083" title="Appeal of 18 June" label="Appeal of 18 June 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="109170" end="109186" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="109216" end="109222" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="109622" end="109637" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431371" start="109898" end="109918" title="Richard de Rochemont" label="Richard de Rochemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="110179" end="110184" title="espionage" label="spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="110189" end="110198" title="sabotage" label="saboteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q632" start="110356" end="110367" title="Jean Moulin" label="Jean Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="110394" end="110424" title="Conseil National de la Résistance" label="National Council of Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="110519" end="110535" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="110624" end="110641" title="Normandy Invasion" label="Normandy invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="110731" end="110760" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q209831" start="110772" end="110804" title="2nd Armored Division (France)" label="Free French 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q312391" start="110820" end="110836" title="Philippe de Hauteclocque" label="Philippe Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="110848" end="110856" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="110954" end="110967" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="111144" end="111155" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="111238" end="111252" title="General Patton" label="General Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223548" start="111260" end="111270" title="United States Third Army" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="111311" end="111326" title="Operation Cobra" label="Operation Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q275718" start="111543" end="111562" title="German 9th Panzer Division" label="9th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="111621" end="111640" title="battle for Normandy" label="battle for Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="111727" end="111735" title="matériel" label="matériel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="111895" end="111914" title="liberation of Paris" label="liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="111991" end="111996" title="Rhine river" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q558245" start="112035" end="112051" title="Henri Rol-Tanguy" label="Henri Rol-Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="112353" end="112368" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q209831" start="112454" end="112481" title="French 2nd Armored Division" label="French 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q61222" start="112772" end="112793" title="Dietrich von Choltitz" label="Dietrich von Choltitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="113254" end="113268" title="General Giraud" label="General Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="113562" end="113585" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="113632" end="113654" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q213526" start="113703" end="113719" title="Édouard Daladier" label="Édouard Daladier"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="113870" end="113879" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="113990" end="114008" title="nonaggression pact" label="nonaggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="114199" end="114205" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="114362" end="114376" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354903" start="114547" end="114568" title="clandestine operation" label="clandestine operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="114581" end="114598" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319927" start="114628" end="114649" title="Pierre-Georges Fabien" label="Pierre-Georges Fabien"/>
<link wikidata="Q807893" start="114753" end="114772" title="Barbès - Rochechouart (Paris Métro)" label="Barbès-Rochechouart"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="114788" end="114799" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="114959" end="114965" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="115107" end="115134" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="115876" end="115889" title="Popular Front" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="115952" end="115962" title="Trotskyist" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784653" start="116040" end="116059" title="Arbeiter und Soldat" label="Arbeiter und Soldat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="116371" end="116384" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="116416" end="116432" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q601482" start="116447" end="116463" title="Georges Politzer" label="Georges Politzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000325" start="116468" end="116484" title="Valentin Feldman" label="Valentin Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158660" start="116496" end="116510" title="Jacques Decour" label="Jacques Decour"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="116582" end="116594" title="white émigré" label="white émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430567" start="116703" end="116728" title="Union of Russian Patriots" label="Union of Russian Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q316753" start="116876" end="116888" title="Daniel Mayer" label="Daniel Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18434" start="116902" end="116911" title="Leon Blum" label="Leon Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332068" start="116932" end="116936" title="French Section of the Workers&amp;#x27; International" label="SFIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q783434" start="116958" end="116968" title="Paul Faure (politician)" label="Paul Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q381187" start="117091" end="117102" title="Félix Gouin" label="Félix Gouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254258" start="117108" end="117139" title="list of networks and movements of the French Resistance" label="Comité d&amp;#x27;action socialiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="117149" end="117154" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q830456" start="117186" end="117205" title="Jean-Baptiste Lebas" label="Jean-Baptiste Lebas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="117213" end="117231" title="Nord-Pas-de-Calais" label="Nord-Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225790" start="117366" end="117378" title="Le Populaire (1920)" label="Le Populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q328694" start="117479" end="117491" title="André Philip" label="André Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="117558" end="117584" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French (France libre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q381187" start="117590" end="117601" title="Félix Gouin" label="Félix Gouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="117609" end="117626" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="117630" end="117636" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="117669" end="117676" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q572765" start="117739" end="117749" title="Riom Trial" label="Riom trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="117968" end="118002" title="National Council of the Resistance" label="National Council of the Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456533" start="118015" end="118029" title="Brutus network" label="Brutus network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355964" start="118069" end="118101" title="organisation civile et militaire" label="organisation civile et militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q829453" start="118115" end="118129" title="Libération-Sud" label="Libération-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q680881" start="118183" end="118201" title="Pierre Brossolette" label="Pierre Brossolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q608815" start="118203" end="118218" title="Gaston Defferre" label="Gaston Defferre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170785" start="118220" end="118231" title="Jean Biondi" label="Jean Biondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564543" start="118233" end="118243" title="Jules Moch" label="Jules Moch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173983" start="118245" end="118262" title="Jean Pierre-Bloch" label="Jean Pierre-Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085898" start="118264" end="118278" title="François Tanguy-Prigent" label="Tanguy-Prigent"/>
<link wikidata="Q314006" start="118280" end="118290" title="Guy Mollet" label="Guy Mollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q661825" start="118295" end="118311" title="Christian Pineau" label="Christian Pineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q255618" start="118332" end="118343" title="Marx Dormoy" label="Marx Dormoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844646" start="118408" end="118421" title="Amédée Dunois" label="Amédée Dunois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="118423" end="118437" title="Claude Jordery" label="Claude Jordery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871616" start="118442" end="118458" title="Augustin Malroux" label="Augustin Malroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q705067" start="118652" end="118664" title="Croix-de-Feu" label="Croix-de-Feu"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="118818" end="118833" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="118954" end="118969" title="parliamentarism" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002755" start="119049" end="119107" title="6 February 1934 crisis" label="&amp;quot;political disturbance&amp;quot; riots of 6 February 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q83687" start="119133" end="119143" title="La Cagoule" label="La Cagoule"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="119234" end="119248" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339879" start="119638" end="119659" title="François de La Rocque" label="François de La Rocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456568" start="119673" end="119685" title="Klan Network" label="Klan Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103122" start="119752" end="119776" title="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau" label="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292123" start="119781" end="119805" title="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade" label="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="119956" end="119972" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105836" start="120124" end="120136" title="Colonel Rémy" label="Colonel Rémy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992588" start="120154" end="120174" title="Confrérie Notre-Dame" label="Confrérie Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q463367" start="120244" end="120256" title="Henri Frenay" label="Henri Frenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q573162" start="120272" end="120278" title="Combat (French Resistance)" label="Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159859" start="120296" end="120312" title="Jacques Renouvin" label="Jacques Renouvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="120653" end="120661" title="ochlocracy" label="mob rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292123" start="120749" end="120773" title="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade" label="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="120781" end="120788" title="Member of Parliament" label="députés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="120829" end="120848" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="120927" end="120936" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="120954" end="120968" title="France" label="Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="121008" end="121017" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="121066" end="121081" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168952" start="121196" end="121213" title="Jean-Pierre Azéma" label="Jean-Pierre Azéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q386196" start="121382" end="121402" title="Révolution nationale" label="Révolution Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947154" start="121452" end="121473" title="Ceux de la Libération" label="Ceux de la Libération"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093806" start="121735" end="121750" title="Gabriel Jeantet" label="Gabriel Jeantet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159326" start="121755" end="121777" title="Jacques Le Roy Ladurie" label="Jacques Le Roy Ladurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q558248" start="121868" end="121881" title="Affiche Rouge" label="Affiche Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="121915" end="121925" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672037" start="122013" end="122027" title="Military history of France during World War II" label="occupied Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="122072" end="122084" title="Franc-Tireur" label="Franc-Tireur"/>
<link wikidata="Q708078" start="122105" end="122121" title="Missak Manouchian" label="Manouchian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928476" start="122234" end="122247" title="Mont-Valérien" label="Mont-Valérien"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="122597" end="122606" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="122747" end="122759" title="collaborationism" label="collaborated"/>
<link wikidata="Q19217057" start="122913" end="122938" title="law on the status of Jews" label="law on the status of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006336" start="122992" end="123002" title="underclass" label="underclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="123047" end="123062" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="123290" end="123308" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904673" start="123698" end="123744" title="Eclaireuses et Eclaireurs israélites de France" label="Eclaireuses et Eclaireurs israélites de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="124043" end="124050" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q637155" start="124093" end="124104" title="Armée Juive" label="Armée Juive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821851" start="124158" end="124174" title="Abraham Polonski" label="Abraham Polonski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697111" start="124194" end="124207" title="Lucien Lublin" label="Lucien Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038282" start="124209" end="124220" title="David Knout" label="David Knout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385294" start="124225" end="124242" title="Ariadna Scriabina" label="Ariadna Scriabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="124277" end="124295" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="124881" end="124885" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="124887" end="124895" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="124897" end="124905" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="124910" end="124914" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594134" start="124954" end="124982" title="Œuvre de Secours aux Enfants" label="Œuvre de Secours aux Enfants"/>
<link wikidata="Q708078" start="125393" end="125410" title="Missak Manouchian" label="Missak Manouchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q567078" start="125483" end="125499" title="Manouchian Group" label="Manouchian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785" start="125515" end="125531" title="Charles Aznavour" label="Charles Aznavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13054690" start="125717" end="125733" title="Kégham Atmadjian" label="Kégham Atmadjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443076" start="125750" end="125762" title="Rouben Melik" label="Rouben Melik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774168" start="125824" end="125871" title="Anti-Fascist Underground Patriotic Organization" label="Anti-Fascist Underground Patriotic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q20513783" start="125936" end="125951" title="Louise Aslanian" label="Louise Aslanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701009" start="126037" end="126052" title="Arpiar Aslanian" label="Arpiar Aslanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="126084" end="126108" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="126341" end="126358" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137404" start="126467" end="126482" title="L&amp;#x27;Humanité" label="L&amp;#x27;Humanité"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="126756" end="126772" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="127003" end="127021" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735867" start="127033" end="127052" title="Dimitri Amilakhvari" label="Dimitri Amilakhvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="127151" end="127167" title="French Foreign Legion" label="Légion étrangère"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="127187" end="127196" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="127233" end="127245" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="127253" end="127265" title="Africa Corps" label="Africa Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q836128" start="127397" end="127417" title="Battle of Bir Hakeim" label="Battle of Bir Hakeim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123431" start="127615" end="127634" title="Order of Liberation" label="Order of Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q550099" start="127827" end="127846" title="Norwegian War Cross" label="Norwegian War Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="127885" end="127901" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="127962" end="127989" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="128424" end="128438" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="128752" end="128767" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="129104" end="129116" title="antifeminism" label="antifeminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275723" start="129536" end="129553" title="Madeleine Riffaud" label="Madeleine Ruffaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="129805" end="129810" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="129831" end="129834" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="NCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469003" start="129978" end="129992" title="Raoul Nordling" label="Raoul Nordling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018164" start="130113" end="130128" title="Buttes Chaumont station" label="Buttes-Chaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q175055" start="130260" end="130282" title="Place de la République" label="Place de la République"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="130299" end="130318" title="Liberation of Paris" label="Liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q271991" start="130651" end="130667" title="Germaine Tillion" label="Germaine Tillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505971" start="130672" end="130701" title="Suzanne Hiltermann-Souloumiac" label="Suzanne Hiltermann-Souloumiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041719" start="130865" end="130876" title="Dutch-Paris" label="Dutch-Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q437091" start="130926" end="130938" title="Lucie Aubrac" label="Lucie Aubrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q829453" start="130978" end="130992" title="Libération-Sud" label="Libération-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q949286" start="131102" end="131122" title="Défense de la France" label="Défense de la France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292123" start="131346" end="131370" title="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade" label="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291891" start="131514" end="131537" title="Marie-Hélène Lefaucheux" label="Marie-Hélène Lefaucheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="131703" end="131735" title="National Council of the Resistance" label="eight major Resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="131773" end="131795" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986303" start="131834" end="131863" title="Commissioner of the Republic (Provisional Government)" label="commissaires de la République"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="131895" end="131940" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="Provisional Government of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="132088" end="132105" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078515" start="132152" end="132177" title="Appeal of 18 June" label="broadcast on 18 June 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="132407" end="132437" title="White émigré" label="White Movement Russian émigrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q565712" start="132451" end="132462" title="Boris Vildé" label="Boris Vildé"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="133280" end="133302" title="armistice with France (Second Compiègne)" label="armistice with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="133327" end="133344" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="133355" end="133386" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="133406" end="133423" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="133533" end="133551" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="133572" end="133579" title="English Channel" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q518345" start="133601" end="133623" title="André Dewavrin" label="Colonel André Dewavrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206616" start="133740" end="133755" title="Deuxième Bureau" label="Deuxième Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="133976" end="134025" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105836" start="134291" end="134306" title="Gilbert Renault" label="Gilbert Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123431" start="134328" end="134350" title="Ordre de la Libération" label="Ordre de la Libération"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="134365" end="134381" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992588" start="134640" end="134663" title="Confrérie de Notre Dame" label="Confrérie de Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="134810" end="134823" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q471460" start="135019" end="135060" title="Henri Honoré d&amp;#x27;Estienne d&amp;#x27;Orves" label="Henri Honoré d&amp;#x27;Estienne d&amp;#x27;Orves"/>
<link wikidata="Q661825" start="135188" end="135204" title="Christian Pineau" label="Christian Pineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q443312" start="135233" end="135248" title="Libération Nord" label="Libération Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q83541" start="135453" end="135485" title="Mouvements Unis de la Résistance" label="Mouvements Unis de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041719" start="136430" end="136441" title="Dutch-Paris" label="Dutch-Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="137045" end="137062" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="137196" end="137204" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935245" start="137237" end="137253" title="concentration camps in France" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q708638" start="137262" end="137271" title="Camp Gurs" label="Camp Gurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q973585" start="137276" end="137287" title="Camp Vernet" label="Camp Vernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="138423" end="138433" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="138842" end="138869" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="139118" end="139134" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640002" start="139317" end="139332" title="Otakar Hromádko" label="Otakar Hromádko"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737252" start="139334" end="139345" title="Věra Waldes" label="Věra Waldes"/>
<link wikidata="Q537234" start="139350" end="139362" title="Artur London" label="Artur London"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="139462" end="139484" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="139496" end="139513" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="139524" end="139530" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="139539" end="139547" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="139587" end="139614" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="139798" end="139804" title="maquis (World War II)" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q91778" start="139849" end="139859" title="Otto Kühne" label="Otto Kühne"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="139884" end="139916" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag in the Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q535974" start="140047" end="140077" title="Saint-Étienne-Vallée-Française" label="Saint-Étienne-Vallée-Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448192" start="140112" end="140127" title="Feldgendarmerie" label="Feldgendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="140157" end="140166" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="140220" end="140230" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="140460" end="140464" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="140466" end="140474" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="140483" end="140491" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="140551" end="140568" title="Antoine Diederich" label="Antoine Diederich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207575" start="140737" end="140741" title="Riom" label="Riom"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="141146" end="141150" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="141152" end="141160" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="141162" end="141171" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="141176" end="141184" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="141283" end="141291" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299052" start="141319" end="141331" title="Emil Szittya" label="Emil Szittya"/>
<link wikidata="Q289711" start="141421" end="141434" title="Étienne Hajdu" label="Étienne Hajdu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="141502" end="141523" title="Andor (André) Steiner" label="Andor (André) Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q248936" start="141525" end="141537" title="Lucien Hervé" label="Lucien Hervé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="141542" end="141554" title="Ervin Martón" label="Ervin Martón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525089" start="141556" end="141567" title="Thomas Elek" label="Thomas Elek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="141581" end="141591" title="Imre Glasz" label="Imre Glasz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184624" start="141608" end="141621" title="József Boczor" label="József Boczor"/>
<link wikidata="Q567078" start="141701" end="141717" title="Manouchian Group" label="Manouchian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="141927" end="141950" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="141955" end="141978" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="142174" end="142181" title="Moselle" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q430628" start="142334" end="142348" title="Vittorio Culpo" label="Vittorio Culpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="142669" end="142672" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848372" start="142723" end="142733" title="Tony Halik" label="Tony Halik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714945" start="142738" end="142760" title="Aleksander Kawałkowski" label="Aleksander Kawałkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="142844" end="142849" title="Cajun" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="142866" end="142888" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q949286" start="143922" end="143942" title="Défense de la France" label="Défense de la France"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="145174" end="145181" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="145382" end="145394" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q463367" start="145601" end="145613" title="Henri Frenay" label="Henri Frenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q573162" start="145621" end="145627" title="Combat (French Resistance)" label="Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q536102" start="145636" end="145672" title="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie" label="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q829453" start="145680" end="145694" title="Libération-Sud" label="Libération-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q315029" start="145706" end="145725" title="François de Menthon" label="François de Menthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q632" start="145878" end="145889" title="Jean Moulin" label="Jean Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="145892" end="145899" title="Prefect" label="Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377" start="145903" end="145915" title="Eure-et-Loir" label="Eure-et-Loir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274693" start="145979" end="145989" title="Pierre Cot" label="Pierre Cot"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="146728" end="146734" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="146749" end="146758" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="146838" end="146858" title="German occupation of France during World War II" label="Occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="146862" end="146874" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="146957" end="146969" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q525212" start="146995" end="147025" title="Service du travail obligatoire" label="Service du travail obligatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="147043" end="147072" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labor for Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="147331" end="147364" title="Conseil National de la Résistance" label="Conseil National de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="147419" end="147437" title="Free French forces" label="Free French forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="147477" end="147489" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="147494" end="147511" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q565213" start="147538" end="147577" title="French Committee of National Liberation" label="Comité Français de Libération Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957683" start="147712" end="147734" title="Charbonnages de France" label="Charbonnages de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947157" start="148096" end="148100" title="Ceux de la Résistance" label="CDLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947154" start="148105" end="148109" title="Ceux de la Libération" label="CDLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="149132" end="149145" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q275730" start="149167" end="149180" title="Agnès Humbert" label="Agnès Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q965990" start="149185" end="149196" title="Jean Cassou" label="Jean Cassou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330726" start="149225" end="149273" title="Musée national des Arts et Traditions Populaires (France)" label="Musée national des Arts et Traditions Populaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q694431" start="149426" end="149436" title="Paul Rivet" label="Paul Rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q745528" start="149660" end="149674" title="Claude Aveline" label="Claude Aveline"/>
<link wikidata="Q316375" start="149987" end="149999" title="Franc-Tireur (movement)" label="Franc-Tireur"/>
<link wikidata="Q949286" start="150164" end="150184" title="Défense de la France" label="Défense de la France"/>
<link wikidata="Q315029" start="150246" end="150265" title="François de Menthon" label="François de Menthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q463367" start="150315" end="150327" title="Henri Frenay" label="Henri Frenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113445" start="150362" end="150368" title="Combat (newspaper)" label="Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273829" start="150672" end="150694" title="Les Éditions de Minuit" label="Les Éditions de Minuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q567062" start="150803" end="150823" title="Le Silence de la Mer" label="Le Silence de la Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q462634" start="150871" end="150883" title="Jean Bruller" label="Jean Bruller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="151214" end="151236" title="Coastal artillery" label="coastal fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="151244" end="151257" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="151261" end="151270" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="151288" end="151292" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="BCRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="151480" end="151491" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="151538" end="151546" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105836" start="151633" end="151645" title="Colonel Rémy" label="Colonel Rémy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103122" start="151744" end="151768" title="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau" label="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="151998" end="152025" title="Franc-tireur" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q970284" start="152112" end="152126" title="Charles Tillon" label="Charles Tillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373850" start="152330" end="152347" title="Westland Lysander" label="Westland Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="152600" end="152610" title="goniometer" label="goniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27643360" start="152734" end="152746" title="Eddy Palacci" label="Eddy Palacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="153009" end="153017" title="Sabotage" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q522816" start="153229" end="153249" title="France Bloch-Sérazin" label="France Bloch-Sérazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="153520" end="153527" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="153687" end="153701" title="francs-tireurs" label="francs-tireurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="153808" end="153836" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="154600" end="154604" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457778" start="154659" end="154673" title="Résistance-Fer" label="Resistance-Fer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="154860" end="154868" title="Operation Overlord" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="154873" end="154881" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q45939" start="155497" end="155514" title="collateral damage" label="collateral damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="155667" end="155684" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q319927" start="156026" end="156047" title="Pierre-Georges Fabien" label="Pierre-Georges Fabien"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="156091" end="156102" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q429722" start="156426" end="156440" title="Joseph Epstein" label="Joseph Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="156689" end="156716" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q708078" start="156754" end="156770" title="Missak Manouchian" label="Manouchian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="156888" end="156905" title="German occupation of France during World War II" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="156983" end="157003" title="liberation of France" label="liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="157249" end="157262" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="157350" end="157357" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="157393" end="157404" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q57134" start="157441" end="157458" title="Albert Kesselring" label="Albert Kesselring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="157538" end="157543" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="157583" end="157586" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="FFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="157621" end="157624" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q433116" start="157669" end="157689" title="Marie Pierre Koenig" label="General Pierre Kœnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="158376" end="158393" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="158636" end="158655" title="Liberation of Paris" label="Liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q312391" start="158696" end="158703" title="Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque" label="Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q209831" start="158711" end="158738" title="2nd Armored Division (France)" label="French 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="158952" end="158963" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422336" start="158969" end="158980" title="French Gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776019" start="158989" end="158995" title="Police in France" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="159149" end="159164" title="French First Army" label="1st French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q81114" start="159168" end="159197" title="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny" label="General de Lattre de Tassigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="159318" end="159338" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190143" start="159384" end="159401" title="Crusade in Europe" label="Crusade in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="159905" end="159922" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="160108" end="160126" title="Military history of France during World War II#Operation Jedburgh (June)" label="Operation Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287683" start="160245" end="160260" title="Ralph Ingersoll (PM publisher)" label="Ralph Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="160544" end="160549" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="160844" end="160857" title="Vichy France#Jewish death toll" label="Jews deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261588" start="161094" end="161111" title="épuration sauvage" label="épuration sauvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="161227" end="161256" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="French Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="161376" end="161393" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152282" start="161940" end="161947" title="shaming" label="shaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q319613" start="162236" end="162252" title="épuration légale" label="épuration légale"/>
<link wikidata="Q254217" start="163044" end="163061" title="collective memory" label="collective memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457845" start="163071" end="163087" title="Résistancialisme" label="Résistancialisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="163170" end="163182" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="163228" end="163246" title="May 1968 events in France" label="events of May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q981884" start="163592" end="163604" title="Henry Rousso" label="Henry Rousso"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432052" start="163626" end="163640" title="Vichy syndrome" label="Vichy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q688313" start="163796" end="163808" title="Paul Touvier" label="Paul Touvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q327009" start="163813" end="163826" title="Maurice Papon" label="Maurice Papon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="164078" end="164100" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721115" start="165196" end="165233" title="Affiche Rouge (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Strophes pour se souvenir&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128" start="165279" end="165291" title="Louis Aragon" label="Louis Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q708078" start="165334" end="165350" title="Missak Manouchian" label="Manouchian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="165429" end="165440" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718620" start="165462" end="165479" title="This Land Is Mine (film)" label="This Land is Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181850" start="165662" end="165681" title="La Bataille du rail" label="La Bataille du rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q461111" start="166074" end="166088" title="Serge Reggiani" label="Serge Reggiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="166168" end="166174" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q561255" start="166305" end="166323" title="Claude Autant-Lara" label="Claude Autant-Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="166540" end="166554" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385009" start="166571" end="166584" title="A Man Escaped" label="A Man Escaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q744482" start="166760" end="166778" title="Le Passage du Rhin" label="Le Passage du Rhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q909561" start="167054" end="167071" title="Is Paris Burning? (film)" label="Is Paris Burning?"/>
<link wikidata="Q487789" start="167229" end="167249" title="La Grande Vadrouille" label="La Grande Vadrouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q681225" start="167441" end="167464" title="L&amp;#x27;armée des ombres" label="L&amp;#x27;armée des ombres"/>
<link wikidata="Q168693" start="167509" end="167529" title="Jean-Pierre Melville" label="Jean-Pierre Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q356537" start="167558" end="167571" title="Joseph Kessel" label="Joseph Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="167675" end="167692" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q681225" start="167731" end="167754" title="L&amp;#x27;armée des ombres" label="L&amp;#x27;armée des ombres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="167937" end="167961" title="May 1968 events in France" label="civil unrest of May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q638892" start="168058" end="168081" title="The Sorrow and the Pity" label="The Sorrow and the Pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="168183" end="168187" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q711420" start="168258" end="168271" title="Marcel Ophüls" label="Marcel Ophüls"/>
<link wikidata="Q558248" start="168473" end="168493" title="L&amp;#x27;Affiche Rouge" label="L&amp;#x27;Affiche Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392" start="168708" end="168719" title="Louis Malle" label="Louis Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q836115" start="168733" end="168748" title="Lacombe, Lucien" label="Lacombe, Lucien"/>
<link wikidata="Q187276" start="168965" end="168986" title="Au revoir les enfants" label="Au revoir les enfants"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="168994" end="169011" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049604" start="169035" end="169051" title="Le Dernier Métro" label="Le Dernier Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q174389" start="169116" end="169122" title="César Award" label="Césars"/>
<link wikidata="Q382389" start="169364" end="169379" title="Jacques Audiard" label="Jacques Audiard"/>
<link wikidata="Q224929" start="169393" end="169414" title="A Self Made Hero" label="Un héros très discret"/>
<link wikidata="Q298905" start="169603" end="169615" title="Claude Berri" label="Claude Berri"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="169629" end="169635" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265242" start="169642" end="169654" title="Lucie Aubrac (film)" label="Lucie Aubrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q577548" start="170769" end="170781" title="Jean Prévost" label="Jean Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q515633" start="170817" end="170831" title="Jean Cavaillès" label="Jean Cavaillès"/>
<link wikidata="Q156585" start="170847" end="170857" title="Marc Bloch" label="Marc Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="170992" end="171005" title="Malraux#World War II" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="171120" end="171124" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q471787" start="171143" end="171159" title="Shapour Bakhtiar" label="Shapour Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="171364" end="171388" title="Iran#Islamic Republic (1979–present)" label="Iranian Islamic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="171450" end="171463" title="Kevin Doherty (writer)" label="Kevin Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q142751" start="171775" end="171784" title="The Train (1964 film)" label="The Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344326" start="171937" end="171944" title="15 Lads" label="15 Lads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440613" start="172046" end="172061" title="Romain Cogitore" label="Romain Cogitore"/>
<link wikidata="Q180709" start="172141" end="172158" title="Grande Chartreuse" label="Grande Chartreuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549122" start="172216" end="172235" title="Un village français" label="Un village français"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928486" start="172448" end="172458" title="Resistance (TV series)" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="172477" end="172480" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q425628" start="172714" end="172736" title="&amp;#x27;Allo &amp;#x27;Allo!" label="&amp;#x27;Allo &amp;#x27;Allo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q973843" start="172858" end="172869" title="Secret Army (TV series)" label="Secret Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="172917" end="172926" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070917" start="172973" end="172979" title="maquis (Star Trek)" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q536102" start="172982" end="173018" title="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie" label="Emmanuel d&amp;#x27;Astier de La Vigerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q464853" start="173089" end="173099" title="Anna Marly" label="Anna Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207674" start="173123" end="173148" title="La Complainte du partisan" label="La Complainte du partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290528" start="173255" end="173263" title="Hy Zaret" label="Hy Zaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="173452" end="173465" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308275" start="173943" end="173956" title="De Bezige Bij" label="De Bezige Bij"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83942" wikidata="Q309250" url="?curid=83942" title="Courtyard">
<text>A courtyard or court is a circumscribed area, often surrounded by a building or complex, that is open to the sky.

Courtyards are common elements in both Western and Eastern building patterns and have been used by both ancient and contemporary architects as a typical and traditional building feature. Such spaces in inns and public buildings were often the primary meeting places for some purposes, leading to the other meanings of court. Both of the words &quot;court&quot; and &quot;yard&quot; derive from the same root, meaning an enclosed space. See yard and garden for the relation of this set of words. In universities courtyards are often known as quadrangles.

== Historic use==

Courtyards—private open spaces surrounded by walls or buildings—have been in use in residential architecture for almost as long as people have lived in constructed dwellings. The courtyard house makes its first appearance –6000 BC (calibrated), in the Neolithic Yarmukian site at Sha&#x27;ar HaGolan, in the central Jordan Valley, on the northern bank of the Yarmouk River, giving the site a special significance in architectural history. Courtyards have historically been used for many purposes including cooking, sleeping, working, playing, gardening, and even places to keep animals.

Before courtyards, open fires were kept burning in a central place within a home, with only a small hole in the ceiling overhead to allow smoke to escape. Over time, these small openings were enlarged and eventually led to the development of the centralized open courtyard we know today. Courtyard homes have been designed and built throughout the world with many variations.

Courtyard homes are more prevalent in temperate climates, as an open central court can be an important aid to cooling house in warm weather. However, courtyard houses have been found in harsher climates as well for centuries. The comforts offered by a courtyard—air, light, privacy, security, and tranquility—are properties nearly universally desired in human housing. Almost all courtyards use natural elements.

== Comparison throughout the world ==

=== Middle East ===
Courtyards were widely used in the ancient Middle East. Middle Eastern courtyard houses reflect the nomadic influences of the region. Instead of officially designating rooms for cooking, sleeping, etc., these activities were relocated throughout the year as appropriate to accommodate the changes in temperature and the position of the sun. Often the flat rooftops of these structures were used for sleeping in warm weather. In some Islamic cultures, private courtyards provided the only outdoor space for women to relax unobserved. Convective cooling through transition spaces between multiple-courtyard buildings in the Middle East has also been observed.

In c. 2000 BC Ur, two-storey houses were constructed around an open square were built of fired brick. Kitchen, working, and public spaces were located on the ground floor, with private rooms located upstairs.

=== Europe ===
The central uncovered area in a Roman domus was referred to as an &quot;atrium&quot;. Today, we generally use the term &quot;courtyard&quot; to refer to such an area, reserving the word &quot;atrium&quot; to describe a glass-covered courtyard. Roman atrium houses were built side by side along the street. They were one-storey homes without windows that took in light from the entrance and from the central atrium. The hearth, which used to inhabit the centre of the home, was relocated, and the Roman atrium most often contained a central pool used to collect rainwater, called an &quot;impluvium&quot;. These homes frequently incorporated a second open-air area, the garden, which would be surrounded by Greek-style colonnades, forming a peristyle. This created a colonnaded walkway around the perimeter of the courtyard, which influenced monastic structures centuries later.

The medieval European farmhouse embodies what we think of today as one of the most archetypal examples of a courtyard house—four buildings arranged around a square courtyard with a steep roof covered by thatch. The central courtyard was used for working, gathering, and sometimes keeping small livestock. An elevated walkway frequently ran around two or three sides of the courtyards in the houses. Such structures afforded protection, and could even be made defensible.

=== China ===

The traditional Chinese courtyard house, (e.g. siheyuan), is an arrangement of several individual houses around a square. Each house belongs to a different family member, and additional houses are created behind this arrangement to accommodate additional family members as needed. The Chinese courtyard is a place of privacy and tranquility, almost always incorporating a garden and water feature. In some cases, houses are constructed with multiple courtyards that increase in privacy as they recede from the street. Strangers would be received in the outermost courtyard, with the innermost ones being reserved for close friends and family members.

In a more contemporary version of the Chinese model, a courtyard can also can be used to separate a home into wings; for example, one wing of the house may be for entertaining/dining, and the other wing may be for sleeping/family/privacy. This is exemplified by the Hooper House in Baltimore, Maryland.
=== United States ===
A courtyard apartment building type appeared in Chicago in the early 1890s and flourished into the 1920s. They are characterized primarily by a low height, a structure along three sides of a rectangular or square lot, and an open court extending perpendicular to the street. The courtyards are generally deeper than they are wide, but many finer ones are wider than they are deep. Influenced by the privacy and domesticity of a standalone house as much as by strict health codes, the architectural style provided outdoor access and ventilation unseen in earlier multi-unit housing in the United States.

== Relevance today ==
More and more, architects are investigating ways that courtyards can play a role in the development of today&#x27;s homes and cities. In densely populated areas, a courtyard in a home can provide privacy for a family, a break from the frantic pace of everyday life, and a safe place for children to play. With space at a premium, architects are experimenting with courtyards as a way to provide outdoor space for small communities of people at a time. A courtyard surrounded by 12 houses, for example, would provide a shared park-like space for those families, who could take pride in ownership of the space. Though this might sound like a modern-day solution to an inner city problem, the grouping of houses around a shared courtyard was common practice among the Incas as far back as the 13th century.

In San Francisco, the floor plans of &quot;marina style&quot; houses often include a central patio, a miniature version of an open courtyard, sometimes covered with glass or a translucent material. Central patios provide natural light to common areas and space for potted outdoor plants. In Gilgit/Baltistan, Pakistan, courtyards were traditionally used for public gatherings where village related issues were discussed. These were different from jirgahs, which are a tradition of the tribal regions of Pakistan.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Hakka walled village
* Yaodong 
* Tsubo-niwa

==References==

* &quot;Atrium: Five Thousand Years of Open Courtyards&quot;, by Werner Blaser 1985, Wepf &amp; Co.
* &quot;Atrium Buildings: Development and Design&quot;, by Richard Saxon 1983, The Architectural Press, London
* &quot;A History of Architecture&quot;, by Spiro Kostof 1995, The Oxford Press.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309250" start="2" end="11" title="Courtyard" label="courtyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q309250" start="15" end="20" title="Courtyard" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="68" end="76" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="317" end="320" title="inn" label="inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q293634" start="433" end="438" title="Court (disambiguation)" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623285" start="555" end="559" title="yard (land)" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="564" end="570" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="613" end="625" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381944" start="656" end="667" title="quadrangle (architecture)" label="quadrangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="785" end="797" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178798" start="868" end="883" title="courtyard house" label="courtyard house"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="941" end="950" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915635" start="951" end="965" title="Yarmukian Culture" label="Yarmukian site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463859" start="1005" end="1018" title="Jordan Valley (Middle East)" label="Jordan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="1301" end="1305" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q221706" start="1389" end="1396" title="ceiling" label="ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="1415" end="1420" title="smoke" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="1928" end="1935" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2170" end="2181" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="2800" end="2802" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="2888" end="2895" title="Kitchen" label="Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="3049" end="3054" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="3083" end="3089" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117244" start="3599" end="3608" title="impluvium" label="impluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="3729" end="3738" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="3751" end="3760" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195718" start="4424" end="4432" title="siheyuan" label="siheyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125776" start="5139" end="5144" title="wing (building)" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691989" start="5295" end="5307" title="Hooper House (Baltimore, Maryland)" label="Hooper House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5402" end="5409" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="5782" end="5798" title="Single-family detached home" label="standalone house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="5820" end="5832" title="Building code" label="health codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="6745" end="6750" title="Inca Empire" label="Incas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6788" end="6801" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q737988" start="6878" end="6883" title="patio" label="patio"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925819" start="7326" end="7346" title="Hakka walled village" label="Hakka walled village"/>
<link wikidata="Q859039" start="7349" end="7356" title="Yaodong" label="Yaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541624" start="7360" end="7370" title="Tsubo-niwa" label="Tsubo-niwa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7453" end="7466" title="Werner Blaser" label="Werner Blaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328903" start="7547" end="7560" title="Richard Saxon" label="Richard Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765281" start="7643" end="7655" title="Spiro Kostof" label="Spiro Kostof"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83943" wikidata="Q142260" url="?curid=83943" title="Indonesia Raya">
<text>&quot;&quot; (&#x27;Indonesia the Great&#x27;) is the national anthem of Indonesia. It has been the national anthem since the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence on 17 August 1945. The song was introduced by its composer, Wage Rudolf Supratman, on 28 October 1928 during the Youth Pledge in Jakarta. The song marked the birth of the archipelago nationalist movement in Indonesia that aims to gain independence from Dutch colonial rule. The first newspaper to openly publish the musical notation and lyrics of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot;—an act of defiance towards the Dutch authorities—was the Chinese Indonesian weekly &quot;Sin Po&quot;.

The first stanza of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; was chosen as the national anthem when Indonesia proclaimed its independence on 17 August 1945. Jozef Cleber, a Dutch composer, created an arrangement of the tune for philharmonic orchestra on August 17, 1950, when the island of Sumatra became an integral part of the Republic of Indonesia. This arrangement is widely used.
&quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; is played in flag raising ceremonies in schools across Indonesia every Monday. The flag is raised in a solemn and timed motion so that it reaches the top of the flagpole as the anthem ends. The main flag raising ceremony is held annually on 17 August to commemorate Independence day. The ceremony is led by the President of Indonesia and is usually held in Merdeka Palace.

During the rendition or singing of the national anthem, all present should stand, face toward the music, and pay respect. Members of the Armed Forces, and other persons in uniform (e.g. secondary school students) must render the military salute.

==History==
===Indonesian Youth Congress===

When he lived in Jakarta, Soepratman read an essay from &quot;Timbul&quot; magazine. The essay author challenged Indonesian music experts to compose a future Indonesian national anthem. Soepratman – who was also a musician – felt challenged, and started composing. In 1924, the song was completed during his time in Bandung and entitled &quot;Indonesia&quot;.

In 1928, youths from across Indonesia held the first Indonesian Youth Congress, an official meeting to push for the independence of the nation. Upon hearing about the efforts, young reporter Wage Rudolf Soepratman contacted the organizers of Congress with the intention of reporting the story, but they requested that he not publish the story from fear of Dutch colonial authorities. The organizers wanted to avoid suspicion so that the Dutch would not ban the event. Supratman promised them this, and the organizers allowed him free access to the event. Supratman was inspired by the meetings and intended to play the song for the conference. After receiving encouragement from the conference leader Sugondo Djojopuspito, Soepratman played the song on the violin, hoping that it would someday become their national anthem. Soepratman first performed &quot;Indonesia&quot; on the violin on 28 October 1928 during the Second Indonesian Youth Congress. He kept the script to himself because he felt that it was not the appropriate time to announce it.

=== Distribution ===
Following the Second Youth Congress, the text of &quot;Indonesia&quot; was distributed by many political and student organisations. The press also played a key role in the publication of the song. On 7 November 1928, the &quot;Soeloeh Ra&#x27;jat Indonesia&quot; daily published the words to the song. This was followed by the &quot;Sin Po&quot; Chinese weekly on 10 November. In 1929, Wage Rudolf Supratman changed the title of his song to &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; and appended the phrase &quot;national anthem of Indonesia&quot; below it, but the text of the song did not change. Soepratman personally printed and distributed copies of the song with its new title through pamphlets. All one thousand copies of the manuscript were sold within a short amount of time to his friends and family.

That same year, the prominent Indonesian businessman and record executive Tio Tek Hong contacted Supratman; the two agreed to issue the first records of the anthem, with Supratman retaining copyright over it. The new records were extremely popular, but in 1930 the Dutch colonial authorities placed a ban on the song and confiscated all remaining unsold records.

A businessman friend of his, Yo Kim Tjan, also expressed interest in recording &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot;. With Soepratman&#x27;s consent, Yo created a copy of the song on a gramophone record overseas to obtain the best sound quality with the intention of bringing the copy back to Indonesia. However, before Yo was able to do so, Dutch colonial authorities had imposed a ban on the song. Yo was unable to bring the original back but was able to bring home a copy. According to Yo, Soepratman had also given him the rights to sell record copies of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; through his store Toko Populair.

===Orchestration===
Initially, there had been no orchestral version of the anthem. Thus in 1950, The Indonesian Government made an appeal to Jozef Cleber to compose a symphonic rendition of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot;.

Cleber at the time had been among the 46 people of the Cosmopolitan Orchestra, under direction of Yvon Baarspul, sent by the Netherlands government to help the Indonesian government for its own music development in Jakarta. &quot;Jos&quot; Cleber was an experienced arranger not only of western songs but also for Indonesian pop songs such as &quot;Di Bawah Sinar Bulan Purnama&quot; and &quot;Rangkaian Melati&quot;. 
&quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; was recorded under Cleber&#x27;s direction on a newly acquired Phillips recorder in early 1951 with musicians from all three radio orchestras of RRI Jakarta and the tape was played for President Sukarno&#x27;s approval. Sukarno found the performance too frilly and asked for something like the red and white Indonesian flag, and in the grave tempo of the Dutch anthem Wilhelmus. Cleber considered this last impossible, though he discerned some of the character of the Marseillaise in the tune and made a second arrangement marked &quot;maestoso con bravura&quot; as a compromise. This met Sukarno&#x27;s approval, but he requested that the climax be prepared by a &quot;grazioso&quot; (&quot;Liefelijk&quot;) section. This final version of the anthem remained in use for 47 years.
The arrangement starts with a &quot;Tutti&quot; of strings and trumpets (in Verse A) that represents a brave and an elegant sound, and in the middle of the song (in Verse B) is played smoothly by strings, and finally (in Verse C) comes another &quot;Tutti&quot; of strings and trumpets, together with the timpani, snare drums and cymbals, giving it a brave sound fitting for a national anthem that was respected by the people.

===Ownership===
In 1951, ownership of the copyright to &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; came into question. President Sukarno ordered a search for the rightful heir to Soepratman. By law, Supratman was the copyright holder of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; as its composer. After Soepratman&#x27;s death in 1938, ownership of the rights to his works fell upon the designated heirs, his four surviving sisters. However, because &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; was officially adopted as the national anthem of Indonesia on 17 August 1945, the work became the property of the state. In addition, the name of &quot;Wage Rudolf Supratman&quot; must be listed as its creator.

As a national anthem, copies of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; cannot be circulated as merchandise to be sold. Consequently, the government had the obligation to obtain all the rights to distribute the song, including the original recording, from Yo Kim Tjan. In 1958, the government obtained the sole right to &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; from Soepratman&#x27;s family. The following year, Yo handed the original record of the song to the Indonesian government. With the recommendation of the Department of Education, the government also rewarded Soepratman&#x27;s sisters with 250,000 Indonesian rupiah each on 31 May 1960.

== Legal basis ==
As stipulated by Chapter XV, Article 36B of the Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, Indonesia Raya is the national anthem of Indonesia. Furthermore, pursuant to 1958 State Gazette no. 44, only the first stanza of Indonesia Raya is to serve the function of a national anthem.

==Lyrics==
There is no official translation of &quot;Indonesia Raya&quot; into other languages. On 28 October 1953, on the 25th anniversary of the anthem, the &quot;Harian Umum&quot; daily published their own English, German, and Dutch translations of the song. A bulletin released by the Ministry of Information used these translations. Currently, however, the translations are no longer published.


== See also ==

* &quot;Bangun Pemudi-Pemuda&quot;
==References==
* 

==External links==

* Official version of the National anthem of Indonesia
* Download National Anthem of Indonesia 2017 Rendition by GBN National Youth Orchestra &amp; Choir, .mp3 or .wav 
* Download Partiture / Musical Notation Sheet of INDONESIA RAYA 2017 Rendition, .pdf 
* Streaming audio, lyrics and information for and about &#x27;Indonesia Raya&#x27;
* Music Video – An Amazing HD Version of Indonesian National Anthem, hosted on YouTube
* Indonesia Raya 1945 – A World War II era reel that shows the full length song, also hosted on YouTube
* Indonesia Raya during the Commemoration of the Anniversary of the Indonesian Armed Forces</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q142260" start="6" end="6" title="Indonesia Raya" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="54" end="69" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="73" end="82" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661772" start="126" end="165" title="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence" label="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="216" end="224" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144049" start="226" end="247" title="Wage Rudolf Supratman" label="Wage Rudolf Supratman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323022" start="279" end="291" title="Youth Pledge" label="Youth Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="295" end="302" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="349" end="360" title="nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="361" end="369" title="Political movement" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945786" start="597" end="615" title="Chinese Indonesian" label="Chinese Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437543" start="629" end="635" title="Sin Po (newspaper)" label="Sin Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756348" start="654" end="660" title="stanza" label="stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187269" start="787" end="799" title="Jozef Cleber" label="Jozef Cleber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="920" end="927" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q101472" start="1125" end="1129" title="Flag of Indonesia" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661772" start="1308" end="1324" title="Proclamation of Indonesian Independence" label="Independence day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="1353" end="1375" title="President of Indonesia" label="President of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139728" start="1399" end="1413" title="Merdeka Palace" label="Merdeka Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="1553" end="1565" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="1725" end="1732" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144049" start="2260" end="2282" title="Wage Rudolf Soepratman" label="Wage Rudolf Soepratman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="2425" end="2451" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch colonial authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651718" start="2770" end="2790" title="Sugondo Djojopuspito" label="Sugondo Djojopuspito"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="2876" end="2891" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q56391081" start="4012" end="4024" title="Tio Tek Hong" label="Tio Tek Hong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4331" end="4342" title="Yo Kim Tjan" label="Yo Kim Tjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="4476" end="4493" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187269" start="5052" end="5064" title="Jozef Cleber" label="Jozef Cleber"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5255" end="5266" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q544858" start="5648" end="5656" title="Reel-to-reel audio tape recording" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113375" start="5721" end="5724" title="Radio Republik Indonesia" label="RRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="5771" end="5778" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q101472" start="5870" end="5899" title="Flag of Indonesia" label="red and white Indonesian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192068" start="5912" end="5923" title="Grave (tempo)" label="grave tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131713" start="5944" end="5953" title="Wilhelmus" label="Wilhelmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41180" start="6044" end="6056" title="la Marseillaise" label="Marseillaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="6897" end="6904" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q41588" start="8022" end="8039" title="Indonesian rupiah" label="Indonesian rupiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49373" start="8128" end="8169" title="Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia" label="Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17998854" start="8789" end="8809" title="Bangun Pemudi-Pemuda" label="Bangun Pemudi-Pemuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="9272" end="9279" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="9376" end="9383" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="83945" wikidata="Q1329066" url="?curid=83945" title="Islamic dietary laws">
<text>Islamic dietary laws are laws that Muslims follow in their diet. Islamic jurisprudence specifies which foods are halal () and which are haram (). The dietary laws are found in the Quran, the holy book of Islam, as well as in collections of traditions attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad.

Herbivores, cud-chewing animals like cattle, deer, sheep, goats, and antelope are some examples of animals that are halal only if they are treated like sentient beings and slaughtered painlessly while reciting the &quot;basmala&quot; and &quot;takbir&quot;. If the animal is treated poorly or tortured while being slaughtered, the meat is haram. Forbidden food substances include alcohol, pork, frog, carrion, the meat of carnivores, and animals that died due to illness, injury, stunning, poisoning, or slaughtering not in the name of God.

==Regulations of food==
===Halal (permissible, lawful)===
Quranic verses which have information regarding halal foods include: Q2:173, Q5:5, and Q6:118–119, 121.

====Permissible meats and animals====

Livestock or cattle, i.e. grazing beasts, are lawful except those that are explicitly prohibited. However, hunting is prohibited during &quot;the pilgrimage&quot;.

This means that most herbivores or cud-chewing animals like cattle, deer, sheep, goats, and antelope are considered halal to consume.

Animals hunted by other animals (such as trained birds) are also permitted.

====Permitted method of slaughter====
In Islamic law, &quot;&quot; () is the prescribed method of slaughter for halal animals. It consists of a swift, deep incision to the throat with a very sharp knife, cutting the wind pipe, jugular veins and carotid arteries on both sides but leaving the spinal cord intact.

The carcass should be hung upside down for long enough to be free of blood.

Slaughtered animals must be acknowledged as sentient beings and slaughtered painlessly while reciting the Basmala and Takbir. The butcher is required to call upon the name of Allah (&quot;Bismillah&quot;) individually for each animal. If the animal is treated poorly, or tortured while being slaughtered, the meat is haram.

Conversely, animals slaughtered for food may not be killed by being boiled or electrocuted. Animals strangled or beaten to death, or which died by falling or due to a wild animal are also expressly forbidden.

====Game of Sea====

Game of water (i.e. fish and other sea creatures) is generally permitted in most of the schools of Islam, based on their interpretation of the Quran 5:96; however, the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence forbids consumption of seafood other than true &quot;fish&quot;, and considers other sea creatures, such as crustaceans, to be &quot;makruh&quot;. Fishing is permitted during pilgrimage.

Some Hanafi scholars are in disagreement over whether or not prawns and shrimp constitute as true &quot;fish&quot;; comparatively, many scholars do agree that crocodile, crab, lobster, or any mollusk is not.

In Shia hadith, there is a prohibition on the consumption of eels. Any fish without scales are &quot;haram&quot; (forbidden) but fish that do have scales are permissible. (see List of halal and kosher fish - Wikipedia)

According to the Maliki school, all types of seafood including seahorses, lobsters and crabs are permitted.

According to Shafi school, every type of fish which is not poisonous (i.e. puffer fish, rock fish etc.) is permitted and crustaceans that do not live on land such as soft-shell crabs and lobsters are permitted, while hermit-crabs, crocodiles and sea-snakes are haram.

====Food of People of the book====
Food of Jews and Christians (other than those explicitly forbidden) is lawful for Sunni Muslims.
===Haram (forbidden)===
A variety of substances are also considered unlawful (haram) for humans to consume and therefore, the consumption of them is forbidden by the Sharia (Islamic law).

Certain animals are considered haram, including land animals without blood, including all insects except locusts. Most reptiles are also considered haram, as well as most pests (&quot;hasharat al-Ardh&quot;) such as mice and rats.

Differences of opinion exist as to whether the consumption of horses, mules, and donkeys is permitted. In the Quran, one finds this verse: &quot;And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys, for you to ride and use for show; and He has created (other) things of which you have no knowledge&quot;. Some scholars have interpreted this as limiting the named animals for riding and show only, prohibiting their consumption. Predatory animals, such as lions, tigers, falcons and hawks are forbidden as well.

However, a person would not be considered guilty of sin in a situation where the lack of any alternative creates an undesired necessity to consume that which is otherwise unlawful, such as a famine.

====Intoxicants====
Alcoholic drinks are generally prohibited under Islamic thought, with the Quran including several verses that admonish the consumption of &quot;khamr&quot;, an Arabic term meaning intoxicants that is interpreted to include most forms of alcohol and psychoactive drugs:


There is some debate about whether the prohibition extends to dishes in which the alcohol would be cooked off, or if it would be practically impossible to consume enough of the food to become intoxicated, but it is generally accepted that the inclusion of any alcohol should be avoided and alternatives used.

Substances which contain intoxicants but are not consumed are not prohibited as such. For example, alcohol can be used as a disinfectant or for cleaning.

The Alevi Muslims of Turkey permit alcohol, unlike many other denominations. The Zaidi and Mutazili sects believe that the use of alcohol has always been forbidden and refer to the Qur&#x27;an Ayah (4:43) as feeling of sleepiness and not to be awake.

====Carrion====
An animal which dies by itself i.e., carrion is forbidden in Islam:
====Blood====
The consumption of blood and its by-products as food is forbidden in Islam, in the Quran, surah 5, al-Maʼidah, verse 3:
====Pork====

The consumption of pork and products made from pork are strictly forbidden in Islam. The origin of this prohibition is in Surat al-Baqarah:
====Animals dedicated to other than God====
Animal dedicated to or slaughtered in the name of a human being or saint is prohibited.
====Horses, mules and donkeys====
In both Sunni and Shia hadith the meat of mules is prohibited but horse meat is allowed in Sunni sources.

Horse meat is especially popular among the Muslims of Central Asia, due in part to their nomadic heritage.

According to Shia hadith, the use of horses for food is prohibited.

Donkey meat is prohibited according to one hadith.

====Animals with fangs====
Predator animals possessing fangs are prohibited (e.g. cats, dogs, bears, lions, wolves).
====Birds of prey====
Birds having talons are prohibited (e.g. owls, eagles, hawks).
====Other prohibited animals====
Lizard is prohibited, except for the dabb lizard according to most scholars.


Likewise snakes, scorpion, and mice are prohibited. There are also no rodents that are considered halal to eat in Islam.

Eating monkeys is prohibited in Islam. According to Shia hadith, metamorphosed animals to which a disobedient, irreverent, or arrogant pre-Islamic nation was converted as a punishment (such as apes and monkeys) are prohibited.

===Mushbooh===
Foods whose halal status is uncertain or debated may be classified as (; &#x27;doubtful&#x27;). This includes foods that are seemingly halal but of an unknown source and ingredients for which the halal status is subject to differing interpretation, such as extract from brewer&#x27;s yeast, which is nonalcoholic but derived from the production of alcohol.

==Islamic dietary laws during Ramadan==
Ramadan, the ninth month on the Muslim calendar, is considered the holy month of fasting. Ramadan begins and ends with the appearance of the new moon. During Ramadan God is said to have delivered the Quran to Muhammad as guidance for the people. During Ramadan, Muslims take time for introspection, prayer, and reading of the Quran. For those who observe Ramadan with fasting, prayer, and faithful intention; God forgives their past sins. During this period, Muslims focus on self restraint or &quot;sawm&quot; (Arabic: to refrain) which is one of the five pillars of Islam. Ramadan emphasizes &quot;sawm&quot;, when worshippers have to abstain from food, drink, sexual activity, and immoral behavior between dawn and dusk. After dusk, Muslims break their fast during a meal called &quot;iftar&quot; with family and friends. &quot;Sawm&quot; can be negated by breaking fast, however, the lost can be made up with one extra day of fasting. The end of the Ramadan fast is the celebration of Eid-al-Fitr (Feast of Fast-Breaking), one of the two major religious holidays on the Muslim calendar.

==Food certification==

Since the turn of the 21st century, there have been efforts to create organizations that certify food products as halal for Muslim consumers in the USA. 
Since 1991, some mainstream manufacturers of soups, grains, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, prepared foods, and other products, as well as hotels, restaurants, airlines, hospitals, and other service providers have pursued the halal market. These companies purchase halal-certified products. This can allow companies to export products to most Middle Eastern countries and Southeast Asian countries. The oldest and most well-known halal certifier in the United States is called the Islamic Services of America.

In Europe, several organizations have been created in order to certify the halal products. A 2009 survey published by a French association of Muslim Consumers (ASIDCOM) shows that the market of halal products has been developed in a chaotic way in Europe. The European certification organizations do not have a common definition of &quot;halal&quot; nor agreed upon control procedures and traceability. The controls implemented by individual agencies are all very different: they can go from an annual audit of the slaughterhouse, to checking each production with permanent controls in place and on-going independent monitoring.

In South Africa, most chicken products have a halal stamp. The South African National Halal Authority (SANHA) issues certificates and products bearing this logo range from water, snacks, and even meat-free products (which may contain non-halal ingredients). The South African National Halal Authority also licenses the usage of the Halal logo in restaurants where the food is halal, in addition to no alcohol or pork products being served.

In Singapore, halal certification is managed by Majlis Ugama Islam Singapura (MUIS), also known as the Islamic Religious Council of Singapore. They are the sole custodian of Halal Certification in Singapore.

In Malaysia, the Department of Islamic Development Malaysia (JAKIM) is the agency responsible for halal certification in Malaysia.

==Availability of halal food in non-Islamic regions==
In 2013, the halal market was estimated to be 26% of world food trade. The Global Halal Institute has a list of Halal certifiers that are approved by most Muslim countries with dietary import restrictions for companies.

===Europe and Asia===
In the United Kingdom, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, or Singapore, halal fried chicken restaurants having thousands of outlets, some but not all of which, serve halal foods such as the Nando&#x27;s, Brown&#x27;s Chicken, and Crown Fried Chicken companies. In Arab, North African and Middle Eastern countries meat and food is mostly halal, even from foreign fast food chains.

== Effects on meat ==
Research claims the method of quickly severing windpipe, jugular vein and carotid artery in one quick move without giving the animal time to panic does have an effect on quality of meat. When animals face trauma or stress, the glycogen in their body is converted to lactic acid. This affects the pH level of the meat, lower pH resulting in lighter colored meat and higher pH resulting in darker meat. This makes the meat tougher and also hard to chew. The halal way of slaughtering ensures the method is believed to be less traumatic for the animal.

==See also==

* Islamic vegetarianism
* Comparison of Islamic and Jewish dietary laws
* Christian dietary laws
* Dhabihah
* Dietary laws
* Halal
* Hechsher
* Kashrut
* Kosher foods
* List of diets
* Makruh
* Muslim Consumer Group (MCG)
* Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork
* Ritual slaughter
* Taboo food and drink
* Word of Wisdom
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1329066" start="0" end="20" title="Islamic dietary laws" label="Islamic dietary laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="35" end="42" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="65" end="86" title="Islamic jurisprudence" label="Islamic jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="180" end="185" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="204" end="209" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="225" end="250" title="hadith" label="collections of traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="285" end="293" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="516" end="523" title="basmala" label="basmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q191811" start="540" end="546" title="takbir" label="takbir"/>
<link wikidata="" start="965" end="971" title="Q2:173" label="Q2:173"/>
<link wikidata="" start="973" end="977" title="Q5:5" label="Q5:5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="983" end="989" title="Q6:118" label="Q6:118"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="1182" end="1196" title="Hajj" label="the pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1226" end="1235" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="1458" end="1469" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="1529" end="1534" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="1633" end="1642" title="wind pipe" label="wind pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q749592" start="1644" end="1656" title="jugular vein" label="jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757544" start="1662" end="1678" title="carotid artery" label="carotid arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="1709" end="1720" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="1913" end="1920" title="Basmala" label="Basmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q191811" start="1925" end="1931" title="Takbir" label="Takbir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="1982" end="1987" title="God in Islam" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="1995" end="2004" title="Basmala" label="Bismillah"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="2531" end="2537" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="2678" end="2689" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133558" start="2703" end="2709" title="makruh" label="makruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058410" start="2819" end="2824" title="prawn" label="prawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="2830" end="2836" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="2917" end="2926" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="2928" end="2932" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="2934" end="2941" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="2950" end="2957" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="3028" end="3031" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="3068" end="3073" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253301" start="3143" end="3184" title="List of halal and kosher fish" label="List of halal and kosher fish - Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="3204" end="3210" title="Maliki school" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="3309" end="3314" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i school" label="Shafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="3371" end="3382" title="Tetraodontidae" label="puffer fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="3417" end="3427" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001949" start="3462" end="3477" title="soft-shell crab" label="soft-shell crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="3483" end="3490" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q273291" start="3513" end="3525" title="Hermit crab" label="hermit-crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="3527" end="3536" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q44514058" start="3542" end="3552" title="Sea snake" label="sea-snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="3557" end="3562" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="3682" end="3695" title="Sunni Muslims" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="3775" end="3780" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="3863" end="3869" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3976" end="3982" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="3991" end="3997" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4005" end="4012" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="4180" end="4185" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="4188" end="4192" title="mule" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="4199" end="4205" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="4568" end="4572" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="4575" end="4580" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="4583" end="4589" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="4595" end="4599" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="4816" end="4822" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="4845" end="4861" title="Alcoholic drinks" label="Alcoholic drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4919" end="4924" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582285" start="4989" end="4994" title="khamr" label="khamr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="5094" end="5112" title="psychoactive drugs" label="psychoactive drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q137097" start="5585" end="5590" title="Alevi Islam" label="Alevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q144333" start="5662" end="5667" title="Zaidiyyah" label="Zaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="5672" end="5680" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili" label="Mutazili"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="5762" end="5773" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="5886" end="5893" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q494268" start="5950" end="5983" title="Blood as food" label="blood and its by-products as food"/>
<link wikidata="Q219701" start="6030" end="6040" title="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;ida" label="al-Maʼidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q219675" start="6196" end="6203" title="Baqarah" label="Baqarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6532" end="6544" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="6655" end="6661" title="Donkey" label="Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940269" start="6762" end="6766" title="fang" label="fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="6942" end="6948" title="Lizard" label="Lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q739847" start="6979" end="6990" title="Uromastyx" label="dabb lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="7030" end="7035" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="7038" end="7046" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="7336" end="7339" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="7345" end="7351" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="7784" end="7791" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7984" end="7989" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="7993" end="8001" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178915" start="8284" end="8288" title="sawm" label="sawm"/>
<link wikidata="Q176770" start="8336" end="8357" title="Five Pillars of Islam" label="five pillars of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q577401" start="8572" end="8577" title="iftar" label="iftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="8773" end="8784" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid-al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="9393" end="9404" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="9422" end="9437" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9531" end="9558" title="Islamic Services of America" label="Islamic Services of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10194" end="10206" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11277" end="11291" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="11293" end="11298" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="11300" end="11309" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="11311" end="11319" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="11324" end="11333" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472954" start="11453" end="11465" title="Nando&amp;#x27;s" label="Nando&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975925" start="11467" end="11487" title="Brown&amp;#x27;s Chicken" label="Brown&amp;#x27;s Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389611" start="11493" end="11512" title="Crown Fried Chicken" label="Crown Fried Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q124830742" start="12233" end="12254" title="Islamic vegetarianism" label="Islamic vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115554" start="12257" end="12302" title="Comparison of Islamic and Jewish dietary laws" label="Comparison of Islamic and Jewish dietary laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001650" start="12305" end="12327" title="Christian dietary laws" label="Christian dietary laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094798" start="12330" end="12338" title="Dhabihah" label="Dhabihah"/>
<link wikidata="Q620663" start="12341" end="12353" title="Dietary laws" label="Dietary laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="12356" end="12361" title="Halal" label="Halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q355552" start="12364" end="12372" title="Hechsher" label="Hechsher"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="12375" end="12382" title="Kashrut" label="Kashrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076110" start="12385" end="12397" title="Kosher foods" label="Kosher foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349446" start="12400" end="12413" title="List of diets" label="List of diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133558" start="12416" end="12422" title="Makruh" label="Makruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942885" start="12425" end="12446" title="Muslim Consumer Group" label="Muslim Consumer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311393" start="12455" end="12504" title="Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork" label="Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105836" start="12507" end="12523" title="Ritual slaughter" label="Ritual slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q620663" start="12526" end="12546" title="Taboo food and drink" label="Taboo food and drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034360" start="12549" end="12563" title="Word of Wisdom" label="Word of Wisdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
