<doc id="481800" wikidata="Q162639" url="?curid=481800" title="Lew Hoad">
<text>Lewis Alan Hoad (23 November 1934 – 3 July 1994) was an Australian tennis player whose career ran from 1950 to 1973. Hoad won four Major singles tournaments as an amateur (the Australian Championships, French Championships and two Wimbledons). He was a member of the Australian team that won the Davis Cup four times between 1952 and 1956. Hoad turned professional in July 1957. He won the Kooyong Tournament of Champions in 1958 and the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions in 1959. He won the Ampol Open Trophy world series of tournaments in 1959, which included the Kooyong tournament that concluded in early January 1960. Hoad&#x27;s men&#x27;s singles tournament victories spanned from 1951 to 1971.

Hoad was ranked the world No. 1 amateur in 1953 by Harry Hopman, by Noel Brown and by the editors of Tennis de France, and also in 1956 by Lance Tingay, by Ned Potter, and by Tennis de France. He was ranked the world No. 1 professional for 1959 in Kramer&#x27;s Ampol point ranking system, and by Robert Barnes (Kramer&#x27;s Australian manager).

Serious back problems plagued Hoad throughout his career, possibly caused by a weight-lifting exercise that he devised in 1954. The back injury became particularly intense following the 1956 Wimbledon championships, continued periodically, and led to his semi-retirement from tennis in 1967. Afterwards, he made sporadic appearances at tournaments, enticed by the advent of the Open Era in 1968 and was seeded No. 7 for the 1968 Wimbledon Championships and seeded No. 12 for the 1970 French Open.

Following his retirement in 1973, Hoad and his wife Jenny Staley Hoad constructed, owned and operated a tennis resort, &quot;Lew Hoad&#x27;s Campo de Tenis&quot; and &quot;Lew Hoad Tennis Village&quot; in Fuengirola, Spain, where he died of leukaemia on 3 July 1994, aged 59.

==Early life and career==

Lewis Hoad was born on 23 November 1934, in the working-class Sydney inner suburb of Glebe, the eldest of three sons of tramway electrician Alan Hoad and his wife, Ailsa Lyle Burbury. Hoad started playing tennis at age five with a racket gifted by a local social club. As a young child, he would wake up at 5 a.m. and hit tennis balls against a wall and garage door until the neighbours complained, and he was allowed to practice on the courts of the Hereford Tennis Club behind the house. At age 10 he competed in the seaside tournament at Manly in the under 16 category.

In his youth, Hoad often played Ken Rosewall, and they became known as the Sydney &quot;twins&quot;, although they had very different physiques, personalities and playing styles. Their first match in Sydney in January 1947 (when both were aged 12) was played as an opener of an exhibition match between Australia and America. Rosewall won 6–0, 6–0. Hoad built up great physical strength, especially in his hands and arms, by training at a police boys&#x27; club, where he made a name as a boxer. Hoad was about 12 when he was introduced to Adrian Quist, a former Australian tennis champion and then general manager of the Dunlop sports goods company. Quist played a couple of sets with Hoad and was impressed by his natural ability. When Hoad was 14 he left school and joined the Dunlop payroll, following the pattern of that &#x27;shamateur&#x27; era when most of Australia&#x27;s brightest tennis prospects were employed by sporting goods companies.

Hoad had just turned 15 when he and Rosewall were selected to play for New South Wales in an interstate contest against Victoria. In November 1949, Hoad won the junior title at the New South Wales Championships, and the same weekend, he also competed in the final of the junior table tennis championship in Sydney.

==Tennis career==

===Amateur career: 1950–1957===

;1950
Hoad lost to Dick Savitt in four sets in round one of the New South Wales State championships in November. In his match report, Adrian Quist said, &quot;Hoad played well, and held a lead of 4-2 in the third set after winning the second. At present he makes too many errors. He will have to learn good control from the ground before his game will reach great heights.&quot; Hoad reached the semi-finals of County of Cumberland championships in Sydney in December, losing to Bill Sidwell. &quot;It was apparent from the start of play that Sidwell did not intend to take the youngster lightly. He served with pressure and followed the majority of his returns to the net. The first set was very evenly contested. Had Hoad not fallen into easy errors he may well have won the opening set. The experience of Sidwell, however, prevailed during the important exchanges&quot;, said Adrian Quist.

;1951
Hoad&#x27;s first Grand Slam tournament appearance was at the 1951 Australian Championships held in January at the White City Tennis Club in Sydney. He won his first match against Ronald McKenzie in straight sets but lost in the following round to defending champion and countryman Frank Sedgman. It was the only Grand Slam tournament he played that year.
Hoad won his first men&#x27;s singles title, the Brisbane Exhibition tournament at Milton, on grass, on 11 August 1951, defeating Rosewall in the final in four sets. In September, Hoad won New South Wales hardcourt championships beating George Worthington in the final.

;1952
In 1952, Hoad reached the third round of the Australian Championships in Adelaide. In April, he was selected by the Australasian Lawn Tennis Association as member of the team to play in overseas tournaments. In May, before departing to Europe, he won the singles title at the Australian Hardcourt Championships on clay after a five-set win in the final against Rosewall. Hoad, who had never played a tournament on European red clay courts, received a walkover in the first round of the French Championships and lost in straight sets to sixth-seeded and 1947 and 1951 finalist Eric Sturgess. In only their second appearance as a doubles team at a Grand Slam event, Hoad and Rosewall reached the French semifinal. Hoad lost in the quarterfinal of the Belgian championships in Brussels in early June, where he was defeated by Budge Patty.
Hoad&#x27;s first entry at the grass court Queen&#x27;s Club Championship in June 1952 ended in the quarterfinal against eventual champion Frank Sedgman. A week later, he played his first match at the Wimbledon Championships defeating Beppe Merlo in a nervous and unimpressive five-set encounter. Wins against Rolando Del Bello and Freddie Huber were followed by a fourth round loss against second-seeded and eventual finalist Jaroslav Drobný. Hoad and Rosewall caused an upset when they defeated second-seeded Gardnar Mulloy and Dick Savitt in the third round of the doubles event, but lost in the semifinal against Vic Seixas and Eric Sturgess.

After a semifinal result at the Swedish championships in July, and an exhibition between Australia and West Germany, Hoad and the Australian team traveled to the United States under the guidance of coach Harry Hopman. As a preparation for his first U.S. Championships he played the Meadow Club Invitational (Southampton), Eastern Grass Court Championships (South Orange), and Newport Invitational before teaming up with Rosewall to reach the semifinal of the U.S. National Doubles Championships in Brookline, Massachusetts. Hoad was the eighth seeded foreign player at the U.S. Championships. He won four matches to reach his first Grand Slam quarterfinal but due in part to making 64 errors could not overcome Sedgman who would win the tournament without losing a set. With Thelma Coyne Long he reached the final of the mixed doubles event, the first Grand Slam final of his career, but they lost in straight sets to Doris Hart and Frank Sedgman. An early loss at the Pacific Southwest Championships in September concluded his first overseas tour. In September, he was jointly ranked No. 10 in the world for 1952 with Rosewall by Lance Tingay of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;.

;1953

Hoad started 1953 poorly in the singles with a second-round exit against Clive Wilderspin at the Australian Championships in Melbourne after playing an uncharacteristic baseline game. He was more successful in doubles where he and Rosewall became the youngest team to win the Australian doubles title after a victory in the final against Mervyn Rose and Don Candy. In March, Hoad defended his singles title at the Australian Hardcourt Championships, defeating Rosewall in a five set semifinal in which he survived six matchpoints, and 34-year-old John Bromwich in the final. Two weeks later, Hoad lost the final of the N.S.W. Hardcourt Championships against Mervyn Rose.

Hoad&#x27;s second overseas tour started in late April, and after an exhibition in Cairo at the Gezira Sporting Club, he reached the final at Italian Championships in Rome losing to Drobný in straight sets but won the doubles title with Rosewall. At the French Championships in May, Hoad was seeded fourth and made it to the quarterfinals in which he lost to Vic Seixas due to overhitting and an unreliable serve. Hoad and Rosewall won the doubles title with a three-set win in the final against countrymen Rose and Wilderspin. In June, Hoad&#x27;s attacking serve-and-volley game proved too good for Wimbledon favorite Rosewall in the final of the Queen&#x27;s Club Championship and he won the tournament without losing a set. At Wimbledon, Hoad was seeded sixth, and as at the French, Vic Seixas defeated him in the quarterfinal, this time in a close five-set match that ended on a Hoad double fault. In an all-Australian doubles final Hoad and Rosewall defeated Hartwig and Rose. Hoad lost to Enrique Morea in the final of the Dutch Championships in mid July. He won his first title on U.S. soil in South Orange at the Eastern Grass Court Championships in mid August, defeating compatriot Rex Hartwig in the final. In the semifinal against Rosewall, he pulled a back muscle. Hoad and Rosewall&#x27;s hopes of winning the doubles Grand Slam, two years after fellow Australians Ken McGregor and Frank Sedgman had first achieved that feat, were dashed when they lost surprisingly in the third round of the U.S. Doubles Championships. At the U.S. Championships Hoad (second foreign seed) won four matches to reach the semifinal where for the third time in 1953 he lost in a Grand Slam event to Vic Seixas. Following his defeat, and that of Rosewall in the other semifinal, there was criticism in the press that both 18-year-old players were physically and mentally worn out due to the intensive schedule imposed by coach Harry Hopman. In September, Seixas again beat Hoad, this time in the semifinal of the Pacific Southwest Championships in Los Angeles.

Hoad was rested a few weeks upon his return to Australia and then won the Queensland Championships in early November in a 41-minute final against Hartwig. Two weeks later, Hoad won the N.S.W. Championships after four-set victories over Tony Trabert in the semi-final and over Rosewall in the final in front of a 10,000 Sydney crowd but had trouble with a sore right elbow. In early December at the Victorian Championships he defeated Rosewall in the final. The much anticipated Davis Cup challenge round match against the challenging team from the United States took place at the Melbourne Kooyong Stadium in late December. Surprisingly Hartwig was selected to partner Hoad in the doubles instead of Rosewall, a decision widely criticized in the press.

In the opening singles matches, Hoad defeated Seixas, his nemesis that season, in straight sets, while Trabert defeated Rosewall, also in straight sets. Hoad and Hartwig lost the doubles match against Seixas and Trabert and Australia trailed 1–2 at the start of the final day. Hoad is remembered for his match as a 19-year-old amateur against the United States champion Tony Trabert. In front of a 17,000 crowd, he defeated Trabert in five sets to help his country retain the Cup. It was seen as one of the best Davis Cup matches in history. Directly following the final, Hoad received his call-up papers for National Service.

Hoad was ranked world No. 5 amateur for 1953 by Lance Tingay in his September rankings. At the end of the year, Hoad was ranked world No. 1 amateur for the complete season of 1953 by Harry Hopman, by Noel Brown and by the editors of &quot;Tennis de France&quot;, published by Philippe Chatrier. Tingay stated in September 1954 that Hoad in 1953 had &quot;played so well during the Australian season that his status as best in the world was axiomatic.&quot; He added that for the 1954 season, &quot;His form since has been almost disastrous. Hoad&#x27;s decline has been a mystery.&quot; Hoad was the youngest tennis player ever at 19 years 38 days to achieve world No. 1 rankings, a record which still stands.

;1954

In January, Hoad played just one tournament before entering his National Service training. At the South Australian Championships in Adelaide he reached the final but sub-par play led to a straight-sets defeat to Trabert. On 13 January, Hoad joined the 13th National Service Training battalion in Ingleburn for a period of 98 days and commented that &quot;It will be a welcome break from tennis&quot;. As a consequence, Hoad was unable to participate in the Australian Championships. At the end of February, Hoad received a leave from service to play for the Australian team at Kooyong stadium in the third Test match against South Africa in front of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh. He won a singles match against Abe Segal, won a doubles match with Rosewall and lost a mixed-doubles match with his girlfriend Jenny Staley. When Hoad returned to service, he was bitten by a spider while on maneuvers which caused him to become ill and hospitalized him for ten days. He spent two days in coma which was not made public.

While he was in service, Hoad devised a weight-lifting exercise, doing push-ups with round 50 lb. weights placed on his back, which Hoad later believed probably initiated his back trouble. Hoad left the National Service at the end of April and his third overseas tour with an Australian team started on 5 May. For the first time in his career, Hoad was the top-seeded player at a Grand Slam tournament at the French Championships but he lost in the fourth round to 40-year-old Gardnar Mulloy. Hoad lost the doubles final with Rosewall to Seixas and Trabert in 56 minutes. Partnering Maureen Connolly, who had won the women&#x27;s singles title, Hoad won the mixed-doubles final against Jacqueline Patorni and Rex Hartwig. In June, Hoad overcame countryman Rose in the final of the Queen&#x27;s Club Championship to successfully defend his title. Hoad was seeded second behind Trabert at Wimbledon Championships. In the fourth round, Hoad avenged his loss to Mulloy at the French Championships, defeating him in four sets. In the quarterfinal the powerful service and excellent returns of Drobný proved too much for Hoad and he was beaten in straight sets within an hour. Hoad and Rosewall were unable to defend their Wimbledon doubles title after losing in five sets in the semifinal to Seixas and Trabert. A surprise loss to Roger Becker in the semifinal at the Midlands Counties Championships in Birmingham was followed in mid-July by winning the singles title at the Swiss Championships in Gstaad. As in the previous year, Hoad met Rosewall in the Eastern Grass Court Championships in August, this time in the final, and again the titleholder was victorious, overpowering Rosewall to win the singles title in three straight sets. At Newport in mid August, Hoad was beaten by 17-year-old compatriot Roy Emerson who won the deciding set 8–6. For the third time in 1954, Seixas and Trabert defeated Hoad and Rosewall at a Grand Slam doubles event, winning the U.S. Doubles Championships in Brookline.
Hoad, no. 1 foreign seed at the U.S. Championships, lost to Ham Richardson in a five-set quarterfinal. His lackluster form continued when he was defeated by unseeded Luis Ayala in the quarterfinal of the Pacific Southwest Championships in mid-September. After returning to Australia at the end of September, Hoad scheduled extra practice to work on his serve and volley but subsequently lost to Don Candy in the semifinal of the Sydney Metropolitan Championships. In early November, matters briefly improved. In the final of the Queensland Championships in Brisbane, he overcame a sunstroke and the loss of sets three and four by 0–6 to defeat Hartwig in five sets. In mid-November, he was upset by veteran John Bromwich who better exploited the windy conditions in the quarterfinal of the N.S.W. Championships. At the Victorian Championships, the last significant tournament before the Davis Cup Challenge Round, Hoad was defeated in straight sets in the semifinal by Seixas. As in the previous match against Sven Davidson he showed such poor form and at times an apparent lack of interest that he was jeered by the crowd and several left after he smashed a ball into the stands.

The 1954 Davis Cup Challenge Round was played on 27–29 December on the grass courts at the White City Stadium in Sydney between title holders Australia and the United States. Hoad lost the first rubber to Trabert, in front of a record crowd of 25,000, in a high-quality four-set match. Rosewall also lost his singles match and the United States won back the cup after Seixas and Trabert defeated Hoad and Rosewall in four sets in the doubles rubber.

In a season review article in the &quot;Dunlop Lawn Tennis Annual &amp; Almanack&quot; editor and former tennis player G.P. Hughes mentioned that &quot;Hoad in particular had a bad year&quot;. In a 1956 interview, Hoad admitted that especially in 1954 he often got fed-up with tennis and didn&#x27;t care whether he played or not. In September, Hoad&#x27;s world ranking had slipped to No. 7 in Tingay&#x27;s ranking. Tingay, Chatrier and other writers ranked Hoad world No. 5 in a collaborative ranking. However, Hoad was ranked world No. 4 in Ned Potter&#x27;s rankings for 1954 in &quot;World Tennis&quot;, which was a higher ranking than Potter had given Hoad in 1953 at No. 5.

;1955
Hoad was unable to play the South Australian tennis championship in early January due to a torn ligament. To some surprise he entered the mixed doubles event at the 1955 Australian Championships with his girlfriend Jenny Staley and the pair finished as runner-ups to Thelma Coyne Long and George Worthington. In the singles event, he reached his first Grand Slam tournament final after solid wins over Seixas (quarterfinal) and Hartwig (semifinal). In the final Rosewall&#x27;s accuracy and control were too strong for him and he lost in three straight sets. Hoad did not participate in the French Championships as the Davis Cup team that he was part of only left for Europe at the end of May during the Championships. In the singles final of the Queen&#x27;s Club Championship in mid-June Hoad, who was married earlier that day, lost his service seven times and lost to Rosewall in two straight sets but won the doubles event with Hartwig. Hoad was the fourth-seeded player at the Wimbledon Championships at the end of June. In his quarterfinal match against seventh-seeded Budge Patty, his game lacked accuracy and he conceded a break in each set resulting in a loss in straight sets.

Having lost the Davis Cup in 1954, Australia had to play through the 1955 Davis Cup preliminary rounds to challenge holders United States. In July, Australia defeated Mexico, Brazil and Canada to win the Americas Zone and subsequently beat Japan and Italy in the Inter-zone matches in August. In the Challenge Round at the West Side Tennis Club, Forest Hills from 26 to 28 August, Hoad defeated the French and Wimbledon champion Trabert in four sets in his first singles rubber and with Hartwig won the doubles match to reclaim the Davis Cup for Australia. These were the first ever tennis matches televised in colour, on the first national colour broadcast by NBC television.

Hoad was no. 2 foreign seed at the U.S. Championships held from 2 to 11 September, immediately after the Davis Cup Challenge Round, on the muddy courts of Forest Hills. In the quarterfinal, he lost his service three times in succession in the third set and suffered a straight-sets defeat in 50 minutes against Trabert, the first-seeded U.S. player, and eventual champion. In his first significant tournament after the U.S. Championships, Hoad won the New South Wales Championships in November after a win in the final against Rosewall. In December, he won the singles title at the Victorian Championships after a tough five-sets final win over 19-year old Ashley Cooper.

In September 1955, he was ranked No. 3 in the world according to Tingay, and was ranked world No. 3 for 1955 by Ned Potter in &quot;World Tennis&quot;.

;1956

Hoad started the year with a five-set defeat in the final of the South Australian Championships against countryman Neale Fraser. At the following Manly tournament, the crowd overflowed the stands during the final hindering Rosewall&#x27;s &quot;baseline defensive game&quot; more than Hoad&#x27;s attacking style, resulting in a straight-sets win for Hoad in 35 minutes. At the Australian Championships in Brisbane, Hoad overcame a two sets to one deficit against Mervyn Rose in the quarterfinal and beat Neale Fraser in the semifinal to reach his second consecutive Australian final, where he overcame titleholder Rosewall in four sets to win his first Grand Slam singles title. He won the doubles title with Rosewall against Don Candy and Mervyn Rose. At the beginning of March, Hoad and his wife left for an overseas private tour (a tour sanctioned but not organised by the Australian tennis federation). First stop of the tour was Cairo where Hoad won the singles title at the Egyptian Championships against Sven Davidson followed by a tournament win in Alexandria over Fred Kovaleski. At Monte Carlo in late March, he was surprisingly beaten by Tony Vincent in the quarterfinal. In the Australian ranking published in April, reflecting the season until the end of March, Hoad overtook Rosewall as No. 1. Singles titles at the Lebanese Championships and at the Connaught Club in Essex followed in April but the month ended with a semifinal loss to Ham Richardson at the British Hard Court Championships in Bournemouth.

Hoad won his first Italian Championships on red clay at the Foro Italico in Rome in early May when he outplayed Sven Davidson in straight sets. At the French Championships at Roland Garros, Hoad survived a five-set scare against Robert Abdesselam in the third round before winning the final against Sven Davidson in straight sets to claim his second consecutive Grand Slam singles title. Unknown to the public, Hoad had stayed up the night previous to the final, invited by a Russian diplomat, and was drunk when he came home. An intensive workout by Rod Laver got him into a state that allowed him to play the final. Following the win in Paris, Hoad stated his intention to remain amateur after 1956, &quot;Even if I win the three big tournaments, even if Kramer raised his offer, I still wouldn&#x27;t turn pro for at least two or three seasons.&quot; In May, Hoad won the International Golden Ball tournament in Wiesbaden, West Germany after a straight-sets victory in the final over Art Larsen but at the Trofeo Conde de Godó in Barcelona, he lost in the quarterfinal to Bob Howe. As a preparation for Wimbledon, Hoad played the singles event at the Northern Championships in Manchester but lost to 34-year old Jaroslav Drobný in the final 7–5 in the deciding set. Hoad was seeded first for the Wimbledon Championships. He lost two sets en route to the final, one to Mal Anderson in the quarterfinal and one to Ham Richardson in the semifinal. In the final he faced Rosewall. In the first all-Australian final since 1922, Hoad was victorious in four sets to gain his first Wimbledon and third successive Grand Slam championship title. Hoad also won the doubles title with Rosewall, their third Wimbledon title, defeating Orlando Sirola and Nicola Pietrangeli in the final in straight sets. Following his Wimbledon title he lost in the semi-final of the Midlands tournament to Mike Davies. In August, Hoad won the singles title at the German Championships, on clay at Hamburg, with a four-set defeat of Orlando Sirola in the final.

Immediately after Wimbledon, Hoad experienced severe pain and stiffness in his lower back, at a level higher than before the tournament. He arranged to travel to the U.S. by boat on the rather than suffer a long plane trip. However, the pain continued and reduced the level of his play for the remainder of the year and into 1957.

After arrival in New York on 21 August, Hoad travelled to Brookline to partner Rosewall in the U.S. Doubles Championships which they won to complete their career doubles Grand Slam. From there he went to the Forest Hills stadium in New York to play his first match in the singles U.S. Championships. He had missed the preparatory grass court tournament at Newport. Having won the first three stages of the Grand Slam, Hoad was favoured to win the fourth and then turn professional for a lucrative contract offered by Jack Kramer, although Hoad himself claimed that he never thought about the Grand Slam and did not hear of it before he arrived in New York. Hoad lost the U.S. Championships final at Forest Hills in four sets to Rosewall. Hoad and Rosewall won the doubles title against Seixas and Richardson. In September Hoad defeated Luis Ayala in the semifinal and Sven Davidson in a four set final at the O&#x27;Keefe Invitational at the Toronto Lawn Tennis Club in Rosedale, Toronto on red clay and at the Pacific Southwest Championships, the last leg of his overseas tour, Hoad was beaten by Alex Olmedo in the third round. In November he lost the final of the Queensland Championships to Ashley Cooper in five sets and was hindered by numbness in the serving arm between the elbow and the wrist. In mid December Hoad and Rosewall competed in the final of the Victorian Championships which was their last final as amateurs as Rosewall turned professional at the end of the month. The final started late due to rain and was stopped due to darkness at two sets to one for Hoad but the following day Rosewall won the last two sets and the title. In late December, Hoad was part of the Australian Davis Cup team which defended the Cup in the Challenge Round against the United States. Hoad was confined to bed with back pain for the two days prior to the Davis Cup matches, and was relieved to find that he could play well. In his last Davis Cup appearance, Hoad won both his singles rubbers, against Herbie Flam and Seixas, as well as his doubles match with Rosewall to help Australia to a 5–0 victory.

Hoad was ranked world No. 1 amateur by Lance Tingay in September, by Ned Potter in October in &quot;World Tennis&quot; and at the end of the year by &quot;Tennis de France&quot;. Hoad won 16 tournaments in 1956, and 17 doubles titles.

;1957
Hoad played poorly in early 1957, due to back trouble, and was placed in an upper body cast for six weeks, following which he slowly returned to tennis competition in April 1957. He then experienced a period of pain-free playing for 11 months. He won the Northern Championships in Manchester, beating Ramanathan Krishnan in the final. Hoad won his second successive Wimbledon singles title, defeating Ashley Cooper in a straight-sets final that lasted 57 minutes.

===Professional career: 1957–1973===

;1957
After winning the 1957 Wimbledon title, Hoad turned professional by signing a two-year contract with Kramer for a record guarantee of US$125,000, or AUS£55,500, which included a US$25,000 bonus for winning the 1957 Wimbledon singles title. This was the highest guarantee that would be given to an amateur turning pro, with Laver receiving the second highest. Hoad&#x27;s business relationship with Kramer in 1957 and later was congenial and smooth compared to the experiences of Pancho Gonzales. Hoad would later claim, &quot;I never had a problem with Jack Kramer.&quot;

On 14 July 1957, Hoad won his debut match as a professional against Frank Sedgman at the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions, broadcast live nationally on the CBS television network. He won his next match, against Pancho Segura, but lost the last three to finish joint third in the round robin event behind Gonzales and Sedgman. After Forest Hills, Hoad commented on the difference between amateur and professional tennis: &quot;It&#x27;s an entirely different league. These pros make mistakes but they don&#x27;t make them on vital points. That&#x27;s the difference.&quot;. At the following Masters round robin tournament played on cement courts at the Los Angeles Tennis Club he lost all six of his matches to finish in last place, commenting &quot;I don&#x27;t like cement courts...&quot;. After these defeats Kramer commented that Hoad would have to change his playing style: &quot;His second serve is too shallow. His opponents massacre it. He must shorten his backhand or play deeper in his returning service.&quot; Kramer stated that there was a psychological factor connected with Hoad&#x27;s defeats &quot;as he never has done well on these courts in Los Angeles and thinks they are his jinx. But, wait until he gets going in the indoor circuit, and then you’ll see an entirely different player, both mentally and physically.&quot;

In September Hoad embarked on a four-month 4-man tour of Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Australia together with Kramer (Sedgman replaced Kramer in Australia), Rosewall, and Segura. Kramer and Hoad were interviewed live on BBC television. Kramer gave his estimation of Hoad&#x27;s game: &quot;I feel that he&#x27;s potentially the best player that tennis might ever have.&quot; Kramer cited Hoad&#x27;s recent marathon win over Rosewall at The Hague on red clay as evidence of improvement in his play. At the Wembley Indoor Pro Championships in late September, Kramer eliminated Hoad, defeating him in straight sets, and Kramer also defeated Gonzales for third place. The two players would be Kramer&#x27;s headliners in the upcoming world pro tennis championship tour. In the 4-man tour of 1957, Hoad finished with slight edges over the other players, 16–15 over Rosewall, 16–14 over Kramer, 13–9 over Segura, 4–2 over Sedgman. Hoad was ranked combined world No. 3 behind Gonzales and Sedgman and ahead of Rosewall and Segura for 1957 by Quist.

;1958
In 1958 a projected series of 100 head-to-head matches was commenced between Hoad and the reigning champion of professional tennis, Pancho Gonzales, together with an undercard series between Trabert and Segura. The series started in January in a number of Australian cities in stadiums on grass courts with mostly a best-of-five set format, and in New Zealand for three matches with a best-of-three set format, and at the end of the Australasian subtour, Hoad was leading 8 to 5. Most venues reported record crowds, including the first Kooyong encounter, which Hoad won in a 3 and 3/4 hour, four-sets, 80-games marathon in front of 12,000 spectators. From 5 to 4 down in New Zealand, Hoad launched a 15 to 3 winning streak against Gonzales (including the non-tour Kooyong Tournament of Champions deciding match and the third-place match at Sydney Masters). In February, the series continued in the United States, mostly in indoor venues and local gyms with a best-of-three set format, played on a portable canvas surface. Hoad would experience a thigh injury in May and June. But Hoad won 18 of the first 27 matches, and in late February Gonzales had, according to Kramer, the look of a &quot;beaten man&quot;. However, after they played an outdoor match on 1 March on a chilly night in Palm Springs, Hoad&#x27;s back stiffened which affected him significantly for the rest of the series. Twice Hoad was forced to take time off to rest his back and was substituted for in his absence by Rosewall and Trabert. From 9–18 Gonzales surged to a 26–23 lead, and at the end of the series on 8 June, he had defeated Hoad by 51 matches to 36.

In late 1958, Jack Kramer was asked which of the many &quot;World Professional Championships&quot; tournaments he considered deserving of the title, and he named four tournaments under his own aegis: Forest Hills, L.A. Masters, Kooyong and Sydney White City. Hoad won three of these eight tournaments in 1958/59. For the 1958/1959 seasons, Kramer had a troupe of professional champions that included 11 Hall of Fame players, under contract, and he designed a series of tournaments to provide a format in which all of them could participate. In January 1958, Hoad won the Kooyong Tournament of Champions in Melbourne, the richest tournament of the year. The tournament was funded by the Australian oil company Ampol. Hoad defeated Gonzales and Sedgman in deciding matches, and won all five of his matches in the round-robin event. During the world championship tour in the U.S. in May, the four players participated in the Cleveland event. In the final at Cleveland on 5 May, Hoad lost a two-set lead against Gonzales while struggling with his leg-muscle injury. Hoad dropped out of the tour in late May to rest his thigh injury. At the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions in June 1958, Hoad&#x27;s thigh injury healed in time for his final match which he won against Gonzales on the final day. However, Gonzales won the event with a better overall round-robin record. At Roland Garros in September, Hoad won his quarterfinal against Trabert, and his semifinal against Gonzales. While leading in the final against Rosewall, Hoad wrenched his back reaching for a ball, and could not play well in the remainder of the match. He had to default the Wembley Pro tournament in September due to an &quot;arthritic&quot; back. Hoad rested for the next three months and did not play again until 1959. Jack March ranked Hoad world No. 2 professional tennis player behind Gonzales for 1958. Jack Kramer ranked Hoad No. 4 for 1958, with Gonzales first, Sedgman second, Rosewall third.

;1959
In early 1959, it was announced that the Australian oil company Ampol, would provide an award of AUS£2,500 (US$5,600), plus the Ampol Open Trophy, to the &quot;acknowledged world&#x27;s best tennis player&quot;, adjudged from a world series of tournaments managed by Jack Kramer. All of the best pros would be ranked by a point system which would determine the seeding list for all tournaments. The first five tournaments of the series were played in Australia on a portable outdoor wooden plywood court, playing slow on a sand/paint surface for traction, but with no sliding possible. Hoad began the series slowly, hampered by an elbow injury. At the end of January, Hoad defeated Rosewall and Cooper to win at Perth and in February 1959, he defeated Rosewall in three sets to win the South Australian Pro tournament at the Norwood Cricket Oval in Adelaide. This gave Hoad the lead in Ampol bonus points after the first group of five tournaments, a lead which he would not relinquish until the Ampol Open Trophy series ended in January 1960.

In the four-man 1959 Kramer World Professional Championship Tour, which ran from 20 February – 31 May in North America, Hoad built a lead of 12 to 5 in his series of matches against Gonzales, after a win in Newcastle, Pennsylvania in late April. Gonzales stated that &quot;I had blisters under my blisters from the punishment&quot; on that tour. However, the daily grind of the tour began to cause a renewal of Hoad&#x27;s back trouble, and he finally won against Gonzales by 15 matches to 13. He also won his head-to-head&#x27;s with newly turned pro Ashley Cooper (18–2) and Mal Anderson (9–5). With a win–loss record of 42–20 he finished second in the four-man tour behind Gonzales (47–15). The championship was based on money won. This would be the only 4-man world professional championship tour in which the winner would have a losing record against one of the other players, and the second-place finisher would have winning records against all of the other players. Four-man world championship tours were held in 1942, 1954, 1959, and 1960. In late April the players in the 4-man tour played in the Cleveland event, and Hoad lost the final to Gonzales in three straight sets.

The L.A. Masters round robin from 5–14 June, was held at the L.A. Tennis Club on concrete, and was part of the Ampol series. Hoad and Gonzales both finished with five wins and one loss, but Gonzales won the title on account of his victory over Hoad in their head-to-head match, which had been the first match for both in the event. During the tournament, Hoad received several Hollywood offers for screen tests, but turned them down with the comment &quot;What do I want with money?&quot;. At the O&#x27;Keefe Professional Championships on red clay at Toronto Lawn Tennis Club from 16 to 21 June, also part of the Ampol series, Hoad lost to Sedgman and Rosewall lost to Trabert. Gonzales won the tournament by beating Cooper, Trabert and Sedgman.

The Forest Hills Tournament of Champions from 23 to 28 June, played on grass at the Forest Hills stadium in New York, and part of the Ampol series, awarded the largest winners&#x27; cheques of the season. Hoad defeated Mal Anderson in the quarterfinal, Rosewall in the semifinal in four sets and Gonzales in the final, also in four sets, to claim the title. Gonzales appeared tired near the end of the match, but had declared in an interview prior to the final, &quot;I feel fit, very fit. Until Hoad beats me, I&#x27;m not worried.&quot; In the August 1959 issue of &quot;World Tennis&quot;, Riggs wrote of the Forest Hills final, &quot;the match signified the end of an era. The great Gonzales who had dominated professional tennis for four years had been decisively beaten...&quot;

In August 1959, Hoad defeated Cawthorn and Worthington to reach the final of the Slazenger Pro Championships in Eastbourne, but lost to Cooper in the final. In September, Hoad lost to Sedgman in the semifinal of the French Pro at Roland Garros, part of the Ampol series, but defeated Rosewall in a playoff for third place. At the Wembley Indoor Championships, part of the Ampol series, Hoad was upset by Segura in the second round, and Segura eventually lost the final to Anderson in a close match. In the Grand Prix de Europe tour from August to October, which excluded Roland Garros and Wembley, Hoad finished in third place behind Sedgman and Rosewall (Gonzales defaulted the European tour).

Hoad won the Perth and Adelaide Memorial Drive events in November and December to begin the final group of Ampol tournaments, which were played on grass courts in tennis stadiums. At the Sydney White City Tournament of Champions from 8–13 December, Hoad injured his hip in the semifinal against Anderson, and lost the final to Gonzales in straight sets. At Brisbane Milton Courts from 15 to 19 December, Rosewall defeated Hoad in the semifinal and Gonzales in the final in long matches. The final event of the Ampol Open Trophy series, the Qantas International Kooyong Championships at Melbourne, began on 26 December 1959. With a victory at Kooyong, either Hoad or Gonzales would have won the series. Gonzales decided to return to the U.S. for the holidays to be with his fiancée, although Kramer had warned that &quot;it could cost Gonzales AUS£5,000 by going home for Christmas.&quot; Gonzales thereby defaulted the Ampol series to Hoad. On 24 December, the day following Gonzales&#x27; departure, Hoad announced that he would not participate in the upcoming 4-man tour in January 1960. On 2 January 1960, Hoad defeated Rosewall in a three-and-a-half hour, four-set match to win the Kooyong tournament, a match which Kramer acclaimed as one of the best ever played. With Hoad&#x27;s successful defence of the Kooyong title also came the Ampol Open Trophy win and bonus money award.

The Ampol Open Trophy &quot;world series&quot; or &quot;world&#x27;s open tennis championship&quot; (it was named &quot;open&quot; in case open tennis arrived, which it did not for some years) had consisted of 15 tournaments around the world between 10 January 1959 and 2 January 1960. Hoad finished first in the series with 51 bonus points, ahead of Gonzales (43 points) and Rosewall (41 points). &quot;The Melbourne Age&quot; stated, Hoad &quot;was crowned the new world professional tournament champion at Kooyong&quot; by winning the Ampol world series. &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that Hoad had won &quot;the title of world&#x27;s top professional tennis player&quot; and was &quot;the game&#x27;s top money-earner&quot; for 1959. French language &quot;L&#x27;Impartial&quot; on 6 January 1960 stated &quot;Lewis Hoad world champion&quot;, the win at Kooyong &quot;allows him at the same time to claim the world title for 1959&quot;. In an advertisement in &quot;World Tennis&quot; magazine in June 1960, Hoad was described as &quot;world champion Lew Hoad&quot;. Kramer&#x27;s brochure described the Ampol series with the term &quot;World Championship Tennis&quot;. There had also been references of Gonzales between January and April 1960 being described variously that he was &quot;world professional tennis champion, will defend his title&quot;, was advertised as &quot;WORLD PRO CHAMPION&quot;, was &quot;world professional champion&quot;, &quot;goes after an unprecedented sixth straight world crown&quot;, was &quot;perennial professional champion&quot;, was described in UPI newswire reports as &quot;world professional tennis champion since 1954&quot;, &quot;titleholder&quot; of the &quot;world professional tennis championship&quot; and that Gonzales with &quot;five world series championships as his record, defeated Ken Rosewall at Cairns last night in straight sets and added further to his claims for his sixth successive world title&quot;. On 15 January 1960, &quot;Lawn Tennis and Badminton&quot; said Hoad was taking a six-month rest and the article stated &quot;J. Kramer is urging Hoad not to take this step, as during this year he will have his best chance of taking R. A. Gonzales&#x27; world professional title from him&quot;.

Kramer&#x27;s office reported that in 1959 Hoad had won his personal series of matches against Gonzales 24 to 23.

Kramer placed Hoad in fourth place in his personal world professional rating for 1959, the same ranking which Kramer awarded to Hoad in 1958 and 1960. Jack March ranked Hoad second behind Gonzales for 1959, the same ranking which he had given Hoad for 1958. Robert Roy in the French sportspaper &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot; ranked Hoad fifth as of mid-December, behind Gonzales, Sedgman, Rosewall, and Trabert. Kramer&#x27;s Australian tennis agent Bob Barnes placed Hoad in first spot, corresponding to Hoad&#x27;s standing on the official Ampol ranking, with Gonzales second, Rosewall third, Sedgman fourth, and Trabert fifth.
 Mal Anderson, in a conversation in &quot;World Tennis&quot;, recalled that &quot;Kramer established a point system to decide the best players...Lew finished ahead of Pancho&quot; followed by Rosewall, Sedgman, and Trabert.

;1960
Hoad decided not to play in the 4-man 1960 world championship tour and took a three-month layoff at the beginning of 1960 to rest his back and spend time with his family. When he returned to play, he was rusty, slow, and carried some extra weight, but he gradually recovered his form. He won a New Zealand tour in April, over Anderson, Sedgman, and Cooper. In May, Hoad commenced his participation in Kramer&#x27;s tournament series for 1960, which used a point system to rank the players. Gonzales withdrew from the tournament series just before it began. Hoad lost a five-set final to Rosewall at the Melbourne Olympic Pool where a court was set up on the drained pool floor. Hoad, Rosewall, and most of the pros did not play in the Cleveland World Pro which, as in 1959, was not a part of Kramer&#x27;s tournament series. However, Hoad and Trabert played a match in Cincinnati, Trabert&#x27;s home town, won by Hoad, just before the Cleveland event, where Trabert would be runner-up to Olmedo. Hoad won tournament finals in June at Santa Barbara, California and in September at Geneva, Switzerland, both over Rosewall, but appeared out of condition in the Roland Garros final against Rosewall. At the Wembley Indoor Championships that year, Hoad was again upset by Segura in the second round. In late 1960, Hoad won the inaugural Japanese Professional Championships in Tokyo, beating Rosewall, Cooper, and Gimeno. The event drew 7,000 fans for each of the four evenings of play, with the Crown Prince and Princess in attendance the first evening. In the final, Hoad prevailed at 13–11 in the fifth set over Rosewall, saving three match points. Following the marathon Tokyo final, Hoad withdrew from the remaining tournaments in the point series with back trouble, and the final projected tournament in Australia was not played. The final results of Kramer&#x27;s tournament series for 1960 are unknown. Hoad and Gonzales did not play against each other in 1960. Hoad was ranked world No. 2 professional tennis player behind Gonzales in a newspaper report.

;1961

Hoad played a few one-set matches on the 1961 Professional World Series tour in January, but soon withdrew because of a broken left foot and was substituted for by first Trabert and then Sedgman. He finished fourth in a tour of five Soviet cities in July, behind Trabert, Buchholz, and Segura, returning to play after his broken foot had healed. In late August and September, Hoad and Gonzales played a ten-match best-of-three sets tour of Britain and Ireland, with Buchholz and Davies playing the undercard matches. Hoad won his series against Gonzales by a score of six matches to four. Hoad won four of the five matches in the series which were played on grass. In September, Hoad lost in the first round of the French Pro to Luis Ayala. At the Wembley Pro, Hoad defeated Gonzales in a four-set semifinal. In the final against Rosewall, in the second game of the match, Hoad pulled his back while running for a backhand volley and suffered a recurrence of his old back injury, and could no longer run, losing in four sets. In November, Hoad won the fifth and deciding rubber for Australia against the United States in the final of the inaugural Kramer Cup (the pro equivalent of the Davis Cup) by beating Trabert in four sets. Trabert said afterwards: &quot;Trying to stop Lew in that final set was like fighting a machine gun with a rubber knife&quot;. Robert Roy in L&#x27;Équipe ranked Hoad as the third-best player of the year. In July 1961 Gardnar Mulloy rated Hoad as world No. 1 ahead of Gonzales, and the favourite to win a prospective open Wimbledon.

;1962
There was no official pro championship tour in 1962, as Laver and Emerson had declined to accept pro offers made by Kramer at the 1961 Wimbledon. Kramer resigned as tour promoter and director. From 14 to 17 March 1962, Hoad won the Adelaide Professional Championships, beating Rosewall, Gimeno, and Sedgman, the final against Rosewall very close. In late August, Hoad played a five-match, best-of-three sets tour in Britain against Trabert, defeating Trabert at Nottingham, Edinburgh, Bournemouth, and Dublin, while Trabert won at Scarborough. Hoad won the professional tournament in Zürich in September 1962 by a win in the final against Pancho Segura. In late September, Hoad lost to Rosewall in a -hour, four-set final at Wembley. Hoad and Rosewall teamed to win the doubles final at both Roland Garros and Wembley. In October, Hoad was awarded the Facis Trophy for winning the pro tour of Italy. In the 1962 Kramer Cup tournament, in best-of-five set formats, Hoad defeated Gimeno in the semifinal tie in Turin, Italy on clay, and Hoad won the opening match of the final at Adelaide in December against Olmedo on grass. In an interview in 1980, Hoad stated that &quot;I finally finished playing seriously, in about 1962&quot;. Hoad was voted the world No. 1 professional tennis player for 1962 in a UPI poll of 85 U.S. sports editors held at the end of January 1963 following the Australian tour.

;1963
In January 1963, Hoad and Rosewall guaranteed the contract of new pro Rod Laver. Hoad defeated Laver 8–0 in an Australian tour, some of their matches played to best-of-five and televised from sold-out stadiums. On Laver&#x27;s pro debut on 5 January, Hoad beat Laver at White City stadium in Sydney on a &quot;slippery&quot; grass surface. Their match at the Kooyong stadium in Melbourne on grass was a close contest, with Laver extending Hoad to five sets before losing. After the Australian series, Hoad was inactive for five months, partly due to a shoulder injury. Hoad did not plan to participate in the World Tour for 1963. On his return in June, he lost to Laver in the semifinal of the Adler Pro, and at the Forest Hills U.S. Pro tournament he lost to Buchholz in the first round. The Forest Hills event did not have a television contract, was a financial failure, and the players, with the exception of Gonzales, were not paid. At the French Pro indoor event at Stade Coubertin in September, Hoad was defeated in straight sets by Rosewall in the semifinal and lost the third place play-off against Sedgman. At the Wembley Pro, he reached the final after surviving a marathon semifinal against Buchholz in which he strained his leg muscle and was limping throughout most of the match. McCauley acclaimed the semi-final with Buchholz &quot;one of the best contests ever staged at Wembley&quot;. Hoad was tired and sluggish in the final, which again he lost to Rosewall, this time in four sets. At the Tokyo Japanese Pro in November, Hoad defeated Rosewall in the preliminary round, but lost the third place match to Sedgman, Buchholz defeating Laver in the final. At the end of the World Championship Tour earlier in the season, Laver had finished second and was officially ranked the No. 2 professional player behind Rosewall. Hoad did not play in the World Tour, and was not officially ranked.

;1964–67 
In February and March 1964, Hoad played a 16-day 24-match best-of-three sets tour of New Zealand with Laver, Rosewall, and Anderson. Hoad and Laver both finished on top with seven wins and five losses, but Hoad won first place with a 3 to 1 head-to-head score against Laver. In late September 1964, Hoad and Gonzales played a four match best-of-three sets head-to-head series in Britain, at Brighton, Carlyon Bay (Cornwall), Cardiff (Wales), and Glasgow (Scotland). Hoad won at Carlyon Bay and Cardiff, while Gonzales won at Brighton and Glasgow. Hoad experienced foot trouble in 1964 and finished in sixth place in the tournament series point system. In early 1965, much of his large right toe was removed, and he was only able to play a limited schedule thereafter. Hoad won his final victories against Laver in January 1966 at White City in Sydney, his home town, defeating him in straight sets, and at Forest Hills, New York in a round robin match in June 1966.

After the expiration of his seven-year contract on 14 November 1966, Hoad withdrew from competitive play for ten months. Hoad and his wife invested in the construction and development of a tennis club resort and a related residential complex in southern Spain. He returned unexpectedly to participate in the Wimbledon Pro tournament in late August 1967.
The Wimbledon Pro was a three-day BBC televised tournament organised by the All-England Club as a trial for &quot;open&quot; tennis and as such the first Wimbledon tournament open to male professional tennis players. Hoad was one of the eight players invited for the singles event and despite being in semi-retirement and without competitive play for ten months, he won his first match against Gonzales in three sets. The BBC television commentator called it &quot;the finest match ever seen on these hallowed grounds.&quot; This would be the last match on grass between Hoad and Gonzales, with Hoad holding a lifetime edge on grass over Gonzales of 21 matches to 14. With little energy left he lost the semifinal to Rosewall in two straight sets. Hoad played for an eight-week period on the pro tour in 1967, and then retired permanently from regular competitive tennis play.

;Open era 1968–1973
Back problems plagued Hoad throughout his career and forced his retirement from the tennis tour in October 1967 but the advent of the Open Era enticed him to make sporadic appearances at tournaments. Hoad lost in the final of the Irish Championships at Dublin in July 1968 to Tom Okker in straight sets, hampered by a thigh injury. In November 1969, Hoad won the Dewar Cup Aberavon singles title, part of the Dewar Cup indoor circuit, defeating Mark Cox in the semifinal and Bob Hewitt in the final, both wins in two straight sets. At the 1970 Italian Open, he lost in the third round in four sets to Alex Metreveli. At the 1970 French Open, he defeated Charlie Pasarell in four close sets, and reached the fourth round before succumbing to eventual finalist Željko Franulović. At Wimbledon that year he lost in the second round to Ismail El Shafei.

Hoad won his final tournament singles title on 7 August 1971, the Playmon Fiesta 71, on red clay at Benidorm, Spain. He defeated Antonio Muñoz in the semifinal and Manuel Santana in the final. This would mark a twenty-year span during which Hoad won singles titles in tennis, between the ages of 16 and 36, dating back to the Brisbane tournament of August 1951. In spring 1972, Hoad played the doubles final at Italian Open with Frew McMillan against Ilie Năstase and Ion Țiriac. Hoad/McMillan led 2–0 in sets but retired at 3–5 down in the fifth set in protest of the poor light conditions and the antics of the Rumanian pair. At the end of June, at the age of 37, Hoad made his final Wimbledon appearance losing in the first round to Jürgen Fassbender in four sets. Hoad&#x27;s final match was a second round loss as a result of a retirement to Fassbender in Johannesburg in November 1973.

From 1970 to 1974, Hoad was the coach of the Spanish Davis Cup team.

According to notes for a 1970 British Pathé documentary film about Hoad&#x27;s tennis ranch, Hoad had &quot;made about GBP 350,000 as a professional&quot;. Per a 1977 newspaper interview, &quot;Throughout his career, Hoad earned a total of £250,000, less than many pros collect in a year now. He received £150 for his Wimbledon victories; the payoff now is £17,500.&quot;

==Career summary==

Hoad&#x27;s win–loss ratio for 1956 in all matches was 114/129 or 88%. His win ratio in 1958 was 41% (winning 64 of 155 matches). However, Hoad&#x27;s win rates on the world championship tour that year (36/87 or 41%) and in the 1959 four-man tour (68%) compare favourably to Rosewall&#x27;s percentages on the 1957 world championship tour (34%) and on the 1960 four man tour (56%). In the 1959 Ampol Open Trophy tournament series, Hoad&#x27;s winning percentage was 71% (36/51) compared to Gonzales&#x27; 72% (26/36) and Rosewall&#x27;s 62% (26/42). Gonzales defaulted three Ampol tournaments and played 15 fewer matches than Hoad in the tournament series. For the 1959 season as a whole, Hoad had a 24 to 23 edge in wins against Gonzales, a consistency which surpasses any other opponent of Gonzales during his world champion years. Hoad&#x27;s lifetime edge over Gonzales on grass was 21 wins to 14 losses (60%). Hoad trails Rosewall lifetime in grasscourt matches, 17 to 27, Hoad&#x27;s results declining after 1961. Hoad was 15 wins and 18 losses against Rosewall lifetime in grass court tournament play (1951–1967). Hoad was 17 wins and 21 losses lifetime on clay against Rosewall, and 10 wins and 13 losses lifetime on clay against Trabert. Lifetime on all surfaces, primarily indoor, in approximate numbers, Hoad trails Gonzales 78–104 and trails Rosewall 51–84. In the five Tournament of Champions events from 1957 to 1959 in which both players were entered, Hoad held a 3 to 2 edge over Gonzales in head-to-head play, all on grass.

On the head-to-head tours of the era (1958, 1959, 1961), Hoad compiled 57 wins and 68 losses against Gonzales, the best head-to-head showing of any pro against the reigning champion Gonzales. In the 1959 Ampol series, Hoad&#x27;s record was 3 wins and 5 losses against Gonzales. However, Hoad was more consistent than Gonzales against the other ten players in the Ampol series, winning 33 of 43 matches (77%), while Gonzales won 21 of 28 (75%), and this gave Hoad the overall victory in the series. Hoad won six tournaments compared to Gonzales&#x27; four, and he had 6 wins and 2 losses against Rosewall on the 1959 Ampol series, while Gonzales had 1 win and 3 losses against Rosewall. Hoad had a 15–13 edge over Gonzales in their meetings on the 4-man championship tour of 1959, but Hoad was deprived of overall victory on this tour because he was less consistent than Gonzales when facing the rookie pros, Mal Anderson and Ashley Cooper. Hoad&#x27;s combined record against the rookies was 27–7 compared to Gonzales’ 34–0.

Hoad was a dominant doubles player. He won nine Grand Slam doubles titles, including one Mixed doubles title, and a Career Grand Slam in men&#x27;s doubles. Hoad won 21 major men&#x27;s doubles titles over 14 seasons (eight Grand Slam, thirteen Pro Slam), a pre-Open era record, shared with Rosewall. He also won the 1959 Forest Hills TOC doubles title. Rosewall won 24 major men&#x27;s doubles titles over 20 seasons, and Mike Bryan won 18 over 15 seasons. Hoad and Rosewall together as a doubles team won 15 major doubles titles (six Grand Slam plus nine Pro Slam), one fewer than the Bryan brothers at 16. Hoad and Trabert won four major doubles titles together (three French Pro, one Wembley Pro) plus the 1959 Forest Hills TOC doubles title. Hoad won a record seven French Pro men&#x27;s doubles titles, and consecutively.

==Playing style==

Strength of arm and wrist played an important part in Hoad&#x27;s game, as he often drove for winners rather than rallying and waiting for the &quot;right&quot; opportunity, though he also had the skill to win the French Championships on the slower clay court. Hoad played right-handed and had a powerful serve and groundstrokes. Hoad&#x27;s game was reported to lack consistency in some accounts. At times Hoad had difficulty maintaining concentration. According to Kramer, &quot;Hoad had the loosest game of any good kid I ever saw. There was absolutely no pattern to his game... He was the only player I ever saw who could stand six or seven feet behind the baseline and snap the ball back hard, crosscourt. He&#x27;d try for winners off everything, off great serves, off tricky short balls, off low volleys. He hit hard overspin drives, and there was no way you could ever get him to temporise on important points.&quot;

Hoad was runner-up for the Australian junior table tennis championship in 1951, and developed strong wrists and arms through heavy weight-lifting regimes. Hoad would use wrist strength in his strokes to make last split-second changes in racquet direction. He would saw off about an inch from the ends of his racquet handles, which were short to begin with, and move the grip higher to wield his racquets as if they were ping-pong bats. Hoad would use wrist action to give heavy topspin to his groundstrokes.

==Assessment==

===By journalists===

In &quot;The Encyclopedia of Tennis&quot; (1973) veteran sportswriters Allison Danzig and Lance Tingay as well as tennis coach, writer and former player Harry Hopman listed their personal choices of the ten greatest players in tennis history. Only Tingay included Hoad in his list, ranking him in fifth position, behind Tilden, Budge, Laver and Gonzales.

Max Robertson, tennis author and commentator, rated Hoad as the best post-war Wimbledon player, followed by Gonzales and Laver, in his 1977 book &quot;Wimbledon 1877–1977&quot;. In his second book about Wimbledon, &quot;Wimbledon – Centre Court of the Game&quot; (1981) his list was unchanged but in the second edition in 1987 he listed Hoad second behind Boris Becker.

In &quot;100 Greatest of All Time&quot;, a 2012 television series broadcast by the Tennis Channel, Hoad was ranked the 19th greatest male player, just behind fellow Australian John Newcombe at 18th, and just ahead of tour promoter Jack Kramer, who had signed Hoad to the professional ranks, at 21st, and Hoad&#x27;s longtime tennis rival Gonzales at 22nd.

In 2016, tennis journalist Richard Evans stated that in his judgment Hoad was the greatest player in the world before the emergence of Federer, and &quot;was without question the strongest man who ever played the game.&quot;

In 2017, tennis journalist Shuvam Chakraborty stated that &quot;winning the biggest titles has always been a hallmark of greatness for players throughout the ages. But for [the] old pros, if you ask them who the greatest player of their day was, they will all say one man – Lew Hoad.&quot; And &quot;compared to some of his contemporaries, Hoad&#x27;s resume may not stand out. However, his peaks might have been the highest of all time. His peers would certainly agree with that.&quot;

In 2021, tennis journalist Rémi Bourrières (former Deputy Editor-in-Chief of Tennis Magazine (2007–2019)) ranked Hoad at No. 3 among the pre-Open players, behind Tilden and Budge. Bourrières ranking was (1) Tilden (2) Budge (3) Hoad (4) Gonzales (5) Perry (6) Cochet (7) Lacoste (8) Santana (9) Renshaw (10) Ashe. Bourrières summarized Hoad as: &quot;This tall blond man with the physique of an Apollo and almost animal strength was perhaps the best of that glorious Australian generation that was to dominate the world in the middle of the 20th century: Laver, Rosewall and others.&quot;

===By players===
Fred Perry in 1978 &quot;put Borg in a class with Jack Kramer, Lew Hoad, Pancho Gonzales and Ellsworth Vines&quot;. In 1983 Perry listed his greatest male players of all time and listed them in two categories, before World War 2 and after. Perry&#x27;s modern best behind Laver: &quot;Borg, McEnroe, Connors, Hoad, Jack Kramer, John Newcombe, Ken Rosewall, Manuel Santana&quot;. Perry stated &quot;the match I’d love to see would be Lew Hoad against Borg. Hoad was better than most thought. He hit so hard and so quickly off the ground he would have stretched Borg.&quot;

Don Budge stated, &quot;If Lew Hoad was on, you may as well just go home or have tea, because you weren’t going to beat him.&quot; Budge did not include Hoad in his top five greatest of all-time list in a 1975 newspaper interview, citing (1) Ellsworth Vines (2) Jack Kramer (3) Fred Perry (4) Bill Tilden and (5) Rod Laver.

In July 1961, Gardnar Mulloy ranked Hoad as the greatest player of the time, based on his results against Gonzales, and named Hoad as the favourite to win a prospective open Wimbledon.

Kramer had a negative assessment of Hoad&#x27;s consistency. Although Kramer ranked him one of the 21 best players of all time, albeit in his second echelon, he also writes that &quot;when you sum Hoad up, you have to say that he was overrated. He might have been the best, but day-to-day, week-to-week, he was the most inconsistent of all the top players.&quot; Kramer compared Hoad to Ellsworth Vines. &quot;Both were very strong guys. Both succeeded at a very young age... Also, both were very lazy guys. Vines lost interest in tennis (for golf) before he was thirty, and Hoad never appeared to be very interested. Despite their great natural ability, neither put up the outstanding records that they were capable of. Unfortunately, the latter was largely true because both had physical problems.&quot; However, Kramer had a positive evaluation of Hoad&#x27;s game when motivated, &quot;When Lew felt like playing, man, he was really something. I never saw anybody who could snap the ball back hard off both sides from way behind the baseline for winners the way he did.&quot; Kramer stated in 1981, &quot;Everybody loved Hoad, even Pancho Gonzales. They should put that on Lew&#x27;s tombstone as the ultimate praise for the man... Even when Hoad was clobbering Gonzales, Gorgo wanted his respect and friendship.&quot;

Gonzales stated that Hoad was the toughest, most skillful adversary that he had ever faced and stated in a 1995 interview that &quot;He was the only guy who, if I was playing my best tennis, could still beat me.&quot;. &quot;I think his game was the best game ever. Better than mine. He was capable of making more shots than anybody. His two volleys were great. His overhead was enormous. He had the most natural tennis mind with the most natural tennis physique.&quot; In a 1970 interview he stated that &quot;Hoad was probably the best and toughest player when he wanted to be. After the first two years on the tour, his back injury plagued him so much that he lost the desire to practice. He was the only man to beat me in a head-to-head tour, 15 to 13.&quot; In a 1975 issue of Sports Illustrated, Arthur Ashe was quoted as relating a remark which Pancho Gonzales had said to him, &quot;If there was ever a Universe Davis Cup, and I had to pick one man to represent Planet Earth, I would pick Lew Hoad in his prime.&quot;

In a 1963 article in &quot;World Tennis&quot;, Rosewall judged Gonzales to be a notch above Hoad but stated that &quot;...the latter is the greatest of all time when he is &#x27;on&#x27;.&quot; In 2010, Rosewall ranked Hoad at the top of his personal list of the top four greatest tennis players of all time, ahead of Gonzales, Laver, and Federer. However, in 2017, Rosewall was asked the question in Italian publication Corriere della Sera if he believed Roger Federer was the greatest of all time and he replied &quot;there is no doubt. I challenge anyone to argue otherwise&quot;.

Hoad gave his own rankings in a 1980 interview, ranking Emerson and Borg at the top in terms of major tournaments won. However, Hoad claimed that &quot;the only way to really assess players is to play them&quot;, rating Gonzales as the best player of those whom he had played against.

In 1988, a panel consisting of Bud Collins, Cliff Drysdale, and Butch Buchholz ranked the top three male tennis players as Laver, Borg and McEnroe. Buchholz ranked Laver, Borg, Rosewall, Gonzales, and McEnroe as his top five choices, while Drysdale ranked Hoad tied with Connors in fifth place behind Laver, Borg, Budge, and McEnroe. However, in 2007 Buchholz ranked Hoad as the greatest player of their time, but said he was injury prone and not exactly a model of fitness. Buchholz stated that &quot;If you had an Earth vs. Mars match, and had to send one man to represent the planet, I would send Hoad.&quot; Buchholz had played the undercard matches on Hoad&#x27;s 1961 British tour against Gonzales, and Hoad&#x27;s 1963 Australian tour against Laver.

Frew McMillan stated his opinion of Hoad in 2001. &quot;The finest player of all time? Possibly. At his best certainly the greatest of the greats that I have seen. Light on his feet yet with the punching power of a fierce fighter. I could marvel at Rod Laver and McEnroe, their flair and artistic strength, but Hoad&#x27;s ruthless efficiency would take my breath away.&quot;

Gordon Forbes gave his opinion in a 2009 interview. &quot;The best they knew? Hoad, says Forbes. Better than Rod Laver? &quot;Hoad was much stronger, bigger. They were both magicians but Hoad was the best.&quot;&quot;

Rod Laver in 2012 ranked Hoad as the greatest player of the &#x27;past champions&#x27; era of tennis, while ranking Federer as the greatest player of the Open Era. Laver described Hoad&#x27;s strengths of &quot;power, volleying and explosiveness&quot; as justification of his accolade. In July 2012, when Federer won his seventh Wimbledon singles championship, Laver said &quot;Roger Federer certainly is my claim to be the best of all time if there is such a thing&quot; and in January 2018, at the Australian Open won by Federer, Laver said &quot;For me, I think Roger Federer is certainly the greatest player that has come along&quot; and &quot;He&#x27;s stood the test of time – that&#x27;s probably the one thing that puts you in that category of the best ever.&quot; However, in a January 2019 interview, Laver stated that Hoad was &quot;the best player who ever held a racquet. He had every shot in the book and he could overpower anyone. He was so strong.&quot; Pancho Gonzales made a similar remark about Hoad, &quot;He was such a strong son****...when he tried, you just couldn&#x27;t beat him. He hit the ball harder than anyone I ever played.&quot;

==Personal life==

Hoad proposed to his girlfriend, Australian tennis player Jenny Staley, on her 21st birthday party in March 1955 and they planned to announce their engagement in June in London while both were on an overseas tour. After arrival in London Jenny discovered that she was pregnant and the couple decided to get married straight away. The marriage took place the following day on 18 June 1955 at St Mary&#x27;s Church, Wimbledon, in London, on the eve of Wimbledon fortnight. They had two daughters and a son.

After announcing his retirement in 1967, due to persistent back problems, Hoad moved to Fuengirola, Spain, near Málaga, where he and his wife constructed, owned and operated a tennis resort, &quot;Lew Hoad&#x27;s Campo de Tenis&quot;, and the accompanying residential complex of apartments and penthouse properties, &quot;Lew Hoad Tennis Village&quot;. For more than thirty years they entertained personal friends such as actors Stewart Granger, Sean Connery, Richard Burton, Peter Ustinov, Deborah Kerr and her husband writer Peter Viertel, actor Kirk Douglas, singer Frank Sinatra and saxophonist Stan Getz. Hoad&#x27;s son Peter stated, &quot;My dad was extremely well connected.&quot; The athletic club including the wedding/event facilities were acquired by Spanish investors in 2005, and in 2021 were rumoured to be for sale at 10 million euros. The Lew Hoad Club currently has seven tennis courts and six paddle courts, outdoor pool and gym. Weddings and events are a specialty, plus an annual ITF seniors tennis tournament and an annual IBP women&#x27;s tournament.

In September 1978, Hoad&#x27;s back problem was successfully treated with spinal fusion surgery, and he was relieved of pain. There had been two ruptured discs and a herniation. The doctor asked one of Hoad&#x27;s friends, &quot;How on earth did this man walk, let alone play tennis?&quot; In a 1980 interview, Hoad claimed that &quot;my back is marvelous now...it&#x27;s absolutely perfect now.&quot;

Hoad was diagnosed with a rare and incurable form of leukaemia on 13 January 1994 which caused his death on 3 July 1994. Press reports of a heart attack were incorrect. Hoad&#x27;s personal physician specialist was his own son-in-law Dr. Manuel Benavides, who explained the cause of death. A book co-written with Jack Pollard and titled &quot;My Game&quot; (&quot;The Lew Hoad story&quot; in the USA) was published in 1958. In 2002, Pollard teamed up with his widow, Jenny, to write &quot;My Life With Lew&quot;.

==Honours==
Hoad was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, in 1980 and in December 1985 was inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame. In January 1995 he was posthumously inducted into the Tennis Australia Hall of Fame together with friend and rival Ken Rosewall.

The ITF organises a seniors tournament in his honour called &quot;The Lew Hoad Memorial ITF Veterans Tournament&quot;, which is hosted by the Lew Hoad Campo de Tenis.
The Kooyong Classic at Kooyong Stadium, the principal warm-up event for the Australian Open, awards the Lew Hoad Memorial Trophy to the winner of the men&#x27;s singles. Kooyong stadium was the site of some of Hoad&#x27;s greatest victories.

The Lewis Hoad Reserve in Sydney and the Lew Hoad Avenue in Baton Rouge, Louisiana are named after him.

==Performance timeline==
===Singles===
Hoad joined the professional tennis circuit in 1957 and as a consequence was banned from competing in 42 Grand Slam tournaments until the start of the Open Era at the 1968 French Open.

===Doubles===
==Grand Slam and Pro Slam finals==

===Singles===

====Grand Slam finals (4–2)====
====Pro Slam finals (0–7)====
===Doubles: 13 (8 titles, 5 runner-ups)===

===Mixed doubles: 4 (1 title, 3 runner-ups)===
==Other important finals==

==See also==
*Overall tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 


===Biographies===
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Hoad vs. Rosewall, 1955 NSW final, White City, Sydney-newsreel
* Hoad vs. Sirola, 1956 German final, Hamburg, at 8:20-newsreel
* Hoad df. Rosewall, 1959 Roland Garros 3rd place-newsreel
* Lew Hoad Tennis and Paddle Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="0" end="15" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lewis Alan Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="67" end="73" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="131" end="136" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="176" end="200" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="202" end="222" title="French Open" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="231" end="240" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q782875" start="267" end="282" title="Australia Davis Cup team" label="Australian team"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="296" end="305" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="390" end="421" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Kooyong Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="438" end="474" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Forest Hills Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="495" end="500" title="Ampol" label="Ampol"/>
<link wikidata="Q742332" start="757" end="769" title="Harry Hopman" label="Harry Hopman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="968" end="973" title="Ampol" label="Ampol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="1432" end="1440" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q777231" start="1478" end="1506" title="1968 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1968 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547215" start="1533" end="1549" title="1970 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1970 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260213" start="1604" end="1621" title="Jenny Staley Hoad" label="Jenny Staley Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q492735" start="1757" end="1767" title="Fuengirola" label="Fuengirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296779" start="1941" end="1946" title="Glebe, New South Wales" label="Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q509716" start="2397" end="2402" title="Manly, New South Wales" label="Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="2462" end="2474" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q374047" start="2970" end="2982" title="Adrian Quist" label="Adrian Quist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315461" start="3052" end="3058" title="Dunlop Sport" label="Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3454" end="3469" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="3503" end="3511" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="3661" end="3673" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54577" start="3770" end="3781" title="Dick Savitt" label="Dick Savitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q374047" start="3885" end="3897" title="Adrian Quist" label="Adrian Quist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903354" start="4230" end="4242" title="Bill Sidwell" label="Bill Sidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="4669" end="4679" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q673043" start="4713" end="4742" title="1951 Australian Championships" label="1951 Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925016" start="4831" end="4846" title="Ron McKenzie (tennis)" label="Ronald McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="4933" end="4946" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q673043" start="5329" end="5353" title="1951 Australian Championships" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494880" start="5400" end="5436" title="Tennis Australia" label="Australasian Lawn Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965460" start="5560" end="5594" title="Australian Hard Court Championships" label="Australian Hardcourt Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q507128" start="5770" end="5790" title="1952 French Championships (tennis)" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115955" start="5860" end="5873" title="Eric Sturgess" label="Eric Sturgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q54549" start="6107" end="6118" title="Budge Patty" label="Budge Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151291" start="6151" end="6162" title="grass court" label="grass court"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="6163" end="6193" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championship" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="6321" end="6344" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258752" start="6355" end="6366" title="Beppe Merlo" label="Beppe Merlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440332" start="6430" end="6447" title="Rolando Del Bello" label="Rolando Del Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713031" start="6452" end="6465" title="Alfred Huber (tennis)" label="Freddie Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q365518" start="6547" end="6562" title="Jaroslav Drobný" label="Jaroslav Drobný"/>
<link wikidata="Q54544" start="6631" end="6645" title="Gardnar Mulloy" label="Gardnar Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54577" start="6650" end="6661" title="Dick Savitt" label="Dick Savitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q54583" start="6737" end="6747" title="Vic Seixas" label="Vic Seixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q742332" start="6972" end="6984" title="Harry Hopman" label="Harry Hopman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410107" start="7017" end="7035" title="1952 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976477" start="7090" end="7123" title="Eastern Grass Court Championships" label="Eastern Grass Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="7266" end="7290" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272676" start="7543" end="7560" title="Thelma Coyne Long" label="Thelma Coyne Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q53564" start="7686" end="7696" title="Doris Hart" label="Doris Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="7737" end="7768" title="Pacific Southwest Championships" label="Pacific Southwest Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="7899" end="7911" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979440" start="8029" end="8045" title="Clive Wilderspin" label="Clive Wilderspin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714927" start="8053" end="8077" title="1953 Australian Championships" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q784047" start="8232" end="8250" title="List of Australian Open men&amp;#x27;s doubles champions" label="Australian doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q913948" start="8294" end="8305" title="Mervyn Rose" label="Mervyn Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035744" start="8310" end="8319" title="Don Candy" label="Don Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928386" start="8503" end="8516" title="John Bromwich" label="John Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="8770" end="8791" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Italian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540085" start="8882" end="8902" title="1953 French Championships (tennis)" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54583" start="8987" end="8997" title="Vic Seixas" label="Vic Seixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054698" start="9624" end="9637" title="Enrique Morea" label="Enrique Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q656185" start="9730" end="9742" title="South Orange" label="South Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976477" start="9750" end="9783" title="Eastern Grass Court Championships" label="Eastern Grass Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q285405" start="9820" end="9831" title="Rex Hartwig" label="Rex Hartwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q712779" start="10007" end="10019" title="Ken McGregor" label="Ken McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410121" start="10169" end="10187" title="1953 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177979" start="11161" end="11170" title="1953 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430893" start="11273" end="11288" title="Kooyong Stadium" label="Kooyong Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54686" start="11807" end="11819" title="Tony Trabert" label="Tony Trabert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12046" end="12062" title="Conscription in Australia#National Service in the 1950s" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q589611" start="12341" end="12358" title="Philippe Chatrier" label="Philippe Chatrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47487965" start="12881" end="12911" title="South Australian Championships" label="South Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032559" start="13079" end="13088" title="Ingleburn, New South Wales" label="Ingleburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q605808" start="13240" end="13264" title="1954 Australian Championships" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="13437" end="13442" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="13451" end="13468" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258527" start="13501" end="13510" title="Abe Segal" label="Abe Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260213" start="13597" end="13609" title="Jenny Staley" label="Jenny Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548484" start="14216" end="14236" title="1954 French Championships (tennis)" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54544" start="14284" end="14298" title="Gardnar Mulloy" label="Gardnar Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q53390" start="14390" end="14406" title="Maureen Connolly" label="Maureen Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157780" start="14493" end="14511" title="Jacqueline Patorni" label="Jacqueline Patorni"/>
<link wikidata="Q285405" start="14516" end="14527" title="Rex Hartwig" label="Rex Hartwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q577138" start="14694" end="14717" title="1954 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565958" start="15133" end="15145" title="Roger Becker" label="Roger Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q299439" start="15277" end="15296" title="Swiss Open (tennis)" label="Swiss Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976477" start="15358" end="15391" title="Eastern Grass Court Championships" label="Eastern Grass Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="15543" end="15550" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="15608" end="15619" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410049" start="15840" end="15858" title="1954 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740871" start="15868" end="15882" title="Ham Richardson" label="Ham Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275397" start="15974" end="15984" title="Luis Ayala (tennis)" label="Luis Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035744" start="16203" end="16212" title="Don Candy" label="Don Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928386" start="16515" end="16528" title="John Bromwich" label="John Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q709836" start="16818" end="16831" title="Sven Davidson" label="Sven Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q766008" start="16994" end="17008" title="1954 Davis Cup" label="1954 Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994559" start="17081" end="17099" title="White City Stadium (Sydney)" label="White City Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q552626" start="17560" end="17571" title="Pat Hughes (tennis)" label="G.P. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715359" start="18295" end="18324" title="1955 Australian Championships" label="1955 Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260213" start="18345" end="18357" title="Jenny Staley" label="Jenny Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q272676" start="18397" end="18414" title="Thelma Coyne Long" label="Thelma Coyne Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102019" start="18419" end="18437" title="George Worthington (tennis)" label="George Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423913" start="18721" end="18741" title="1955 French Championships (tennis)" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q655368" start="19112" end="19135" title="1955 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54549" start="19205" end="19216" title="Budge Patty" label="Budge Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q386556" start="19387" end="19401" title="1955 Davis Cup" label="1955 Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409981" start="20031" end="20049" title="1955 U.S. National Championships (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q712208" start="20653" end="20666" title="Ashley Cooper (tennis)" label="Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q715173" start="20944" end="20956" title="Neale Fraser" label="Neale Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111530" start="21207" end="21231" title="1956 Australian Championships" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q913948" start="21293" end="21304" title="Mervyn Rose" label="Mervyn Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q709836" start="21841" end="21854" title="Sven Davidson" label="Sven Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087122" start="21903" end="21917" title="Fred Kovaleski" label="Fred Kovaleski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531925" start="21979" end="21991" title="Tony Vincent (tennis)" label="Tony Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740871" start="22281" end="22295" title="Ham Richardson" label="Ham Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q929574" start="22303" end="22335" title="British Hard Court Championships" label="British Hard Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="22372" end="22393" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Italian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437911" start="22413" end="22425" title="Foro Italico" label="Foro Italico"/>
<link wikidata="Q709836" start="22465" end="22478" title="Sven Davidson" label="Sven Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540115" start="22504" end="22524" title="1956 French Championships (tennis)" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434395" start="22582" end="22599" title="Robert Abdesselam" label="Robert Abdesselam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="22904" end="22913" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="23268" end="23277" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54531" start="23340" end="23350" title="Art Larsen" label="Art Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q299163" start="23362" end="23382" title="Barcelona Open (tennis)" label="Trofeo Conde de Godó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270810" start="23428" end="23436" title="Robert Howe (tennis)" label="Bob Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q299541" start="23507" end="23529" title="Northern Lawn Tennis Championships" label="Northern Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q655378" start="23652" end="23675" title="1956 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="23724" end="23736" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740871" start="23768" end="23782" title="Ham Richardson" label="Ham Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340559" start="24078" end="24092" title="Orlando Sirola" label="Orlando Sirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q709909" start="24097" end="24115" title="Nicola Pietrangeli" label="Nicola Pietrangeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933109" start="24233" end="24244" title="Mike Davies (tennis)" label="Mike Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22829012" start="24291" end="24311" title="German Open Tennis Championships" label="German Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="24324" end="24331" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340559" start="24359" end="24373" title="Orlando Sirola" label="Orlando Sirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="25238" end="25249" title="Jack Kramer" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="25732" end="25763" title="Pacific Southwest Championships" label="Pacific Southwest Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q734544" start="25819" end="25830" title="Alex Olmedo" label="Alex Olmedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049414" start="26724" end="26735" title="Herbie Flam" label="Herbie Flam"/>
<link wikidata="Q299541" start="27325" end="27347" title="Northern Lawn Tennis Championships" label="Northern Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559952" start="27371" end="27390" title="Ramanathan Krishnan" label="Ramanathan Krishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q712208" start="27471" end="27484" title="Ashley Cooper (tennis)" label="Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="28058" end="28073" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="28220" end="28233" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="28254" end="28277" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="28367" end="28380" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q299963" start="30016" end="30048" title="Wembley Championships" label="Wembley Indoor Pro Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="31847" end="31859" title="Palm Springs" label="Palm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="32774" end="32797" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="32904" end="32909" title="Ampol" label="Ampol"/>
<link wikidata="Q299963" start="33840" end="33862" title="Wembley Championships" label="Wembley Pro tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="34239" end="34244" title="Ampol" label="Ampol"/>
<link wikidata="Q712208" start="35771" end="35784" title="Ashley Cooper (tennis)" label="Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="35796" end="35808" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="37168" end="37191" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47487966" start="38018" end="38045" title="Slazenger Pro Championships" label="Slazenger Pro Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="42710" end="42723" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="43036" end="43048" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275397" start="46062" end="46072" title="Luis Ayala (tennis)" label="Luis Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="46704" end="46717" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="47487" end="47493" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="48381" end="48390" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q462240" start="49282" end="49297" title="Stade Pierre de Coubertin (Paris)" label="Stade Coubertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023526" start="51500" end="51513" title="Wimbledon Pro" label="Wimbledon Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023526" start="51550" end="51563" title="Wimbledon Pro" label="Wimbledon Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q815369" start="51622" end="51638" title="All-England Club" label="All-England Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="52578" end="52586" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559570" start="52674" end="52693" title="Irish Open (tennis)" label="Irish Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q455411" start="52720" end="52729" title="Tom Okker" label="Tom Okker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999429" start="52807" end="52825" title="Dewar Cup Aberavon" label="Dewar Cup Aberavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565058" start="52889" end="52897" title="Mark Cox (tennis)" label="Mark Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q52453" start="52919" end="52929" title="Bob Hewitt" label="Bob Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800207" start="52983" end="53000" title="1970 Italian Open (tennis)" label="1970 Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q465796" start="53045" end="53059" title="Alex Metreveli" label="Alex Metreveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q922533" start="53068" end="53084" title="1970 French Open" label="1970 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269243" start="53098" end="53114" title="Charlie Pasarell" label="Charlie Pasarell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290977" start="53203" end="53220" title="Željko Franulović" label="Željko Franulović"/>
<link wikidata="Q402950" start="53276" end="53292" title="Ismail El Shafei" label="Ismail El Shafei"/>
<link wikidata="Q487981" start="53395" end="53403" title="Benidorm" label="Benidorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776822" start="53424" end="53437" title="Antonio Muñoz (tennis)" label="Antonio Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q445602" start="53459" end="53473" title="Manuel Santana" label="Manuel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800211" start="53706" end="53718" title="1972 Italian Open (tennis)" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q962512" start="53724" end="53737" title="Frew McMillan" label="Frew McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106113" start="53746" end="53758" title="Ilie Năstase" label="Ilie Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q924245" start="53763" end="53773" title="Ion Țiriac" label="Ion Țiriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049052" start="53981" end="53990" title="1972 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q77578" start="54031" end="54048" title="Jürgen Fassbender" label="Jürgen Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335443" start="54156" end="54168" title="1973 South African Open (tennis)" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q586825" start="54233" end="54255" title="Spain Davis Cup team" label="Spanish Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="54288" end="54301" title="British Pathé" label="British Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="56033" end="56056" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="57102" end="57114" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712208" start="57119" end="57132" title="Ashley Cooper (tennis)" label="Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q53342" start="57643" end="57653" title="Mike Bryan" label="Mike Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="58282" end="58302" title="French Open" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q933101" start="59612" end="59626" title="Allison Danzig" label="Allison Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="59631" end="59643" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q742332" start="59694" end="59706" title="Harry Hopman" label="Harry Hopman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795181" start="59897" end="59910" title="Max Robertson" label="Max Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="60253" end="60265" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q129714" start="60277" end="60301" title="100 Greatest of All Time" label="100 Greatest of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="61946" end="61956" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="62519" end="62528" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54544" start="62858" end="62872" title="Gardnar Mulloy" label="Gardnar Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54690" start="63417" end="63432" title="Ellsworth Vines" label="Ellsworth Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="64166" end="64181" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="65136" end="65154" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="65156" end="65167" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q195386" start="66316" end="66330" title="Butch Buchholz" label="Butch Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q962512" start="67010" end="67023" title="Frew McMillan" label="Frew McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565966" start="67387" end="67400" title="Gordon Forbes" label="Gordon Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="67606" end="67615" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260213" start="68845" end="68857" title="Jenny Staley Hoad" label="Jenny Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594457" start="69178" end="69210" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Wimbledon" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q492735" start="69381" end="69391" title="Fuengirola" label="Fuengirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="69405" end="69411" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q310150" start="69722" end="69737" title="Stewart Granger" label="Stewart Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="69739" end="69751" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="69753" end="69767" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="69769" end="69782" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104146" start="69784" end="69796" title="Deborah Kerr" label="Deborah Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q711701" start="69820" end="69833" title="Peter Viertel" label="Peter Viertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104027" start="69841" end="69853" title="Kirk Douglas" label="Kirk Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="69862" end="69875" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587" start="69892" end="69901" title="Stan Getz" label="Stan Getz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="70824" end="70833" title="leukaemia" label="leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="71324" end="71357" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="71361" end="71368" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="71421" end="71449" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame Awards" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="71566" end="71578" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223041" start="71585" end="71588" title="International Tennis Federation" label="ITF"/>
<link wikidata="Q286203" start="71752" end="71767" title="Kooyong Classic" label="Kooyong Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430893" start="71771" end="71786" title="Kooyong Stadium" label="Kooyong Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q911810" start="72302" end="72318" title="1968 French Open" label="1968 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="72581" end="72624" title="Overall tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Overall tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481803" wikidata="Q312728" url="?curid=481803" title="Ken Rosewall">
<text>Kenneth Robert Rosewall (born 2 November 1934) is an Australian former world No. 1 professional tennis player. Rosewall won 147 singles titles, including 23 majors: a record 15 Pro Majors and eight Grand Slam tournaments. He also won 15 Pro Majors in doubles and nine Grand Slam doubles titles. Rosewall achieved a Pro Slam in singles in 1963 by winning the three Pro Majors in one year, and completed the career Grand Slam in doubles.

Rosewall had a renowned backhand and enjoyed a long career at the highest levels from the early 1950s to the early 1970s. He was ranked as the world No. 1 men&#x27;s tennis player by multiple sources from 1961 to 1964, multiple sources in 1970, and Rino Tommasi in 1971 and 1972. Rosewall was first ranked in the top 20 in 1952, and last ranked in the top 20 in 1977. Rosewall is the only player to have simultaneously held Pro Slam titles on three different surfaces (1962–63). At the 1971 Australian Open, he became the first man in the Open Era to win a Grand Slam tournament without dropping a set. Rosewall won world professional championship tours in 1963, 1964, and the WCT titles in 1971 and 1972.

A natural left-hander, Rosewall was taught by his father to play right-handed. He developed a powerful, effective backhand, but his serve was merely accurate and relatively soft. He was tall, weighed , and sarcastically was nicknamed &quot;Muscles&quot; by his fellow-players because of his lack of them; however, he was fast, agile, and tireless, with a deadly volley. A father of two and grandfather of five, Rosewall lives in northern Sydney.

==Early life and tennis==
Rosewall was born on 2 November 1934 in Hurstville, Sydney. His father, Robert Rosewall, was a grocer in Penshurst, New South Wales, and when Ken was one year old, they moved to Rockdale where his father bought three clay tennis courts. Ken started playing tennis at age 3 with a shortened racket and using both hands for forehand and backhand shots. They practiced early in the morning, focusing on playing one type of shot for a period of weeks. He was a natural left-hander but was taught to play right-handed by his father. He played his first tournament when he was nine and lost to the eventual winner. At age eleven Rosewall won the Metropolitan Hardcourt Championships for under fourteen.

In his youth, Rosewall often played Lew Hoad, and they became known as the Sydney &quot;twins&quot;, but they had very different physiques, personalities and playing styles. Their first match in Sydney in January 1947 (when both were aged 12) was played as an opener of an exhibition match between Australia and America. Rosewall won 6–0, 6–0. The two played again a few weeks later, and Rosewall won again in straight sets. Rosewall beat Hoad twice later in 1947 in state age-group championships. &quot;At this stage the consistent baseline strategy of Rosewall was able to doggedly unravel any questions asked by his more aggressive, hard-hitting rival&quot;. In 1949, at age 14, Rosewall became the junior champion at the Australian Hardcourt Championships in Sydney, the youngest player to win an Australian title.

==Tennis career==

===Amateur career: 1950 to 1956===
;1950
In September 1950, at the age of 15, and still a junior player, Rosewall reached the final of the 1950 New South Wales Metropolitan hard court championships, where he lost to Jim Gilchrist. In October, Rosewall reached the semifinals of the 1950 New South Wales Metropolitan grass court Championships (not to be confused with the New South Wales Championships), where he was defeated by the world-class adult player Ken McGregor.
;1951
Rosewall won his first men&#x27;s tournament in Manly, New South Wales in January against Gilchrist and was &quot;the youngest player ever to capture the seaside title. It was also Rosewall&#x27;s first important win in a tennis tournament. Rosewall played almost flawless ground shots. When he did come into the net, he made no mistake about volleying his winners. Rosewall&#x27;s only weakness was his smash. He seemed to hurry this shot, and in the second set, he missed eight consecutive smashes.&quot; Rosewall beat Adrian Quist in the semifinals of the Brisbane exhibition tournament in August, but he lost the final to Lew Hoad. Ken lost in the final of Metropolitan Hardcourt championships at Naremburn to George Worthington in September. In the New South Wales championships in November, Rosewall pushed reigning Australian and Wimbledon champion Dick Savitt to four sets.

;1952
In 1952, still only 17, Rosewall reached the quarterfinals of the U.S. Championships, upsetting the top-seeded Vic Seixas in the fourth round in five sets and then losing to Gardnar Mulloy in five sets. In his end-of-year rankings, the British tennis expert Lance Tingay ranked Rosewall and Lew Hoad, his equally youthful doubles partner, jointly as the tenth best amateur players in the world.

;1953
Rosewall was only 18 years old when he won his first singles title at a Grand Slam event in 1953, defeating American Vic Seixas in the semifinals and compatriot Mervyn Rose in the final of the Australian Championships. He also won the French Championships, beating Seixas in the final in four sets, when &quot;the young Australian&#x27;s mastery in all phases of the game disheartened Seixas as Rosewall beat him repeatedly with perfectly placed shots&quot;. Rosewall was the top seed at Wimbledon, but lost in the quarterfinals to Kurt Nielsen. Rosewall reached the semifinals at the U.S. Championships, where he was defeated by Tony Trabert in straight sets. At the Pacific Southwest Championships Rosewall beat Trabert in the semifinals and Seixas in the final in five sets and in the end &quot;Rosewall&#x27;s superior backhand probably decided the match.&quot; Rosewall lost to Trabert in the Challenge Round of the Davis Cup in Melbourne in three sets. Rosewall, however, won the fifth and deciding rubber of this tie, defeating Seixas in four sets. In early September, Tingay placed Trabert first and Rosewall second in his annual amateur rankings. The editors of Tennis de France magazine ranked Rosewall third behind Hoad and Trabert in a full season ranking for 1953. Harry Hopman ranked Rosewall third behind Hoad and Trabert in a full season ranking.

;1954
In 1954, Rosewall lost in the semifinals of the Australian championships to Rose. Rosewall played &quot;a fine net game&quot; in beating Mal Anderson in the final of the Darling Downs tournament in April. He defeated Trabert in a five-set semifinal at Wimbledon but lost the final to crowd-favorite Jaroslav Drobný in four sets. At the U.S. Championships, Rosewall lost in the semifinals to Rex Hartwig. At the Victorian championships in December, Rosewall won the title, beating Seixas in the final (the seventh victory by Rosewall in eight meetings between the two players).

;1955
Rosewall won the singles title at the Australian Championships for the second time in 1955, defeating Hoad in the final in three sets. Rosewall&#x27;s &quot;angled shots rattled Hoad and his returns of service were a match-winning factor. Hoad made 74 errors to Rosewall&#x27;s 52.&quot; Ken did not play in the 1955 French Championships because it did not fit in the preparation of the Australian team for the Davis Cup. At Wimbledon, Rosewall lost in the semifinals to unseeded Kurt Nielsen. At the U.S. Championships, Trabert defeated Rosewall in the final in three sets.

;1956
In 1956, Rosewall and Hoad captured all the Grand Slam men&#x27;s doubles titles except at the French Championships, from which Rosewall was absent. For several years in their youthful careers, Rosewall and Hoad were known as &quot;The Gold Dust Twins.&quot; In singles, Rosewall lost to Hoad in the final of two Grand Slam tournaments. At the Australian Championships, Hoad defeated Rosewall in four sets and at Wimbledon, Hoad won in four sets. Rosewall, however, prevented Hoad from winning the Grand Slam when Rosewall won their final at the U.S. Championships in four sets. &quot;Rosewall owner of the best backhand in the game, ripped the lines with his passing shots, sent trickly lobs into the swirling winds and caught Hoad flat-footed with stop volleys and drop shots. Frequently Hoad would stop and shake his head in disbelief at some of Rosewall&#x27;s returns.&quot;

Tingay and the editors of Tennis de France both ranked Rosewall No. 2 behind Hoad for 1956.

During his amateur career, Rosewall helped Australia win three Davis Cup Challenge Rounds (1953, 1955 and 1956). Rosewall won 15 of the 17 Davis Cup singles rubbers he played those years, including the last 14 in a row.

===Professional career: 1957 to March 1968===

Promoter and former tennis great Jack Kramer tried unsuccessfully to sign the &quot;Whiz Kids&quot; (Lew Hoad and Rosewall) to professional contracts in late 1955. But one year later, Rosewall accepted Kramer&#x27;s offer on 30 December 1956. Rosewall, during the Challenge Round of the Davis Cup, tried to convince his partner Hoad to do the same, but he rejected the proposition.

====1957====
Rosewall played his first professional match on 14 January 1957 at Kooyong Stadium in Melbourne against Pancho Gonzales, the reigning king of professional tennis, who won a close five-set match. The following day, Rosewall defeated Gonzales in straight sets. Gonzales opened a lead of 5 to 1 in the Australian series. Rosewall explained later that there was a huge gap between the amateur level and the professional level. In their head-to-head world series tour in Australia and the U.S. (until May), Gonzales won 50 matches to Rosewall&#x27;s 26. During this period, Rosewall also entered two tournaments, the Ampol White City Tournament of Champions at Sydney in February and the U.S. Pro in Cleveland, Ohio] in April. At both events, he was defeated in the semifinals in straight sets; by Frank Sedgman (second best pro in 1956) and Pancho Segura (third best pro in 1956), respectively. At the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions, a round-robin event held in New York, Rosewall defeated Segura and Hoad but lost to Gonzales, Sedgman and Trabert to finish in joint third place.

In September, Rosewall won the Wembley Pro title, beating Segura in a five-set final. This was a significant victory for Rosewall because, of the top professional players, only Sedgman and Tony Trabert did not play. At the end of the year, Rosewall won an Australian tour featuring Lew Hoad, Sedgman, and Segura. Rosewall was offered an undercard position against Trabert for the 1958 world championship tour, but declined.

====1958====
At the Kooyong Tournament of Champions at Kooyong in January, the richest tournament of the era, Rosewall finished in fourth place, beating Trabert and Segura, but losing to Sedgman, Hoad, and Gonzales.

Rosewall was the runner-up at the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions in June. Both he and Gonzales won five round-robin matches and lost one, but Gonzales claimed the title as he won their head-to-head encounter. Rosewall tied for second (with Pancho Gonzales and Sedgman) behind an undefeated Segura in the Masters Round Robin Pro in Los Angeles in July. These tournaments were among the more important of the year. Kramer designated Forest Hills, Kooyong, Sydney, and Los Angeles as the four major pro tennis tournaments. In September, Rosewall had the opportunity to show that he was still one of the better players on clay. The previous year, no French Professional Championships (also known as the World Pro Championships on Clay when organised at Stade Roland Garros) had been held. This tournament returned in 1958, and Rosewall beat Jack Kramer, Frank Sedgman, and an injured Lew Hoad in four sets to claim the title. At the Wembley Pro, Rosewall lost a close five-set semifinals to Trabert.

====1959====
In the Ampol Open Trophy points standings after February, part of a fifteen tournament world series, Rosewall was second with 12 points behind Hoad with 13. For the first time since he turned professional, Rosewall had a favourable 6–5 win–loss record against Pancho Gonzales for the year. Rosewall won both editions of the Queensland Pro Championships in Brisbane, both included in the Ampol series, defeating Tony Trabert in the January final in five sets and Gonzales in the December final in four sets. At the Forest Hills Tournament of Champions, Rosewall lost a semifinals to Hoad in four sets, and beat Trabert to win third place. At the Roland Garros World Professional Championships, Rosewall lost in the semifinals to Trabert, and was beaten by Hoad in the third place match.

At the White City Tournament of Champions in Sydney in early December, Rosewall lost in the semifinals to Gonzales in three straight sets. In the final Ampol series tournament, played at Kooyong from 26 December 1959 to 2 January 1960, Rosewall finished runner-up to Hoad, losing the deciding match to Hoad in four long sets. Kramer acclaimed this match as one of the greatest ever played. Rosewall finished third in the Ampol series with 41 bonus points, behind Hoad in first place (51 bonus points), and Gonzales in second place (43 bonus points). Rosewall&#x27;s winning percentage on the 1959 Ampol series was 62% (26/42). Rosewall was 2 wins and 6 losses against Hoad and 3 wins and 1 loss against Gonzales during the series. Kramer&#x27;s personal list ranked Rosewall world No. 3 professional tennis player behind Gonzales and Sedgman, but ahead of Hoad.

====1960====

Rosewall was incorporated in a new World Pro tour, from January to May, featuring Gonzales, Segura and new recruit Alex Olmedo. This tour was perhaps the peak of Gonzales&#x27;s entire career. The final standings were: 1) Gonzales 49 matches won – 8 lost, 2) Rosewall 32–25, 3) Segura 22–28, 4) Olmedo 11–44. Rosewall was therefore far behind Gonzales on this tour, the American having won almost all their direct confrontations (20 wins for Gonzales to 5 wins for Rosewall).

Rosewall began the tour slowly, dropping briefly in early February to fourth place in the overall standings behind Segura and Olmedo, and rising to second place in early March. Halfway through the North American part of the tour the standings were Gonzales 23–1 (his only match lost in three sets to Olmedo in Philadelphia), Segura 8-9, Rosewall 11–13. British Lawn Tennis reported, &quot;While Kenny hasn&#x27;t yet nailed Pancho, he has come within a couple of points several times. Rosewall finally got his serve working better, and he is now the tough little player he was last year. He&#x27;ll get some wins over Big Pancho before long.&quot; As described in a later report, &quot;Ken started very slowly against Gonzales, Segura and Olmedo but finished in second place behind Gonzales [and] more than held his own the last 20 matches with him, after getting over a physical problem.&quot;

In 1960 Rosewall won six tournaments including the two main tournaments of the year, the French Pro at Roland Garros, defeating Hoad in the final in four sets, and Wembley Pro, defeating Segura. Hoad won four tournaments in 1960, defeating Rosewall in all four finals.

Kramer&#x27;s personal list ranked Rosewall world No. 3 professional tennis player behind Gonzales and Sedgman, but ahead of Hoad.

====1961====
After 10 years of World touring, Rosewall decided to take several long breaks in order to spend time with his family and entered no competitions in the first half of 1961, withdrawing from Kramer&#x27;s World Series tour. He trained his long-time friend Hoad when the pros toured in Australia where Gonzales, back to the courts after a -month retirement, won another World tour featuring Hoad (withdrew with injury), Olmedo (replacing Rosewall), Gimeno and the two new recruits MacKay and Buchholz (Segura, Trabert, Cooper and Sedgman sometimes replaced the injured players).

In the summer Rosewall returned to the circuit and won the two biggest tournaments (all the best players participating): the French Pro (clay) and Wembley Pro (wood). At the French he captured the title by beating Gonzales in the final in four sets, and at Wembley he defeated Hoad in the final. In the summer Rosewall won a short head-to-head tour of France over Gonzales 4-2 and had a 7-4 edge over Gonzales for the entire year.

Rosewall teamed with Hoad to win the inaugural Kramer Cup trophy (the pro equivalent of the Davis Cup) in South Africa. Rosewall lost to Trabert in the first rubber, but defeated MacKay to set up the fifth and deciding rubber between Hoad and Trabert. After having won on clay and on wood Rosewall ended the season by winning on grass at the New South Wales Pro Championships in Sydney, defeating Butch Buchholz in the final, cementing his status as the best all-court player that year.

Although Gonzales had won Kramer&#x27;s 1961 World Series tour, later in the year Rosewall won both Wembley Pro and French Pro, where Gonzales was reported in one source to lose his title. The USPLTA reported Rosewall as the world No. 1 ranked pro followed by Gonzales and Trabert. Robert Roy of L&#x27;Équipe, Kléber Haedens and Philippe Chatrier of Tennis de France, Michel Sutter (who has published &quot;Vainqueurs 1946–1991 Winners&quot;), Peter Rowley and Robert Geist considered Rosewall as the new No. 1 in the world.

====1962====

In 1962, Rosewall was the leading pro, winning most pro tournaments of all the players during the year. He retained his Wembley Pro and French Pro titles and also won tournaments at Adelaide, Melbourne, Christchurch, Auckland, Geneva, Milan and Stockholm. There was no World Series tour in 1962, and many of the top pros (Rosewall included) did not play pro matches in the U.S. during the year.

Per records found, Rosewall lost seven matches in 1962: Hoad (in the Adelaide Professional Indoor Tournament), Gimeno, Ayala, Buchholz, Segura, Anderson and Robert Haillet. Rosewall was ranked world No. 1 pro by Robert Geist and in a &quot;Time&quot; magazine article.

====1963====
In an Australasian tour (Australia and New Zealand) played on grass for the Australian portion, Rosewall defeated Rod Laver 11 matches to 2.

A US tour followed with Rosewall defending his world pro title against Laver, Gimeno, Ayala and two Americans: Butch Buchholz and Barry MacKay (Hoad was recovering from a shoulder injury). Rosewall entered as defending world pro titlist. In the first phase of this tour, lasting two and a half months, each player faced each other about eight times. Rosewall ended first (31 matches won – 10 lost in front of Laver (26–16), Buchholz (23–18), Gimeno (21–20), MacKay (12–29) and Ayala (11–30)). In this round-robin phase Rosewall beat Laver in the first 5 meetings, ensuring thus a 12-match winning streak (in counting the last 7 matches in Australasia) and Laver won the last 3. Then a second and final phase of the tour opposed the first (Rosewall) and the second (Laver) of the first phase to determine the final winner (the third (Buchholz) met the fourth (Gimeno)). In 18 matches Rosewall beat Laver 14 times to conquer the US tour first place (Gimeno beat Buchholz 11–7) and thus successfully defended his world pro title.

In mid-May, the tournament season started. In those occasions Rosewall only beat Laver 4–3 and won 5 tournaments (the same as Laver), but in particular he won the three main tournaments of the year 1963: chronologically the U.S. Pro at Forest Hills (without Gimeno and Sedgman) on grass where he defeated Laver in three straight sets, neither Rosewall nor Laver receiving any payment for the event. the French Pro at Coubertin on wood where his opponent in the final was again Laver who later praised his victor: &quot;I played the finest tennis I believe I&#x27;ve ever produced, and he beat me&quot;, Rosewall won the Wembley Pro for the fourth consecutive time after a four-sets win against Hoad in the final. In those tournaments Rosewall won three times while Laver reached two finals and one quarterfinals (Wembley). Rosewall beat Laver 34 matches to 12. Rosewall was voted world number one pro by The International Professional Tennis Players Association.

====1964====
In early 1964, Rosewall finished third behind Hoad and Laver in a four-man, 24-match tour of New Zealand.

In 1964, Rosewall won one major pro tournament: the French Pro over Laver on an indoor wood surface (at Coubertin). At the end of the South African tour in October, Rosewall also beat Laver in three straight sets in a special challenge match, on cement, held in Ellis Park, Johannesburg. In the pro points rankings, Rosewall ended as the official No. 1 in 1964 ahead of Laver and Gonzales.

The majority of tennis observers (Joe McCauley, Norris McWhirter, Michel Sutter and &quot;British Lawn Tennis&quot; magazine) and the players themselves agreed with this points rankings for they considered Rosewall the number one in 1964. Rod Laver after his triumph over Rosewall at the Wembley Pro said &quot;I&#x27;ve still plenty of ambitions left and would like to be the world&#x27;s No. 1. Despite this win, I am not there yet – Ken is. I may have beaten him more often than he has beaten me this year but he has won the biggest tournaments except here. I&#x27;ve lost to other people but Ken hasn&#x27;t.&quot;

Laver had a great season and could also claim the top rank. He captured two of the major pro tournaments: a) the U.S. Pro (outside Boston) over Rosewall (suffering from food poisoning) and Gonzales and b) Wembley Pro over Rosewall.

In 1964, Rosewall beat Gonzales 13 times out of 17, most of the matches taking place in Italy on clay, and Laver was beaten by Gonzales 7 times out of 12. In 1964, Laver had a leading win–loss record against Rosewall of 17–7.

====1965====
In early 1965 the pro circuit toured Australia and a number of defeats to Laver and Gonzales created some doubt about the continuation of Rosewall&#x27;s dominance. In late April-early May Rosewall competed in the US Pro Indoors, held at the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York and part of a nine-tournament US circuit. He was the No. 1 seeded player but was overpowered by Gonzales in the semifinals and lost in straight sets. Fellow pro Mal Anderson commented in the July 1965 issue of &quot;World Tennis&quot; that Rosewall had too many responsibilities with the player&#x27;s association while also defending his world number one ranking.

Until mid-September, Rosewall and Laver were quite equal, the latter winning more tournaments, including the US Pro Indoors and the Masters Pro at Los Angeles but Rosewall won the U.S. Pro, played on grass courts at the Longwood Cricket Club outside Boston, defeating Gonzales in the semifinals and Laver in the final, both in three straight sets and Rosewall again beat Laver in three sets in the French Pro final on the fast wooden courts at Coubertin.

====1966====
Laver and Rosewall shared all the titles and the finals of the five greatest tournaments. Rosewall won the Madison Square Garden Pro and the French Pro tournaments over Laver, the latter capturing Forest Hills Pro, the U.S. Pro (outside Boston) and Wembley Pro, with Rosewall finalist (or second) each time.

====1967====
The 20 main tournaments of the year were shared by a) Laver, ten titles including the five biggest ones, all played on fast courts (U.S. Pro, French Pro, Wembley Pro, Wimbledon Pro, Madison Square Garden, World Pro in Oklahoma, Boston Pro (not to be confused with the U.S. Pro), Newport R.R., Johannesburg Ellis Park, Coubertin Pro in April (not to be confused with the French Pro at Coubertin in October), b) Rosewall, six titles (Los Angeles, Berkeley, U.S. Pro Hardcourt in St Louis, Newport Beach, Durban and Cape Town), c) Gimeno, three titles (Cincinnati, East London, Port Elizabeth) and d) Stolle, one tournament (Transvaal Pro). Including lesser tournaments Laver&#x27;s supremacy was even more obvious: 1) Laver 18 tournaments, plus two small tours 2) Rosewall seven tournaments 3) Stolle four tournaments and 4) Gimeno three tournaments. In head-to-head matches, Rosewall trailed Laver 5–8 and was equal with Gimeno 7–7.

Before 1967, Gimeno always trailed Rosewall in direct confrontations, but that year they split their matches. Rosewall defeated Gimeno in Los Angeles, Madison Square Garden, St Louis, Newport, Johannesburg (challenge match), Durban and Wembley whereas Gimeno won in Cincinnati, U.S. Pro, East London, Port Elizabeth, Johannesburg (tournament), Marseille, French Pro.

Forbidden to contest the greatest traditional events, Davis Cup and Grand Slams, during nearly 11 and a half years from 1957 to 30 March 1968, Rosewall reached his best level during this period, in particular from 1960 to 1966, by winning at least 62 tournaments (including 16 less-than-eight-man events) and seven small tours.

===Open-closed career: April 1968 to July 1972===

====1968====
During the 1968 season several categories of players coexisted:
* Amateur players, dependent on their national and international federations, allowed to play the amateur events and open events but forbidden to receive official prize money
* Registered players, also dependent on their national and international federations, eligible to play the Davis Cup and forbidden to play pro events as an amateur, but authorised to take prize money in the open events (e.g. Okker)
* Professionals under contract with the National Tennis League (NTL)
* Professionals under contract with the World Championship Tennis (WCT)
* Freelance professionals (e.g. Hoad, Ayala, Owen Davidson and Mal Anderson).
In 1968 there were a) an amateur circuit including the Davis Cup (closed to any &quot;contract&quot; professional until 1973) and the Australian Championships b) two pro circuits: WCT and NTL, which met at four tournaments and c) an open circuit (with a little more than 10 tournaments). At the beginning of the open era, WCT founder Dave Dixon did not allow his players to enter tournaments where NTL players were present: There were no WCT players at the first two open tournaments, the British Hard Court Championships and French Open, and all the NTL players were present. The first tournament where NTL and WCT players competed against each other was the U.S. Pro, held at Longwood in June. Several events still were reserved to the amateur players between 1968 and 1972.

Two tournaments were at the top in 1968: Wimbledon (a 128-man field), and the US Open (a 96-man field), both played on grass, where all the best players competed. Other notable tournaments that year were the Queen&#x27;s Club tournament and the greatest pro tournaments where all the NTL and WCT pros competed (but without amateur or registered players) as the U.S. Pro (outside Boston, on grass), the French Pro (coming back to Roland Garros after the 5-edition interlude at Coubertin), the first Pacific Southwest Open in Los Angeles (64-man field) with all the best players present, the indoor professional championships at Wembley in November and the Madison Square Garden Pro in December with the four best pros of each organisation.

In this context Rosewall played almost all NTL pro tournaments in 1968, the four &quot;NTL-WCT&quot; tournaments and some open tournaments. He entered his first open tournament at 33 years old at Bournemouth on clay (the WCT players did not take part) and defeated Gimeno and Laver, to win the first open tennis title. At the French Open, the first Grand Slam tournament of the Open Era, Rosewall confirmed his status of best claycourt player in the world by defeating Laver in the final in four sets. Defeats followed against some of the upcoming 1967 amateur players (Roche twice on grass at the US Pro and at Wimbledon, Newcombe on clay at the French Pro and Okker on grass at the U.S. Open in the semifinals). Rosewall was finalist to Laver at the Pacific Southwest Open, defeating Arthur Ashe, the US Open winner, and in November, captured the Wembley Pro tournament over WCT player John Newcombe. At age 34, Rosewall was sranked No. 3 in the world behind Laver and Ashe according to Lance Tingay and Bud Collins. Rino Tommasi ranked Rosewall no. 2 behind Laver.

====1969====
Rosewall was no longer the best clay court player as Laver had taken his crown in the final of the French Open at Roland Garros. At Wimbledon, Rosewall lost in the third round to Bob Lutz and &quot;confessed that for the first time in his career the fans disturbed his concentration&quot;. At the US Open, Rosewall lost in the quarterfinals to Arthur Ashe. Rosewall was ranked No. 4 that year by Bud Collins and 6 by Rino Tommasi. He won three tournaments (Bristol, Chicago, Midland).

====1970====
Being an NTL player at the beginning of 1970 he didn&#x27;t play the Australian Open held at the White City Stadium in Sydney in January because NTL boss George McCall and his players thought that the prize money was too low for a Grand Slam tournament. In March, a tournament, sponsored by Dunlop, was organised at the same site, with a higher quality field because of better prize-money and a better date. Some of the same players as in the Australian Open were present and in addition not only the NTL pros participated but also some independent pros, such as Ilie Năstase, who usually did not make the trip to Australia. Laver won the tournament after defeating Rosewall in a five-set final watched by a crowd of 8,000. As both the NTL and the WCT boycotted the Roland Garros tournament because it refused to pay guarantees Rosewall also missed the second Grand Slam tournament of the year. All the best players met again at Wimbledon. This time, a rested Rosewall reached the final and took Newcombe, his junior by -years, to five sets but ultimately succumbed. In July, Rosewall became a WCT player after that organisation took over the NTL and its players. Two months later at the U.S. Open, one of the two 1970 Grand Slams with all the best players, Rosewall won over Newcombe in their semifinals in three straight sets before defeating Tony Roche in the final to win his sixth Grand Slam tournament.
To fight against the WCT and NTL promoters, who controlled their own players and did not allow them to compete where they wanted, Kramer introduced the Grand Prix tennis circuit in December 1969, open to all players. The first Grand Prix circuit was held in 1970 and comprised 20 tournaments from April to December. These tournaments gave points according to their categories and the players&#x27; performances with the top six ranked players invited to a season-ending tournament called the Masters. The amateurs and independent pros played in this circuit, while the contract pros firstly played their own circuit and eventually played in some Grand Prix tournaments. Rosewall and Laver performed well in both circuits. Rosewall was ranked third in the Grand Prix standings and finished third in the Masters behind winner Stan Smith and his 1970 nemesis Laver.

After his 1967–1969 steady decline, 1970 saw a rejuvenated Rosewall who was just one set short of winning the Wimbledon and U.S. Open double. 1970 was a year where no player dominated the circuit, the seven leading tournaments were won by seven different players, and different arguments were given to designate the World No. 1. Rino Tommasi ranked Rosewall number 1 as did Judith Elian. Bud Collins ranked him 2 behind Newcombe. In his book Robert Geist ranked the three Australians Laver, Newcombe and Rosewall equal number ones. Rosewall was ranked world No. 1 by the panel of 10 international journalists for the &#x27;Martini and Rossi&#x27; Award, with 97 points (out of 100), with Laver second (89 pts).

====1971====
After his runner-up finishes at Sydney and Wimbledon and his victory at the US Open in 1970, Rosewall continued his good performances in 1971 in the great grass court tournaments. One year after the first Dunlop Open was held in Sydney, Rosewall was back in Sydney in March, this time for the Australian open held on the White City courts. Because it was sponsored by Dunlop in 1971, all the World Championship Tennis (WCT) players (including the National Tennis League players since spring 1970) entered (John Newcombe, Rosewall, Rod Laver, Tony Roche, Tom Okker, Arthur Ashe) as well as some independent pros. Only Stan Smith (Army&#x27;s service), Cliff Richey, Clark Graebner, and the clay specialist players Ilie Năstase and Jan Kodeš were missing. Rosewall won the tournament, his second consecutive Grand Slam win and his seventh overall Grand Slam title, without losing a set and defeated Roy Emerson and Okker before beating Ashe in the final in straight sets.

Rosewall and most other WCT players did not play the French Open; yet, Rosewall still tried to reach his 1970s goal by winning Wimbledon. In the quarterfinals, Rosewall needed about four hours to defeat Richey in five sets, whereas Newcombe quickly defeated Colin Dibley. In the semifinals, the older Rosewall was no match for the younger Newcombe and lost in straight sets. Later in the summer, Rosewall and some other WCT players (Laver, Andrés Gimeno, Emerson, Cliff Drysdale, Fred Stolle, and Roche) did not play the US Open because of the growing conflict between the International Lawn Tennis Federation (ILTF) and the WCT. The illnesses of both his sons was an additional reason for Rosewall not playing this tournament.

As a contract pro, Rosewall was not allowed to play the Davis Cup, and he concentrated mainly on the WCT circuit organised similarly to the Grand Prix circuit which was the equivalent for the independent pros: 20 tournaments (including the Australian Open), each giving the same points amount. The top eight players in ranking points were invited to the WCT Finals, an eight-man tournament, equivalent of the Grand Prix Masters for the WCT players, played in November in Houston and Dallas. When the WCT players were off, they could play tournaments on the Grand Prix circuit. The war between the ILTF and WCT climaxed in a ban by the ILTF beginning on 1 January 1972 of the WCT players from the Grand Prix circuit.

Rosewall ended third on the 1971 WCT circuit behind Laver and Okker and qualified for the WCT Finals. He won the title, beating Newcombe in the quarterfinals, defeating Okker in the semifinals and beating Laver in a four-set final in what was considered at the time as the best match, with their 1970 Sydney final, between the two rivals since their 1968 French Open final. As a WCT player Rosewall played few Grand Prix tournaments but he had earned enough points to play the Grand Prix Masters held about ten days after his WCT Finals. He refused the invitation as he was tired after a long season and took his holidays at the end of the year.

In 1971, Rosewall won eight tournaments and 76 out of 97 matches (78%) and in direct confrontations trailed Newcombe 1–3, Laver 2–3 but led Smith 1–0. Collins ranked Rosewall third after Newcombe and Smith. Tingay ranked Rosewall 4th, Rino Tommasi 1st. Geist ranked Rosewall co-No. 1 tied with Newcombe and Smith. That year, as in 1970, there was no clear undisputed World No. 1.

====1972====
1972 saw a return to separate circuits because all traditional ILTF events held from January to July were forbidden to the WCT players. This included the Davis Cup but also the French Open and Wimbledon. The 1972 Australian Open organisers used a trick to avoid the ban of the WCT players. They held the tournament from 27 December 1971, four days before the ban could be applied, to 3 January 1972. Thus all contract as well as independent pros could enter but few were interested because it was held during Christmas and New Year&#x27;s Day period. The draw included only eight non-Australian players. Rosewall reached the final in which he defeated Mal Anderson to win his fourth Australian title and the eighth, and last, Grand Slam title of his career and became the oldest Grand Slam male champion (37 years and 2 months old) in the Open Era.

A fragile agreement in the spring of 1972 let the WCT players come back to the traditional circuit in August (in Merion, WCT players Okker and Roger Taylor played). The US Open, won by Ilie Năstase, was the greatest event of the year as only in this tournament were all the best players present with the exception of Tony Roche who suffered from a tennis elbow. Later that year two other tournaments had good fields with WCT and independent pros: the Pacific Southwest Open at Los Angeles and, to a lesser extent, Stockholm, both won by Stan Smith.

In many 1972 rankings there were six or seven WCT players in the world top 10 (the three or four independent pros were Smith, Năstase, Orantes and sometimes Gimeno) so the season-ending WCT Finals held in May in Dallas were considered as one of the major events of the year. The final, played between Rosewall and Laver, was considered one of the two best matches played in 1972, the other being the Wimbledon final, and the best Rosewall-Laver match of the open era. It was broadcast nationally in the U.S., viewed by 23 million people, and became known as the &quot;match that made tennis in the United States.&quot; Rosewall won the last major title of his long career by defeating Laver in an epic five-set match which was decided by a tiebreak. (Laver wrote that the two Australians had played better matches between them in the pre-open days, citing their 1963 French Pro final as the pinnacle; McCauley considered their 1964 Wembley final).

Because of the ILTF&#x27;s ban once again Rosewall could not enter Wimbledon.

===Open career: August 1972 to 1980 (and 1982)===

====1972====
From August 1972 players could enter almost all the tournaments they wanted. The Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) was created during the US Open. Rosewall won seven tournaments in 1972, including the depleted Australian Open. Rosewall was ranked 2 in 1972 by Bud Collins and number 1 by Rino Tommasi. He lost in the second round of the 1972 U.S. Open to Mark Cox. &quot;Rosewall was the picture of dismay and frustration, often looking to the gray, leaden skies as if seeking help. He once pounded his fist on the rain-slicked grass after missing a shot, several times batting balls angrily away after Cox had scored a point.&quot;

====1973====
At the 1973 Australian Open (again with a weak field because as in 1972 among the top 20 only Rosewall and Newcombe participated), top-seeded Rosewall was defeated by &quot;virtual unknown&quot; German Karl Meiler in his first match (second round) in straight sets in a big upset. &quot;It just wasn&#x27;t the vintage Rosewall stuff we have come to expect from the Little Master. He seldom middled the ball, and was generally out-manoeuvred by the West German. Rosewall would not have said that he had been taking antibiotics for a throat infection unless he had been asked. Nor would he have admitted to feeling poorly when he played unless he had been asked.&quot; Between May 1972 (victory at Dallas) and April 1973 (victory at Houston, River Oaks) Rosewall captured only two minor titles, Tokyo WCT (not giving points for the WCT Finals) and Brisbane (in December 1972) where he was the only top 20 player.

Rosewall did not play Wimbledon that year as the edition was boycotted by the ATP players. After an absence of 17 years, Rosewall returned to Davis Cup play in November when he played a doubles match with Rod Laver in the interzonal final against Czechoslovakia.

His best performances in 1973 were firstly his semifinals at the US Open (as in 1972 the greatest event of the year) and secondly his third place at the WCT Finals (he was beaten by Ashe in the semifinals and defeated Laver for 3rd place). He also won at Houston WCT, Cleveland WCT, Charlotte WCT, Osaka and Tokyo. He was still ranked in the top 10. Tommasi ranked Rosewall 4, Tingay 6, ATP 6 and Collins 5.

====1974====
1974 was the first year since 1952 that Rosewall did not win a single tournament. However, he entered nine tournaments (the one at Hong Kong not finished because of rain) and reached three finals including Wimbledon and US Open. At Wimbledon, Rosewall beat Newcombe in the quarterfinals in four sets. In the semifinals against Stan Smith, Rosewall was behind 0–2 sets 3–5 in games, and 5–6 in the tiebreaker at match point, but won three points in succession to take the set and went on to win in five sets to reach the final. This was his last Wimbledon final, at the age of 39. Despite the strong support of the crowd, who were eager to see him claim a Wimbledon title, he lost to Jimmy Connors. He was ranked between second (Tingay) and seventh place (Collins) by many tennis journalists. He ranked only 9th in the ATP rankings because he played too few tournaments due to playing World Team Tennis (Rosewall coached the Pittsburgh Triangles team in 1974.)

====1975–1982====
Rosewall still stayed in the top 10 (number 6 according to ATP, 10 according to Collins and 8 according to Tommasi) in 1975 winning 5 tournaments (Jackson, Houston-River Oaks, Louisville, Gstaad, Tokyo Gunze Open) and his two singles in Davis Cup against New Zealand (this event was opened to contract pros in 1973 : that year Rosewall was selected by Neale Fraser for the semifinals doubles). Rosewall made his last attempt at Wimbledon, at over 40, and as in his first Wimbledon Open (in 1968) he lost in the same round (4th) and against the same player (Tony Roche).

In 1976, Rosewall dropped out of the top 10 in the ATP rankings but stayed in the top 20, as he won three tournaments: Brisbane, Jackson WCT and Hong Kong (over Năstase then the 3rd player in the world).

1977 was Rosewall&#x27;s last year in the top 20 in the ATP rankings (his first year in the top 10 was in 1952). In January he reached the semifinals of the 1977 Australian Open, losing in four sets to eventual champion Roscoe Tanner. He won his last two titles in Hong Kong and Tokyo (Gunze Open) respectively at the age of 43. Rosewall played in the Sydney Indoor Tournament in October 1977. Approaching his 43rd birthday he beat the No. 3 in the world Vitas Gerulaitis in a straight-sets semifinals and lost to Jimmy Connors in the final in three straight sets. The following year he lost in the semifinals at 44 years of age. Afterwards, he gradually retired. In October 1980 at the Melbourne indoor tournament, at nearly 46 years of age, Rosewall defeated American Butch Walts, ranked world No. 49, in the first round, then lost to Paul McNamee. Rosewall made a brief comeback at 47 years of age in a non-ATP tournament, the New South Wales Hardcourt Championships in Grafton in February 1982, where he reached the final, losing to Brett Edwards in two sets.

In 1972, Rosewall had been the second tennis pro to pass $1 million career earnings. In early 1978, his career earnings were $1,510,267.

== Rivalries ==

Gonzales and Laver are the two players that Rosewall most often met. His meetings with Laver are better documented and detailed than those with Gonzales.

Except the first year (1963) and the last year they played (1976), the statistics of their meetings show a domination by Laver. In the Open Era, a match score of 23–9 in favour of Laver can be documented, overall a score of 89–75.

Including tournaments and one-night stands, Rosewall and Gonzales played at least 204 matches, all of them as professionals. A match score of 117–87 in favor of Gonzales can be documented.

==Playing style and assessment==
In his 1979 autobiography, Kramer wrote that &quot;Rosewall was a backcourt player when he came into the pros, but he learned very quickly how to play the net. Eventually, for that matter, he became a master of it, as much out of physical preservation as for any other reason. I guarantee you that Kenny wouldn&#x27;t have lasted into his forties as a world-class player if he hadn&#x27;t learned to serve and volley.&quot; His sliced backhand was his strongest shot, and along with the very different backhand of former player Don Budge, has generally been considered one of the best, if not the best, backhands yet seen. He also had a first volley that was the best in the game.

His one-handed backhand, which he usually played with backspin, was rated as one of the great backhands in the history of the game.
He is considered to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time.
Kramer included the Australian in his list of the 21 greatest players of all time, albeit in the second echelon.

In 1988, a panel consisting of Bud Collins, Cliff Drysdale, and Butch Buchholz ranked their top five male tennis players of all time. Buchholz and Collins both listed Rosewall number three on their lists (Collins listed Rod Laver and John McEnroe above Rosewall and Buchholz listed Laver and Bjorn Borg above Rosewall). Drysdale did not list Rosewall in his top five.

During his long playing career he remained virtually injury-free, something that helped him to still win tournaments at the age of 43 and remain ranked in the top 15 in the world. Although he was a finalist four times at Wimbledon, and also at the Wimbledon Pro in 1967, it was the one major tournament that eluded him.

Rosewall was a finalist at the 1974 US Open at 39 years 310 days old, making him the oldest player to participate in two Grand Slam finals in the same year. Before that, in 1972 Rosewall won the Australian Open final at age 37 and 2 months making him the oldest male player to win a Grand Slam singles title in the Open Era as of 2021.

In 1995 Pancho Gonzales said of him: &quot;He became better as he got older, more of a complete player. With the exception of me and Frank Sedgman, he could handle everybody else. Just the way he played, he got under Hoad&#x27;s skin, but he had a forehand weakness and a serve weakness.&quot; In 202 matches against Gonzales, he won 87 and lost 117. In 135 matches against Lew Hoad, he won 84 and lost 51.

In the 2012 Tennis Channel series &quot;100 Greatest of All Time&quot;, Rosewall was ranked number 13 among all time male tennis players, with only two Australian tennis players ranked ahead of him: Laver and Emerson.

==Career statistics==
===Major titles performance timeline===
Ken Rosewall joined professional tennis in 1957 and was unable to compete in 45 Grand Slam tournaments until the open era arrived in 1968. Summarizing Grand Slam and Pro Slam tournaments, Rosewall won 23 titles, and he has a winning record of 246–46, which represents 84.24% spanning 28 years.


=== Grand Slam tournament finals ===
===Singles: 16 (8 titles, 8 runner-ups)===
===Pro-Slam tournament finals ===
* Singles : 15 titles, 4 runner-ups

* * other events (Tournament of Champions, Wimbledon Pro – important professional tournaments – 2 runners-up)

==Records==

===All-time records===
===Open Era records===
* These records were attained in Open Era of tennis.
Note: &quot;The draw of Pro majors was significantly smaller than the traditional Grand Slam tournaments; usually they only had 16 or even fewer professional players, this meant only four rounds of play instead of the modern six or seven rounds.&quot;

==Personal life==
Rosewall married Wilma McIver, a former representative tennis player for Queensland, at St John&#x27;s Cathedral, Brisbane on 6 October 1956. It was described in press reports as Brisbane&#x27;s society wedding of the year with over 2000 people in attendance outside the church, and 800 guests in the Cathedral. The couple then moved to Turramurra in Sydney, educating his two sons at Barker College, Hornsby. They moved to live in Queensland. His wife died on 27 April 2020 in Sydney.

Rosewall was a non-executive director of the failed stockbroking firm BBY and his son, Glenn Rosewall, was the company&#x27;s executive director.

==Honours==
In the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours of 1971, he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE). In the Australia Day Honours of 1979, he was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia (AM). Rosewall was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, Rhode Island, in 1980. In 1985 he was inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame. He is an Australian Living Treasure.

To honour his service to tennis, the centre court at the Sydney Olympic Park Tennis Centre was renamed the Ken Rosewall Arena in 2008.

Rosewall was invited to present the Men&#x27;s Singles trophy at the 2023 Australian Open Championship to commemorate the seventieth anniversary of his first Australian single&#x27;s championship victory.

==See also==

* Tennis male players statistics
* All-time tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles
* Open Era tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="0" end="23" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Kenneth Robert Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="71" end="82" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="96" end="102" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="177" end="187" title="Major professional tennis tournaments before the Open Era#Professional majors" label="Pro Majors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="198" end="219" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="Grand Slam tournament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="315" end="323" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Pro Slam" label="Pro Slam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="406" end="423" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364175" start="461" end="469" title="backhand" label="backhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q943089" start="923" end="943" title="1971 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1971 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="976" end="984" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496549" start="1657" end="1667" title="Hurstville, New South Wales" label="Hurstville"/>
<link wikidata="Q824473" start="1722" end="1748" title="Penshurst, New South Wales" label="Penshurst, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400385" start="1795" end="1803" title="Rockdale, New South Wales" label="Rockdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="2351" end="2359" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q248952" start="3525" end="3554" title="Sydney International" label="New South Wales Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q712779" start="3611" end="3623" title="Ken McGregor" label="Ken McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q374047" start="4152" end="4164" title="Adrian Quist" label="Adrian Quist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="4257" end="4265" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q54577" start="4487" end="4498" title="Dick Savitt" label="Dick Savitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="4586" end="4604" title="US Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54583" start="4631" end="4641" title="Vic Seixas" label="Vic Seixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54544" start="4694" end="4708" title="Gardnar Mulloy" label="Gardnar Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="4778" end="4790" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="4811" end="4819" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q54583" start="5039" end="5049" title="Vic Seixas" label="Vic Seixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q913948" start="5083" end="5094" title="Mervyn Rose" label="Mervyn Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714927" start="5115" end="5139" title="1953 Australian Championships" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="5157" end="5177" title="French Championships" label="French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="5410" end="5419" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q552261" start="5454" end="5466" title="Kurt Nielsen" label="Kurt Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54686" start="5552" end="5564" title="Tony Trabert" label="Tony Trabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="5590" end="5621" title="Pacific Southwest Championships" label="Pacific Southwest Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="5843" end="5852" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="6429" end="6441" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q365518" start="6591" end="6606" title="Jaroslav Drobný" label="Jaroslav Drobný"/>
<link wikidata="Q285405" start="6683" end="6694" title="Rex Hartwig" label="Rex Hartwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423913" start="7188" end="7213" title="1955 French Championships (tennis)" label="1955 French Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578722" start="7694" end="7709" title="Gold Dust Twins" label="Gold Dust Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177979" start="8523" end="8527" title="1953 Davis Cup" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q386556" start="8529" end="8533" title="1955 Davis Cup" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q530960" start="8538" end="8542" title="1956 Davis Cup" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="8733" end="8744" title="Jack Kramer (tennis)" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="8801" end="8809" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="8987" end="8996" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430893" start="9163" end="9178" title="Kooyong Stadium" label="Kooyong Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="9200" end="9215" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="9725" end="9748" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021035" start="9779" end="9787" title="U.S. Pro Tennis Championships draws, 1946–1967" label="U.S. Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="9889" end="9902" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="9933" end="9946" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022891" start="10007" end="10030" title="Tournament of Champions (tennis)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q299963" start="10210" end="10221" title="Wembley Championships" label="Wembley Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54686" start="10368" end="10380" title="Tony Trabert" label="Tony Trabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="10461" end="10469" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="11067" end="11082" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q198718" start="11445" end="11449" title="clay courts" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613027" start="11576" end="11595" title="Stade Roland Garros" label="Stade Roland Garros"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="11664" end="11675" title="Jack Kramer" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="11677" end="11690" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q162639" start="11707" end="11715" title="Lew Hoad" label="Lew Hoad"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="12097" end="12112" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q54686" start="12248" end="12260" title="Tony Trabert" label="Tony Trabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q734544" start="13616" end="13627" title="Alex Olmedo" label="Alex Olmedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195386" start="16695" end="16709" title="Butch Buchholz" label="Butch Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418310" start="17231" end="17243" title="Peter Rowley" label="Peter Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="18120" end="18129" title="Rodney George Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q320560" start="20699" end="20715" title="Norris McWhirter" label="Norris McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457745" start="21986" end="22009" title="Seventh Regiment Armory" label="Seventh Regiment Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="22183" end="22195" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023526" start="23346" end="23359" title="Wimbledon Pro" label="Wimbledon Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978903" start="25384" end="25406" title="National Tennis League" label="National Tennis League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991741" start="25453" end="25478" title="World Championship Tennis" label="World Championship Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q976174" start="25530" end="25543" title="Owen Davidson" label="Owen Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="25548" end="25560" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154828" start="26052" end="26084" title="1968 British Hard Court Championships" label="British Hard Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q911810" start="26089" end="26100" title="1968 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865182" start="26223" end="26231" title="1968 U.S. Pro Tennis Championships" label="U.S. Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q855690" start="26382" end="26391" title="1968 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258867" start="26419" end="26426" title="1968 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927430" start="26549" end="26577" title="1968 Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865182" start="26702" end="26710" title="1968 U.S. Pro Tennis Championships" label="U.S. Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q194976" start="26743" end="26753" title="French Pro Championship" label="French Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154836" start="26839" end="26861" title="1968 Pacific Southwest Open" label="Pacific Southwest Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154828" start="27277" end="27288" title="1968 British Hard Court Championships" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q911810" start="27407" end="27418" title="1968 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="27459" end="27467" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="27867" end="27878" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="28070" end="28082" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000491" start="28087" end="28098" title="Bud Collins" label="Bud Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q202226" start="28262" end="28273" title="1969 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q781639" start="28731" end="28746" title="1970 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994559" start="28759" end="28777" title="White City Stadium (Sydney)" label="White City Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106113" start="29225" end="29237" title="Ilie Năstase" label="Ilie Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q925733" start="29591" end="29600" title="1970 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q710119" start="30007" end="30017" title="Tony Roche" label="Tony Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775082" start="30223" end="30248" title="Grand Prix tennis circuit" label="Grand Prix tennis circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413373" start="30563" end="30570" title="1970 Pepsi-Cola Masters" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="31703" end="31712" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="31736" end="31743" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q290376" start="31953" end="31968" title="1971 Australian Open" label="Australian open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994559" start="31981" end="31991" title="White City Stadium (Sydney)" label="White City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991741" start="32052" end="32077" title="World Championship Tennis" label="World Championship Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312464" start="32166" end="32179" title="John Newcombe" label="John Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="32191" end="32200" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q710119" start="32202" end="32212" title="Tony Roche" label="Tony Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q455411" start="32214" end="32223" title="Tom Okker" label="Tom Okker"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="32225" end="32236" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q54657" start="32277" end="32287" title="Stan Smith" label="Stan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565885" start="32311" end="32323" title="Cliff Richey" label="Cliff Richey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269127" start="32325" end="32339" title="Clark Graebner" label="Clark Graebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q106113" start="32373" end="32385" title="Ilie Năstase" label="Ilie Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q317431" start="32390" end="32399" title="Jan Kodeš" label="Jan Kodeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="32557" end="32568" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q390839" start="32889" end="32901" title="Colin Dibley" label="Colin Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q315958" start="33071" end="33084" title="Andrés Gimeno" label="Andrés Gimeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q582003" start="33095" end="33109" title="Cliff Drysdale" label="Cliff Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q54671" start="33111" end="33122" title="Fred Stolle" label="Fred Stolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223041" start="33204" end="33240" title="International Tennis Federation" label="International Lawn Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="33416" end="33425" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016844" start="34167" end="34177" title="1971 World Championship Tennis Finals" label="WCT Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298011" start="34554" end="34572" title="1971 Pepsi-Cola Masters" label="Grand Prix Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q781658" start="35326" end="35346" title="1972 Australian Open" label="1972 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q963687" start="35770" end="35782" title="Mal Anderson" label="Mal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016847" start="36704" end="36714" title="1972 World Championship Tennis Finals" label="WCT Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="37691" end="37726" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q89533" start="38467" end="38478" title="Karl Meiler" label="Karl Meiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q521328" start="39200" end="39209" title="1973 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="39383" end="39392" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711852" start="39400" end="39439" title="1973 Davis Cup" label="interzonal final against Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q745901" start="40070" end="40079" title="1974 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162276" start="40084" end="40091" title="1974 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="40547" end="40560" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199409" start="40788" end="40808" title="Pittsburgh Triangles" label="Pittsburgh Triangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q715173" start="41195" end="41207" title="Neale Fraser" label="Neale Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983669" start="41543" end="41554" title="Tennis South Invitational" label="Jackson WCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443908" start="41559" end="41568" title="Hong Kong Open (tennis)" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q420849" start="41776" end="41796" title="1977 Australian Open (January)" label="1977 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54681" start="41839" end="41852" title="Roscoe Tanner" label="Roscoe Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630033" start="41971" end="41995" title="1977 Custom Credit Australian Indoor Championships" label="Sydney Indoor Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q53547" start="42074" end="42090" title="Vitas Gerulaitis" label="Vitas Gerulaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="42133" end="42146" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928827" start="42389" end="42400" title="Butch Walts" label="Butch Walts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348791" start="42456" end="42468" title="Paul McNamee" label="Paul McNamee"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="43977" end="43986" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364175" start="44135" end="44154" title="one-handed backhand" label="one-handed backhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q582003" start="44492" end="44506" title="Cliff Drysdale" label="Cliff Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q195386" start="44512" end="44526" title="Butch Buchholz" label="Butch Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="45038" end="45047" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="45174" end="45181" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="45608" end="45621" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="46814" end="46822" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="47193" end="47227" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856211" start="47442" end="47452" title="Turramurra" label="Turramurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="47456" end="47462" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860946" start="47490" end="47504" title="Barker College" label="Barker College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007874" start="47506" end="47513" title="Hornsby, New South Wales" label="Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q108696230" start="47662" end="47665" title="BBY Limited" label="BBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985929" start="47758" end="47795" title="1971 Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="47830" end="47857" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601035" start="47872" end="47901" title="1979 Australia Day Honours" label="Australia Day Honours of 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="47922" end="47954" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="47992" end="48025" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="48094" end="48122" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824396" start="48133" end="48159" title="Australian Living Treasures" label="Australian Living Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759057" start="48219" end="48252" title="Sydney Olympic Park Tennis Centre" label="Sydney Olympic Park Tennis Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422468" start="48520" end="48550" title="Tennis male players statistics" label="Tennis male players statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="48553" end="48597" title="All-time tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="All-time tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="48600" end="48644" title="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481805" wikidata="Q312545" url="?curid=481805" title="Roy Emerson">
<text>Roy Stanley Emerson (born 3 November 1936) is an Australian former tennis player who won 12 Grand Slam singles titles and 16 Grand Slam doubles titles, for a total of 28 Grand Slam titles. All of his singles Grand Slam victories and 14 of his Grand Slam doubles victories were achieved before the open era began in 1968. He is the only male player to have completed a career Grand Slam (winning titles at all four Grand Slam events) in both singles and doubles, and the first of four male players to complete a double career Grand Slam in singles (later followed by Rod Laver, Novak Djokovic, and Rafael Nadal). His 28 major titles are the all-time record for a male player. He was ranked world No. 1 amateur in 1961 by Ned Potter, 1964 by Potter, Lance Tingay and an Ulrich Kaiser panel of 14 experts and 1965 by Tingay, Joseph McCauley, Sport za Rubezhom and an Ulrich Kaiser panel of 16 experts.

Emerson was the first male player to win 12 singles majors. He held that record for 30 years until it was passed by Pete Sampras in 2000. He also held the record of six Australian Open men&#x27;s singles titles until 2019 when Novak Djokovic won his seventh title. Emerson won five of those titles consecutively (1963–67), a still-standing record. Emerson is one of only five tennis players ever to win multiple slam sets in two disciplines. Emerson was a member of a record eight Davis Cup–winning teams between 1959 and 1967. Unlike several of his contemporaries, he chose to remain an amateur player and did not turn professional before the advent of the Open Era.

==Biography==
Emerson was born on a farm in Blackbutt, Queensland. His family later moved to Brisbane and he received better tennis instruction after attending Brisbane Grammar School and Ipswich Grammar School. He played his first singles tour event at the 1951 Southwest Queensland Championships. He won his first singles title at the 1953 Queensland Hard Court Championships.

Emerson won his first Grand Slam tournament doubles title in 1959 at Wimbledon (partnering Neale Fraser). In 1961, he captured his first Grand Slam tournament singles title at the Australian Championships, beating compatriot Rod Laver in four sets in the final. Later that year, Emerson claimed his second major singles crown when he again beat Laver in the final of the US Championships.

Known as &quot;Emmo&quot; on the tour, the six-foot right-hander was known for training hard and always being ready for strenuous matches because of his outstanding level of fitness. He was primarily a serve-and-volley style player, but was also able to adapt to the rigours of slow courts, allowing him to enjoy success on all surfaces.

From 1963 to 1967, Emerson won five consecutive men&#x27;s singles titles at the Australian Championships. His record of six Australian men&#x27;s singles crowns was surpassed in 2019 by Novak Djokovic who won his record seventh.
1963 also saw Emerson capture his first French Championships singles title, beating Pierre Darmon in the final.

Emerson&#x27;s first Wimbledon singles title came in 1964, with a final victory over Fred Stolle. Emerson won 55 consecutive matches during 1964 and finished the year with 109 victories out of 115 matches. He won three of the year&#x27;s four Grand Slam events that year (failing to win only the French Open).

During his amateur career Emerson received several offers to turn professional, including an £38,000 offer made at the end of 1964 by Jack Kramer, but declined and opted to remain an amateur.
In 1966, Emerson rejected a $100,000 guarantee over two years offer to turn pro, stating that he &quot;couldn&#x27;t afford to take a pay cut.&quot; It was estimated that Emerson and Santana were paid about $1,000 to $1,500 a week in living expenses alone from their national tennis associations as &quot;shamateurs&quot;.

Emerson was the world No. 1 amateur player in 1964 and 1965 according to Lance Tingay of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; and in 1961 and 1964 according to Ned Potter of &quot;World Tennis&quot;. In 1965, he successfully defended his Australian and Wimbledon singles crowns. He was the heavy favourite to win Wimbledon again in 1966, but during his fourth round match he skidded while chasing the ball and crashed into the umpire&#x27;s stand, injuring his shoulder. He still finished the match, but was unable to win.

Emerson&#x27;s last major singles title came at the French Championships in 1967 – the year before the open era began. His 12 major singles titles stood as a men&#x27;s record until 2000, when it was surpassed by Pete Sampras. Emerson signed a professional contract with the National Tennis League in early April 1968.

Emerson had 10 straight victories in Grand Slam tournament finals in which he appeared, which is an all-time record.

Emerson&#x27;s final Grand Slam doubles title was won in 1971 at Wimbledon (partnering Laver). His 16 Grand Slam doubles crowns were won with five different partners. From 1960 to 1965, he won six consecutive French Open men&#x27;s doubles titles. Jack Kramer, the long-time tennis promoter and tennis great, writes in his 1979 autobiography that &quot;Emerson was the best doubles player of all the moderns, very possibly the best forehand court player of all time. He was so quick he could cover everything. He had the perfect doubles shot, a backhand that dipped over the net and came in at the server&#x27;s feet as he moved to the net. Gene Mako and Johnny van Ryn could hit a shot like that sometimes, but never so often nor as proficiently as Emerson.&quot;

Emerson was also a member of a record eight Davis Cup winning teams between 1959 and 1967.

Emerson&#x27;s 12 singles and 16 doubles titles make him one of the leading players in Grand Slam tournament history.

Emerson&#x27;s last top-20 ranking was in 1973, primarily owing to his winning his 119th and final career title at the Pacific Coast Championships in San Francisco. He defeated Roscoe Tanner, Arthur Ashe, and Björn Borg in the last three rounds of that tournament. Emerson played just a few tournaments through 1977. His last appearance was at the Swiss Open in Gstaad, Switzerland in 1983.
Although he exited the tournament circuit, Emerson did not retire. In the late 1970s, he served as a player/coach for the Boston Lobsters in World Team Tennis (WTT). He mostly played doubles with the Lobsters and often teamed with fellow Australian Tony Roche. In the 1978 season, the last season under the original iteration of World Team Tennis, Roy coached the Lobsters to the Eastern Division Championship and into the WTT Finals against the Los Angeles Strings. The final Lobster team that Emerson coached consisted of Tony Roche, Mike Estep (for part of the season), and Emerson himself as the male players.

Emerson now resides in Newport Beach, California with his wife, Joy, and daughter, Heidi, and has a home in Gstaad where he holds a tennis clinic each summer. His son, Antony, was an All-American in tennis at Corona del Mar High School and the University of Southern California and played on the professional tour briefly. Roy and Antony won the United States Hard Court Father-and-Son title in 1978. Roy briefly coached promising juniors at East Lake Woodlands in Oldsmar, Florida.

==Awards and honours==
Emerson was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1982 and the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 1986. The main court for the Suisse Open Gstaad, a tournament which Emerson won five times and where he played his last match as a professional, is named Roy Emerson Arena in his honour.

In 2000, he was awarded the Australian Sports Medal, and in 2001 received the Centenary Medal.

The Roy Emerson trophy, which is awarded to the male champion at the Brisbane International, is named in his honour. In 2009 Emerson was inducted into the Queensland Sport Hall of Fame. He was honoured during the 2013 Australian Open at the Australian Open Legends&#x27; Lunch.

In 2014, the Brisbane City Council named the new tennis centre in Milton at Frew Park after Roy Emerson. The same year at Blackbutt, the Roy Emerson Museum was opened by Roy Emerson. On the 18 January 2017, a statue of Roy Emerson was unveiled at the Blackbutt Museum.

==Place in history==
In the Tennis Channel series &quot;100 Greatest of All Time&quot; in 2012, Emerson was ranked the 11th greatest male tennis player of all time, and the second highest rated Australian in the series, behind Rod Laver.

==Grand Slam tournament finals==
===Singles: 15 (12 titles, 3 runners–up)===
===Doubles: 28 (16 titles, 12 runners–up)===
===Mixed doubles: 2 (runners–up)===
==Grand Slam tournament performance timeline==
===Singles===
==Open-Era doubles titles (20)==
==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* &quot;World of Tennis Yearbook 1971&quot; (1971), by John Barrett, London

==See also==

* World number one male tennis player rankings
* Tennis male players statistics
* All-time tennis records – men&#x27;s singles
* Tennis records of the Open Era – men&#x27;s singles

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="0" end="19" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Stanley Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="67" end="73" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="92" end="102" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="297" end="305" title="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="open era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="368" end="385" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="566" end="575" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="577" end="591" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="597" end="609" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="748" end="760" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="1016" end="1028" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="1069" end="1084" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q48213295" start="1117" end="1121" title="2019 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1303" end="1321" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Multiple Career Grand Slams" label="multiple slam sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="1381" end="1390" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922758" start="1613" end="1634" title="Blackbutt, Queensland" label="Blackbutt, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1662" end="1670" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968573" start="1729" end="1752" title="Brisbane Grammar School" label="Brisbane Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065569" start="1757" end="1779" title="Ipswich Grammar School" label="Ipswich Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="2018" end="2027" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q715173" start="2040" end="2052" title="Neale Fraser" label="Neale Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="2129" end="2153" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="2174" end="2183" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="2320" end="2336" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="2865" end="2879" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283417" start="2992" end="3005" title="Pierre Darmon" label="Pierre Darmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54671" start="3106" end="3117" title="Fred Stolle" label="Fred Stolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747" start="3921" end="3933" title="Lance Tingay" label="Lance Tingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3943" end="3962" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="4580" end="4592" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978903" start="4642" end="4664" title="National Tennis League" label="National Tennis League"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="5053" end="5064" title="Jack Kramer (tennis)" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54526" start="5446" end="5455" title="Gene Mako" label="Gene Mako"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387051" start="5460" end="5474" title="John Van Ryn" label="Johnny van Ryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="5615" end="5624" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888516" start="5901" end="5928" title="1973 Pacific Coast Open" label="Pacific Coast Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q54681" start="5959" end="5972" title="Roscoe Tanner" label="Roscoe Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="5991" end="6001" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q299439" start="6130" end="6140" title="Swiss Open (tennis)" label="Swiss Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q37149" start="6144" end="6150" title="Gstaad" label="Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511187" start="6295" end="6310" title="Boston Lobsters (1974–1978)" label="Boston Lobsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044168" start="6314" end="6331" title="World Team Tennis" label="World Team Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q710119" start="6422" end="6432" title="Tony Roche" label="Tony Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682351" start="6619" end="6638" title="Los Angeles Strings (1974–1978)" label="Los Angeles Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107672" start="6709" end="6719" title="Mike Estep" label="Mike Estep"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="6811" end="6836" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16054633" start="6956" end="6962" title="Antony Emerson" label="Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="6971" end="6982" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172136" start="6997" end="7023" title="Corona del Mar High School" label="Corona del Mar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="7032" end="7065" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q971628" start="7253" end="7269" title="Oldsmar, Florida" label="Oldsmar, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="7325" end="7358" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271575" start="7375" end="7403" title="Sport Australia Hall of Fame" label="Sport Australia Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q299439" start="7436" end="7454" title="Swiss Open (tennis)" label="Suisse Open Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372771" start="7561" end="7578" title="Roy Emerson Arena" label="Roy Emerson Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649458" start="7623" end="7646" title="Australian Sports Medal" label="Australian Sports Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393205" start="7673" end="7688" title="Centenary Medal" label="Centenary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264806" start="7760" end="7782" title="Brisbane International" label="Brisbane International"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="7983" end="8004" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314513" start="8036" end="8042" title="Milton, Queensland" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861048" start="8046" end="8055" title="Frew Park" label="Frew Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q129714" start="8296" end="8320" title="100 Greatest of All Time" label="100 Greatest of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="8863" end="8907" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="World number one male tennis player rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422468" start="8910" end="8940" title="Tennis male players statistics" label="Tennis male players statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="8943" end="8987" title="All-time tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="All-time tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="8990" end="9041" title="Tennis records of the Open Era – men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Tennis records of the Open Era – men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481807" wikidata="Q439446" url="?curid=481807" title="Peri Gilpin">
<text>Peri Gilpin (born Peri Kay Oldham; May 27, 1961) is an American actress who portrayed Roz Doyle in the NBC sitcom &quot;Frasier&quot; and Kim Keeler in the ABC Family drama series &quot;Make It or Break It&quot;.

==Career==
Gilpin appeared on the TV series &quot;Cheers&quot;, playing Holly Matheson in the 21st episode of the 11th season, which aired in April 1993.

From 1993 until 2004, Gilpin played Roz Doyle in the television series &quot;Frasier&quot;, a spin-off of &quot;Cheers&quot;, starring Kelsey Grammer as Frasier Crane, the role he had played on &quot;Cheers&quot; since 1984. She was given the role after being one of over 300 other actresses who answered the casting call. Gilpin’s fellow finalist for the role was Lisa Kudrow. Along with the principal cast, Gilpin won a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 1999.

In 2009, Gilpin appeared in the ABC Family drama &quot;Make It or Break It&quot;, for which she received a Gracie Award in the category of &quot;Outstanding Female Actor in a Supporting Role in a Drama Series&quot;.

Gilpin and &quot;Frasier&quot; co-star Jane Leeves ran a production company, Bristol Cities (named from the cockney rhyming slang), whose projects included a Fox network pilot titled &quot;Minister of Divine&quot;, an American remake of the British sitcom &quot;The Vicar of Dibley&quot; with Kirstie Alley (another &quot;Cheers&quot; regular) in a starring role. Gilpin is the voice artist for the character Jane Proudfoot in &quot;Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within&quot;. She provided the voices of Desiree in the Nickelodeon animated television series &quot;Danny Phantom&quot;, Volcana in &quot;&quot; and &quot;Justice League&quot;, Hecate in &quot;Hercules&quot;, and Kate Corrigan in the &quot;Hellboy&quot; animated films. Gilpin also did voice work for several Wells Fargo and Johnsonville Meats TV commercials.

Gilpin has appeared on the television series &quot;Medium&quot; and &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;. She has a supporting role on the television series &quot;Make It or Break It&quot; and has appeared on &quot;Law &amp; Order: Criminal Intent&quot;. She also starred alongside Teri Polo in the Lifetime film &quot;For the Love of a Child&quot;. In 2012, Gilpin guest-starred with another &quot;Cheers&quot; alum, Ted Danson, in &quot;&quot;. She had a recurring role in &quot;Men at Work&quot; on TBS as editor of &quot;Full Steam&quot; magazine. In the second season of &quot;Scorpion&quot;, she was introduced as Katherine Cooper, a team superior in homeland security.

In 2023, Gilpin reprised her role as Roz Doyle in Paramount&#x27;s &quot;Frasier&quot; reboot.

== Personal life ==
In 1997, Gilpin&#x27;s mother died of leiomyosarcoma. Gilpin has led efforts supporting cancer research awareness since the time her mother was diagnosed with the disease. Her father, Jim O&#x27;Brien, was a popular TV reporter in Philadelphia.

On July 31, 1999, Gilpin married painter Christian Vincent. They have twins who were born to a surrogate mother on May 7, 2004.

On July 29, 2023, Gilpin&#x27;s brother Marc Gilpin died from complications related to a glioblastoma brain tumor at the age of 56. He was also an actor, and appeared in &quot;Jaws 2&quot; as a child.

Jane Leeves, Gilpin&#x27;s co-star on &quot;Frasier&quot;, is her neighbor and close friend.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
*Peri Gilpin Interview with Ability Magazine
*Peri Gilpin at Allmovie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q439446" start="0" end="11" title="Peri Gilpin" label="Peri Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q439446" start="18" end="33" title="Peri Gilpin" label="Peri Kay Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375286" start="86" end="95" title="Roz Doyle" label="Roz Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="103" end="106" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="120" end="127" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="156" end="166" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066201" start="186" end="205" title="Make It or Break It" label="Make It or Break It"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="264" end="270" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q196560" start="504" end="518" title="Kelsey Grammer" label="Kelsey Grammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405761" start="522" end="535" title="Frasier Crane" label="Frasier Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529789" start="791" end="878" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148424" start="996" end="1008" title="Gracie Award" label="Gracie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q239558" start="1145" end="1156" title="Jane Leeves" label="Jane Leeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q429083" start="1214" end="1235" title="cockney rhyming slang" label="cockney rhyming slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="1368" end="1387" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="The Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="1399" end="1412" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="1484" end="1496" title="voice actor" label="voice artist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1539" end="1572" title="Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within" label="Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365069" start="1607" end="1614" title="Desiree (Danny Phantom)" label="Desiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="1622" end="1633" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83978" start="1667" end="1680" title="Danny Phantom" label="Danny Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545644" start="1688" end="1695" title="Volcana (DC Comics)" label="Volcana"/>
<link wikidata="Q250036" start="1722" end="1736" title="Justice League (TV series)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="1744" end="1750" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517641" start="1760" end="1768" title="Hercules (1998 TV series)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375448" start="1780" end="1793" title="Kate Corrigan" label="Kate Corrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129844" start="1801" end="1835" title="Hellboy Animated" label="&amp;quot;Hellboy&amp;quot; animated films"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="1876" end="1887" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470111" start="1979" end="1985" title="Medium (TV series)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="2002" end="2022" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2139" end="2171" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q236300" start="2206" end="2215" title="Teri Polo" label="Teri Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="2223" end="2231" title="Lifetime (network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q381203" start="2342" end="2352" title="Ted Danson" label="Ted Danson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305666" start="2405" end="2416" title="Men at Work (TV series)" label="Men at Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="2426" end="2429" title="TBS (U.S. TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110140" start="2506" end="2514" title="Scorpion (TV series)" label="Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="2651" end="2660" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q116636567" start="2674" end="2681" title="Frasier (2023 TV series)" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504713" start="2755" end="2769" title="leiomyosarcoma" label="leiomyosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2901" end="2917" title="Jim_O%27Brien_(reporter)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="2996" end="3003" title="painter" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="3033" end="3038" title="twins" label="twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q334645" start="3058" end="3074" title="surrogate mother" label="surrogate mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q76861511" start="3132" end="3143" title="Marc Gilpin" label="Marc Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="3181" end="3193" title="glioblastoma" label="glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199834" start="3268" end="3274" title="Jaws 2" label="Jaws 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q239558" start="3294" end="3305" title="Jane Leeves" label="Jane Leeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q477809" start="3528" end="3536" title="Allmovie" label="Allmovie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481811" wikidata="Q3374316" url="?curid=481811" title="Peintre Celebre">
<text>Peintre Celebre (17 March 1994 – 19 October 2018) was an American-bred, French-trained champion thoroughbred racehorse. He won the French Derby and the Prix de l&#x27;Arc de Triomphe in 1997.

==Background==
Peintre Celebre was bred and owned by businessman Daniel Wildenstein and trained by André Fabre. The horse was a son of Nureyev, France&#x27;s champion miler in 1980, who was in turn the son of the outstanding sire Northern Dancer. He was by Alydar on his dam&#x27;s side.

==Racing career==
Peintre Celebre was lightly raced as a two-year-old. He entered only two races, winning one and finishing third in the other.

In 1997, at age three, the horse won the French Derby and the Grand Prix de Paris before facing the best horses in Europe in France&#x27;s most valuable race, the Prix de l&#x27;Arc de Triomphe. Ridden by jockey Olivier Peslier, Peintre Celebre won by five lengths and broke the track record by 3.4 seconds. His victory made him only the second horse after Le Pacha in 1941 to complete that treble of Group One races.

Peintre Celebre raced five times that year, winning four starts and finishing a close second in the other. He was named European Horse of the Year and the International Classification rated him the best in the world in 1997.

==Stud career==
Before the 1998 racing season, Peintre Celebre suffered a career-ending injury and was retired to breeding at Coolmore Stud in Fethard, County Tipperary, Ireland. Later he was sent to Australia in 1998-2003 and to Japan for one season in 2001. His offspring include Pride, Byword and Collection (Hong Kong Derby). Pensioned from stud duties in 2014, Peintre Celebre died on 19 October 2018.

==Pedigree==
==References==
==External links==
* Video of Peintre Celebre&#x27;s impressive win in the 1997 Prix du Jockey Club at YouTube.com
* Peintre Celebre&#x27;s pedigree and partial racing stats</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3374316" start="0" end="15" title="Peintre Celebre" label="Peintre Celebre"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="96" end="108" title="thoroughbred" label="thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="109" end="118" title="racehorse" label="racehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129942" start="131" end="143" title="Prix du Jockey Club" label="French Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q422296" start="152" end="182" title="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe" label="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q723358" start="258" end="276" title="Daniel Wildenstein" label="Daniel Wildenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q353931" start="292" end="303" title="André Fabre" label="André Fabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346473" start="328" end="335" title="Nureyev (horse)" label="Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969034" start="423" end="438" title="Northern Dancer" label="Northern Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738646" start="450" end="456" title="Alydar" label="Alydar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129942" start="668" end="680" title="Prix du Jockey Club" label="French Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114137" start="689" end="708" title="Grand Prix de Paris" label="Grand Prix de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q422296" start="790" end="820" title="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe" label="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351282" start="839" end="854" title="Olivier Peslier" label="Olivier Peslier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507386" start="984" end="992" title="Le Pacha" label="Le Pacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611178" start="1028" end="1037" title="Group One" label="Group One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962947" start="1166" end="1192" title="European Horse of the Year" label="European Horse of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742463" start="1398" end="1411" title="Coolmore Stud" label="Coolmore Stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669658" start="1415" end="1440" title="Fethard, County Tipperary" label="Fethard, County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402863" start="1554" end="1559" title="Pride (horse)" label="Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006507" start="1561" end="1567" title="Byword (horse)" label="Byword"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752077" start="1584" end="1599" title="Hong Kong Derby" label="Hong Kong Derby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481812" wikidata="Q3436301" url="?curid=481812" title="Bobby Shriver">
<text>Robert Sargent Shriver III (born April 28, 1954) is an American activist, attorney, and journalist. He was a member of the Santa Monica City Council from 2004 to 2012, serving as mayor pro tem in 2006 and as mayor during part of 2010. A member of the prominent Shriver and Kennedy families, he is a nephew of former U.S. President John F. Kennedy, and former U.S. senators Robert F. Kennedy and Edward M. &quot;Ted&quot; Kennedy.

==Early life and education==
Shriver was born in Chicago, Illinois, to Sargent Shriver (1915—2011) and Eunice Kennedy Shriver (1921—2009), the first of their five children. His siblings are Maria (born 1955), Timothy (born 1959), Mark (born 1964) and Anthony (born 1965).

Bobby attended Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, where he was a member of the Scroll and Key Society. He graduated with a B.A. in American studies with &quot;cum laude&quot; honors. He graduated from Yale Law School with a J.D. in 1981.

== Business career and philanthropy ==
After graduating from law school, Shriver clerked for a year for Judge Stephen R. Reinhardt at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which is headquartered in San Francisco, California.

He then moved to New York City to work in a venture capital business at James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.

Along with father Sarge, Eli Jacobs, and Larry Lucchino, Bobby was an investor from 1989 to 1993 in the Baltimore Orioles, a professional-baseball team based in Baltimore, Maryland.

Shriver is an attorney. He is also president of RSS Inc., a Beverly Hills, California music, film and philanthropic company. (The letters RSS are Shriver&#x27;s initials.)

In 1987, he produced a prime-time television feature about the Special Olympics, an organization for disabled young people and founded by his mother in 1968. This and subsequent productions have raised in excess of US$55 million for the Special Olympics program.

He has also produced several films, including &quot;True Lies&quot; (1994), which starred Arnold Schwarzenegger – his then brother-in-law. 

In 2002, Shriver was a co-founder – with U2 lead singer Bono – of DATA (Debt, AIDS, Trade in Africa), a multinational, non-government organization whose purpose is to obtain social equality and justice for Africa through debt relief; adjust trade rules which burden Africa; eliminate the African AIDS epidemic; and strengthen democracy with more accountability by the wealthiest nations and African leaders with transparency towards the people.

With Shriver&#x27;s involvement, DATA, in turn, was one of the founding organizations in 2004 of the ONE Campaign, a U.S.-based, non-partisan, non-profit organization which aims to increase U.S. government funding for and effectiveness of international-aid programs.

In 2006, he and Bono also co-founded (RED) to bring the world&#x27;s biggest companies into the fight against AIDS and generate money for The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. To date, (RED) has generated over $700M and impacted over 245 million lives. 

Shriver also served as a producer of the 2023 film &quot;The Burial,&quot; starring Tommy Lee Jones, Jamie Foxx, and Jurnee Smollett. 

== Political career ==

===California State Parks and Recreation Commission===

After Schwarzenegger became the Governor of California in 2003, he reappointed Shriver as chairman of the California State Park and Recreation Commission overseeing the state&#x27;s parks and gardens. He had first been appointed by prior California Governor Gray Davis.

In 2005, Shriver, the commission chairman, and Clint Eastwood, the commission vice chairman, led a commission panel in its unanimous opposition to a six-lane, toll road that would cut through San Onofre State Beach (north of San Diego) that includes Trestles, a collection of surfing spots – one of Southern California&#x27;s most-cherished. Shriver and Eastwood also supported a 2006 lawsuit to block the toll road and urged the California Coastal Commission to reject the project, which it did in February 2008.

In March 2008, Shriver and Eastwood, whose terms had expired, were not reappointed. The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) asked for a legislative investigation into the decision not to re-appoint Shriver and Eastwood, citing their opposition to the toll-road extension.

Schwarzenegger&#x27;s press release appointing Alice Huffman and Lindy DeKoven to replace Shriver and Eastwood makes no mention of a reason for the commission change.

===Santa Monica City Council===
In November 2004 Shriver ran for, and was elected to, a seat on the Santa Monica City Council. He stated that he decided to run for the seat after a dispute with the city over the height of the hedges at his home. He was one of thirteen candidates for four at-large council seats and received 23,260 votes, or 16.5 percent, of the vote. The other three winning candidates received 16,710, 14,475, and 13,408 votes.

He ran for re-election in 2008, again in a race in which thirteen candidates were running for four open seats. He again received the most votes, although he won by a smaller margin over the candidate receiving the second-most votes. Shriver received 24,298 votes, or 18.56 percent of the vote. The other three winning candidates received 20,232, 19,145, and 17,202 votes. Shriver&#x27;s second term ended November 2012.

In March 2009 Shriver was reported to be considering becoming a candidate in the 2010 California Attorney General election. He did not run, and Kamala Harris, the Democratic candidate, was elected Attorney General.

===Candidacy for Los Angeles County Supervisor===

On January 21, 2014, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; reported that Shriver launched his campaign for Los Angeles County supervisor. Shriver was defeated by former state senator Sheila Kuehl.

==Personal life==
Shriver was romantically linked to Princess Caroline of Monaco in the 1970s. In 1989 he had an affair with married director Sondra Locke, who was 10 years his senior. He was dating Lauren Bessette, older sister of Carolyn Bessette Kennedy, the wife of his cousin John F. Kennedy Jr, at the time of their deaths. Lauren had joined JFK Jr. and Carolyn in his private plane to spend time with Bobby Shriver, along with other friends, on Martha&#x27;s Vineyard that weekend.

He married Malissa Feruzzi on May 7, 2005. They have one daughter, born in 2009. Shriver has a stepdaughter from his wife&#x27;s previous marriage.

==Awards==

In 2007, Shriver received The Advertising Club&#x27;s &quot;Silver Medal Award&quot;—also known as the Advertising Person of the Year Award—for his work with (RED). The annual award recognizes those who have made outstanding contributions to the advertising industry, furthering industry standards, demonstrating creative excellence and responsibility in areas of social concern.

In February 2008, he was honored with amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS&#x27;s Award of Courage for his outstanding contribution to HIV/AIDS research and awareness.

==See also==
*Kennedy family

*DATA
*ONE Campaign
*(Product) Red

==References==
==External links==
*Santa Monica City Council, Santa Monica City Council official website
*Shriver biography on Santa Monica City Council official website
*&quot;#17 President - Product Red&quot;, portal to podcast of February 25, 2007, presentation by Tasmin Smith, (Product) Red&#x27;s President (hosted at USF MBA Podcast&#x27;s website)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3436301" start="0" end="26" title="Bobby Shriver" label="Robert Sargent Shriver III"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="123" end="135" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="136" end="148" title="City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q131124818" start="261" end="268" title="Shriver family" label="Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="273" end="289" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy families"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="331" end="346" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="373" end="390" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="395" end="428" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Edward M. &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="480" end="487" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="502" end="517" title="Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="534" end="556" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="621" end="626" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529079" start="640" end="647" title="Timothy Shriver" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769708" start="661" end="665" title="Mark Kennedy Shriver" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="682" end="689" title="Anthony Shriver" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="719" end="734" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="738" end="760" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560506" start="787" end="813" title="Scroll and Key" label="the Scroll and Key Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="835" end="839" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q470125" start="843" end="859" title="American studies" label="American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="871" end="880" title="cum laude" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="913" end="928" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="936" end="940" title="Juris Doctor" label="J.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q883231" start="1032" end="1039" title="law clerk" label="clerked"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="1055" end="1060" title="Judge" label="Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610345" start="1061" end="1081" title="Stephen R. Reinhardt" label="Stephen R. Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="1089" end="1132" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="1232" end="1247" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360247" start="1312" end="1322" title="Eli Jacobs" label="Eli Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490715" start="1328" end="1342" title="Larry Lucchino" label="Larry Lucchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="1391" end="1408" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q907328" start="1412" end="1438" title="professional baseball" label="professional-baseball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1448" end="1457" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1459" end="1467" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1484" end="1492" title="Lawyer" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="1530" end="1555" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="1556" end="1561" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="1563" end="1567" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="1572" end="1585" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="1706" end="1722" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1858" end="1861" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q110397" start="1959" end="1968" title="True Lies" label="True Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="1997" end="2018" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="2089" end="2091" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="2104" end="2108" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181663" start="2114" end="2118" title="DATA" label="DATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="2152" end="2165" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="2167" end="2194" title="Non-governmental organization" label="non-government organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="2222" end="2237" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="2242" end="2249" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2254" end="2260" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q651936" start="2269" end="2280" title="debt relief" label="debt relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="2289" end="2294" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358589" start="2336" end="2348" title="HIV/AIDS in Africa" label="African AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2374" end="2383" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="2394" end="2408" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q535347" start="2460" end="2472" title="Transparency (behavior)" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133343" start="2595" end="2607" title="ONE Campaign" label="ONE Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="2623" end="2635" title="Nonpartisanism" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="2637" end="2660" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2684" end="2699" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="2733" end="2750" title="aid" label="international-aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414657" start="2900" end="2955" title="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria" label="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962910" start="3093" end="3103" title="The Burial (film)" label="The Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q170587" start="3120" end="3135" title="Tommy Lee Jones" label="Tommy Lee Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="3137" end="3147" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350967" start="3153" end="3168" title="Jurnee Smollett" label="Jurnee Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="3284" end="3306" title="Governor of California" label="Governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="3342" end="3350" title="chairman" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933976" start="3358" end="3405" title="California Department of Parks and Recreation" label="California State Park and Recreation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q356929" start="3510" end="3520" title="Gray Davis" label="Gray Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="3570" end="3584" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="3682" end="3691" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415028" start="3715" end="3737" title="San Onofre State Beach" label="San Onofre State Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3748" end="3757" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749208" start="3773" end="3781" title="Trestles (surfing)" label="Trestles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="3799" end="3806" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="3822" end="3841" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="3908" end="3915" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020331" start="3953" end="3982" title="California Coastal Commission" label="California Coastal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="4126" end="4159" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Natural Resources Defense Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q207184" start="4338" end="4351" title="news release" label="press release"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552976" start="4381" end="4394" title="Lindy DeKoven" label="Lindy DeKoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419788" start="4584" end="4609" title="Santa Monica City Council" label="Santa Monica City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="4710" end="4715" title="hedge" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020249" start="5434" end="5475" title="California Attorney General election, 2010" label="2010 California Attorney General election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="5497" end="5510" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="5651" end="5668" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277788" start="5799" end="5811" title="Sheila Kuehl" label="Sheila Kuehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q233966" start="5867" end="5894" title="Princess Caroline of Monaco" label="Princess Caroline of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q284166" start="5956" end="5968" title="Sondra Locke" label="Sondra Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q449173" start="6046" end="6070" title="Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy" label="Carolyn Bessette Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316064" start="6095" end="6113" title="John F. Kennedy Jr." label="John F. Kennedy Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232326" start="6136" end="6142" title="1999 Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard plane crash" label="deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782571" start="6884" end="6914" title="amfAR" label="amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6975" end="6983" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="7023" end="7037" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181663" start="7040" end="7044" title="DATA" label="DATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133343" start="7046" end="7058" title="ONE Campaign" label="ONE Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q624601" start="7060" end="7073" title="Product Red" label="(Product) Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="7297" end="7304" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q624601" start="7357" end="7370" title="Product Red" label="(Product) Red"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7399" end="7414" title="USF MBA Podcast" label="USF MBA Podcast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481813" wikidata="Q2665075" url="?curid=481813" title="Timing attack">
<text>In cryptography, a timing attack is a side-channel attack in which the attacker attempts to compromise a cryptosystem by analyzing the time taken to execute cryptographic algorithms. Every logical operation in a computer takes time to execute, and the time can differ based on the input; with precise measurements of the time for each operation, an attacker can work backwards to the input. Finding secrets through timing information may be significantly easier than using cryptanalysis of known plaintext, ciphertext pairs. Sometimes timing information is combined with cryptanalysis to increase the rate of information leakage.

Information can leak from a system through measurement of the time it takes to respond to certain queries. How much this information can help an attacker depends on many variables: cryptographic system design, the CPU running the system, the algorithms used, assorted implementation details, timing attack countermeasures, the accuracy of the timing measurements, etc. Timing attacks can be applied to any algorithm that has data-dependent timing variation. Removing timing-dependencies is difficult in some algorithms that use low-level operations that frequently exhibit varied execution time.

Timing attacks are often overlooked in the design phase because they are so dependent on the implementation and can be introduced unintentionally with compiler optimizations. Avoidance of timing attacks involves design of constant-time functions and careful testing of the final executable code.

== Avoidance ==
Many cryptographic algorithms can be implemented (or masked by a proxy) in a way that reduces or eliminates data-dependent timing information, a constant-time algorithm. An implementation of a constant-time algorithm is sometimes called a timing-safe implementation. Consider an implementation in which every call to a subroutine always returns in exactly x seconds, where x is the maximum time it ever takes to execute that routine on every possible authorized input. In such an implementation, the timing of the algorithm is less likely to leak information about the data supplied to that invocation. The downside of this approach is that the time used for all executions becomes that of the worst-case performance of the function.

The data-dependency of timing may stem from one of the following:
* Non-local memory access, as the CPU may cache the data. Software run on a CPU with a data cache will exhibit data-dependent timing variations as a result of memory looks into the cache.
* Conditional jumps. Modern CPUs try to speculatively execute past jumps by guessing. Guessing wrong (not uncommon with essentially random secret data) entails a measurable large delay as the CPU tries to backtrack. This requires writing branch-free code.
* Some &quot;complicated&quot; mathematical operations, depending on the actual CPU hardware:
** Integer division is almost always non-constant time. The CPU uses a microcode loop that uses a different code path when either the divisor or the dividend is small.
** CPUs without a barrel shifter runs shifts and rotations in a loop, one position at a time. As a result, the amount to shift must not be secret.
** Older CPUs run multiplications in a way similar to division.

==Limitations==
Time attacks can also be performed remotely over a network. Observing delays in a system is often influenced by random perturbations, which become even more significant when the observation occurs through a network. In most cases, time attacks require the attacker to have knowledge of the implementation details. However, such attacks can also be leveraged to identify the algorithms in use and facilitate reverse engineering.

== Examples ==

The execution time for the square-and-multiply algorithm used in modular exponentiation depends linearly on the number of &#x27;1&#x27; bits in the key. While the number of &#x27;1&#x27; bits alone is not nearly enough information to make finding the key easy, repeated executions with the same key and different inputs can be used to perform statistical correlation analysis of timing information to recover the key completely, even by a passive attacker. Observed timing measurements often include noise (from such sources as network latency, or disk drive access differences from access to access, and the error correction techniques used to recover from transmission errors). Nevertheless, timing attacks are practical against a number of encryption algorithms, including RSA, ElGamal, and the Digital Signature Algorithm.

In 2003, Boneh and Brumley demonstrated a practical network-based timing attack on SSL-enabled web servers, based on a different vulnerability having to do with the use of RSA with Chinese remainder theorem optimizations. The actual network distance was small in their experiments, but the attack successfully recovered a server private key in a matter of hours. This demonstration led to the widespread deployment and use of blinding techniques in SSL implementations. In this context, blinding is intended to remove correlations between key and encryption time.

Some versions of Unix use a relatively expensive implementation of the &quot;crypt&quot; library function for hashing an 8-character password into an 11-character string. On older hardware, this computation took a deliberately and measurably long time: as much as two or three seconds in some cases. The &quot;login&quot; program in early versions of Unix executed the crypt function only when the login name was recognized by the system. This leaked information through timing about the validity of the login name, even when the password was incorrect. An attacker could exploit such leaks by first applying brute-force to produce a list of login names known to be valid, then attempt to gain access by combining only these names with a large set of passwords known to be frequently used. Without any information on the validity of login names the time needed to execute such an approach would increase by orders of magnitude, effectively rendering it useless. Later versions of Unix have fixed this leak by always executing the crypt function, regardless of login name validity.

Two otherwise securely isolated processes running on a single system with either cache memory or virtual memory can communicate by deliberately causing page faults and/or cache misses in one process, then monitoring the resulting changes in access times from the other. Likewise, if an application is trusted, but its paging/caching is affected by branching logic, it may be possible for a second application to determine the values of the data compared to the branch condition by monitoring access time changes; in extreme examples, this can allow recovery of cryptographic key bits.

The 2017 Meltdown and Spectre attacks which forced CPU manufacturers (including Intel, AMD, ARM, and IBM) to redesign their CPUs both rely on timing attacks. As of early 2018, almost every computer system in the world is affected by Spectre.

Timing attacks are difficult to prevent and can often be used to extend other attacks. For example, in 2018, an old attack on RSA was rediscovered in a timing side-channel variant, two decades after the original bug.

=== Algorithm ===

The following C code demonstrates a typical insecure string comparison which stops testing as soon as a character doesn&#x27;t match. For example, when comparing &quot;ABCDE&quot; with &quot;ABxDE&quot; it will return after 3 loop iterations:
bool insecureStringCompare(const void *a, const void *b, size_t length) {
 const char *ca = a, *cb = b;
 for (size_t i = 0; i &lt; length; i++)
 if (ca[i] != cb[i])
 return false;
 return true;


By comparison, the following version runs in constant-time by testing all characters and using a bitwise operation to accumulate the result:

bool constantTimeStringCompare(const void *a, const void *b, size_t length) {
 const char *ca = a, *cb = b;
 bool result = true;
 for (size_t i = 0; i &lt; length; i++)
 result &amp;= ca[i] == cb[i];
 return result;


In the world of C library functions, the first function is analogous to , while the latter is analogous to NetBSD&#x27;s or OpenBSD&#x27;s and . On other systems, the comparison function from cryptographic libraries like OpenSSL and libsodium can be used.

== Notes ==
Timing attacks are easier to mount if the adversary knows the internals of the hardware implementation, and even more so, the cryptographic system in use. Since cryptographic security should never depend on the obscurity of either (see security through obscurity, specifically both Shannon&#x27;s Maxim and Kerckhoffs&#x27;s principle), resistance to timing attacks should not either. If nothing else, an exemplar can be purchased and reverse engineered. Timing attacks and other side-channel attacks may also be useful in identifying, or possibly reverse-engineering, a cryptographic algorithm used by some device.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Paul C. Kocher. Timing Attacks on Implementations of Diffie-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and Other Systems. CRYPTO 1996: 104–113
*   Describes dudect, a simple program that times a piece of code on different data.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665075" start="19" end="32" title="Timing attack" label="timing attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267081" start="38" end="57" title="side-channel attack" label="side-channel attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q976521" start="105" end="117" title="cryptosystem" label="cryptosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="473" end="486" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325106" start="1379" end="1401" title="compiler optimizations" label="compiler optimizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q813911" start="2532" end="2548" title="Conditional jump" label="Conditional jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164465" start="2570" end="2591" title="Speculative execution" label="speculatively execute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2768" end="2784" title="Branch (computer science)#Branch-free code" label="branch-free code"/>
<link wikidata="Q808850" start="3066" end="3080" title="barrel shifter" label="barrel shifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864127" start="3748" end="3777" title="square-and-multiply algorithm" label="square-and-multiply algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="3786" end="3808" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="4330" end="4346" title="error correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="4497" end="4500" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162410" start="4502" end="4509" title="ElGamal encryption" label="ElGamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224829" start="4519" end="4546" title="Digital Signature Algorithm" label="Digital Signature Algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896470" start="4558" end="4563" title="Dan Boneh" label="Boneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231847" start="4568" end="4575" title="David Brumley" label="Brumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4632" end="4635" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="4730" end="4755" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926699" start="4975" end="4983" title="Blinding (cryptography)" label="blinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="5131" end="5135" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="5723" end="5734" title="Brute-force attack" label="brute-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="6277" end="6289" title="cache memory" label="cache memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="6293" end="6307" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928607" start="6348" end="6358" title="page fault" label="page fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="6367" end="6377" title="cache miss" label="cache miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036859" start="6791" end="6799" title="Meltdown (security vulnerability)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q47037422" start="6804" end="6811" title="Spectre (security vulnerability)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="7276" end="7277" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="7798" end="7815" title="bitwise operation" label="bitwise operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="8282" end="8289" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978209" start="8294" end="8303" title="libsodium" label="libsodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133735" start="8566" end="8592" title="security through obscurity" label="security through obscurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331187" start="8637" end="8664" title="Kerckhoffs&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Kerckhoffs&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481814" wikidata="Q1071196" url="?curid=481814" title="Leased line">
<text>A leased line is a private telecommunications circuit between two or more locations provided according to a commercial contract. It is sometimes also known as a private circuit, and as a data line in the UK. Typically, leased lines are used by businesses to connect geographically distant offices.

Unlike traditional telephone lines in the public switched telephone network (PSTN) leased lines are generally not switched circuits, and therefore do not have an associated telephone number. Each side of the line is permanently connected, always active and dedicated to the other. Leased lines can be used for telephone, Internet, or other data communication services. Some are ringdown services, and some connect to a private branch exchange (PBX) or network router.

The primary factors affecting the recurring lease fees are the distance between end stations and the bandwidth of the circuit. Since the connection does not carry third-party communications, the carrier can assure a specified level of quality.

An &quot;Internet leased line&quot; is a premium Internet connectivity product, normally delivered over fiber, which provides uncontended, symmetrical bandwidth with full-duplex traffic. It is also known as an &quot;Ethernet leased line&quot;, dedicated line, &quot;data circuit&quot; or private line.
==History==
Leased line services (or private line services) became digital in the 1970s with the conversion of the Bell backbone network from analog to digital circuits. This allowed AT&amp;T to offer Dataphone Digital Services (later re-branded digital data services) that started the deployment of ISDN and T1 lines to customer premises to connect.

Leased lines were used to connect mainframe computers with terminals and remote sites, via IBM&#x27;s Systems Network Architecture (created in 1974) or DEC&#x27;s DECnet (created in 1975).

With the extension of digital services in the 1980s, leased lines were used to connect customer premises to Frame Relay or ATM networks. Access data rates increased from the original T1 option with maximum transmission speed of 1.544 Mbit/s up to T3 circuits.

In the 1990s, with the advances of the Internet, leased lines were also used to connect customer premises to ISP point of presence whilst the following decade saw a convergence of the aforementioned services (frame relay, ATM, Internet for businesses) with the MPLS integrated offerings.

Access data rates also evolved dramatically to speeds of up to 10 Gbit/s in the early 21st century with the Internet boom and increased offering in long-haul optical networks or metropolitan area networks.

==Applications==
Leased lines are used to build up private networks, private telephone networks (by interconnecting PBXs) or access the internet or a partner network (extranet).

Here is a review of the leased-line applications in network designs over time:

===Site to site data connectivity===
Terminating a leased line with two routers can extend network capabilities across sites. Leased lines were first used in the 1970s by enterprise with proprietary protocols such as IBM System Network Architecture and Digital Equipment DECnet, and with TCP/IP in University and Research networks before the Internet became widely available. Note that other Layer 3 protocols were used such as Novell IPX on enterprise networks until TCP/IP became ubiquitous in the 2000s. Today, point to point data circuits are typically provisioned as either TDM, Ethernet, or Layer 3 MPLS.

===Site to site PBX connectivity===
Terminating a leased line with two PBX allowed customers to by-pass PSTN for inter-site telephony. This allowed the customers to manage their own dial plan (and to use short extensions for internal telephone number) as well as to make significant savings if enough voice traffic was carried across the line (especially when the savings on the telephone bill exceeded the fixed cost of the leased line).

===Site to network connectivity===
As demand grew on data network telcos started to build more advanced networks using packet switching on top of their infrastructure. Thus, a number of telecommunication companies added ATM, Frame-relay or ISDN offerings to their services portfolio. Leased lines were used to connect the customer site to the telco network access point.

===International private leased circuit===
An international private leased circuit (IPLC) functions as a point-to-point private line. 
IPLCs are usually time-division multiplexing (TDM) circuits that utilize the same circuit amongst many customers. The nature of TDM requires the use of a CSU/DSU and a router. Usually the router will include the CSU/DSU.

Then came the Internet (in the mid-1990s) and since then the most common application for leased line is to connect a customer to its ISP point of presence. With the changes that the Internet brought in the networking world other technologies were developed to propose alternatives to frame-relay or ATM networks such as VPNs (hardware and software) and MPLS networks (that are in effect an upgrade to TCP/IP of existing ATM/frame-relay infrastructures).

==Availability==

===In the United Kingdom===
In the UK, leased lines are available at speeds from 64 kbit/s increasing in 64 kbit/s increments to 2.048 Mbit/s over a channelised E1 tail circuit and at speeds between 2.048 Mbit/s to 34.368 Mbit/s via channelised E3 tail circuits. The NTE will terminate the circuit and provide the requested presentation most frequently X.21 however higher speed interfaces are available such as G.703 or 10BASE-T. Some ISPs however use the term more loosely, defining a leased line as “any dedicated bandwidth service delivered over a leased fibre connection&quot;.

As of March 2018, Leased Line services are most commonly available in the region of 100 Mbit/s to 1 Gbit/s. In large cities, for example, London, speeds of 10 Gbit/s are attainable.

===In the United States===
In the U.S., low-speed leased lines (56 kbit/s and below) are usually provided using analog modems. Higher-speed leased lines are usually presented using FT1 (Fractional T1): a T1 bearer circuit with 1 to 24, 56k or 64k timeslots. Customers typically manage their own network termination equipment, which include a Channel Service Unit and Data Service Unit (CSU/DSU).

===In Hong Kong===
In Hong Kong, leased lines are usually available at speeds of 64k, 128k, 256k, 512k, T1 (channelized or not) or E1 (less common). Whatever the speed, telcos usually provide the CSU/DSU and present to the customer on V.35 interface.

Fibre circuits are slowly replacing the traditional circuits and are available at nearly any bandwidth.

===In India===
In India, leased lines are available at speeds of 64 kbit/s, 128 kbit/s, 256 kbit/s, 512 kbit/s, 1 Mbit/s, 2 Mbit/s, 4 Mbit/s, 8 Mbit/s, 1000 Mbit/s T1(1.544 Mbit/s) or E1(2.048 Mbit/s) and up to 622 Mbit/s. Customers are connected either through OFC, telephone lines, ADSL, or through Wi-Fi. Customers would have to manage their own network termination equipment, namely the channel service unit and data service unit.

===In Italy===
In Italy, leased lines are available at speeds of 64 kbit/s (terminated by DCE2 or DCE2plus modem) or multiple of 64 kbit/s from 128 kbit/s up to framed or unframed E1 (DCE3 modem) in digital form (PDH service, known as CDN, &quot;Circuito Diretto Numerico&quot;). Local telephone companies also may provide CDA (&quot;Circuito Diretto Analogico&quot;), that are plain copper dry pair between two buildings, without any line termination: in the past (pre-2002) a full analog base band was provided, giving an option to customer to deploy xDSL technology between sites: nowadays everything is limited at 4 kHz of bearer channel, so the service is just a POTS connection without any setup channel.

For many purposes, leased lines are gradually being replaced by DSL and metro Ethernet.

==Leased line alternatives==
Leased lines are more expensive than alternative connectivity services including (ADSL, SDSL, etc.) because they are reserved exclusively to the leaseholder. Some internet service providers have therefore developed alternative products that aim to deliver leased-line type services (carrier Ethernet-based, zero contention, guaranteed availability), with more moderate bandwidth, over the standard UK national broadband network. While a leased line is full-duplex, most leased line alternatives provide only half-duplex or in many cases asymmetrical service.

==See also==
*Circuit ID
*Dark fibre
*Dry loop
*Tie line (telephony)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="2" end="13" title="Leased line" label="leased line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695847" start="27" end="53" title="telecommunications circuit" label="telecommunications circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="161" end="176" title="Leased line" label="private circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="187" end="196" title="Leased line" label="data line"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="341" end="374" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="472" end="488" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="609" end="618" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="620" end="628" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="639" end="657" title="data communication" label="data communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334841" start="677" end="685" title="ringdown" label="ringdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="718" end="741" title="private branch exchange" label="private branch exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="751" end="765" title="router (computing)" label="network router"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375892" start="848" end="859" title="end station" label="end station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="869" end="878" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q869830" start="984" end="1010" title="Service-level agreement" label="specified level of quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330575" start="1257" end="1271" title="dedicated line" label="dedicated line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246218" start="1301" end="1313" title="private line" label="private line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246218" start="1352" end="1364" title="private line" label="private line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142907" start="1435" end="1451" title="backbone network" label="backbone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="1615" end="1619" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180989" start="1624" end="1626" title="Digital Signal 1" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="1701" end="1719" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1758" end="1761" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503167" start="1769" end="1797" title="Systems Network Architecture" label="Systems Network Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="1819" end="1822" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152931" start="1830" end="1836" title="DECnet" label="DECnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q242506" start="1965" end="1976" title="Frame Relay" label="Frame Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="1980" end="1983" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757981" start="2227" end="2248" title="ISP point of presence" label="ISP point of presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q677023" start="2379" end="2383" title="MPLS" label="MPLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="2515" end="2528" title="Internet boom" label="Internet boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q182129" start="2585" end="2610" title="metropolitan area network" label="metropolitan area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="2730" end="2733" title="private branch exchange" label="PBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q373889" start="2781" end="2789" title="extranet" label="extranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19725982" start="2845" end="2859" title="network design" label="network design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503167" start="3094" end="3121" title="System Network Architecture" label="System Network Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="3161" end="3167" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q208074" start="3265" end="3272" title="Network Layer" label="Layer 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q901831" start="3452" end="3455" title="Time-Division Multiplexing" label="TDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350316" start="3667" end="3676" title="dial plan" label="dial plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="3991" end="3997" title="Telephone company" label="telcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="4044" end="4060" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q901831" start="4450" end="4476" title="time-division multiplexing" label="time-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062282" start="4586" end="4593" title="CSU/DSU" label="CSU/DSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="4974" end="4977" title="VPN" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696083" start="5162" end="5164" title="telecommunications in the United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327982" start="5288" end="5290" title="E-carrier" label="E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327982" start="5372" end="5374" title="E-carrier" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391505" start="5394" end="5397" title="network termination" label="NTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424171" start="5480" end="5484" title="X.21" label="X.21"/>
<link wikidata="Q651113" start="5539" end="5544" title="G.703" label="G.703"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="5548" end="5556" title="10BASE-T" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154221" start="5928" end="5932" title="Communications in the United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q2180989" start="6098" end="6100" title="Digital Signal 1" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q878344" start="6141" end="6150" title="Time-division multiple access" label="timeslots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062282" start="6280" end="6287" title="CSU/DSU" label="CSU/DSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454027" start="6313" end="6322" title="communications in Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072521" start="6399" end="6410" title="channelization (telecommunications)" label="channelized"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6422" end="6424" title="E-carrier#E1" label="E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624253" start="6526" end="6530" title="V.35 (recommendation)" label="V.35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668014" start="6666" end="6671" title="Communications in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="6910" end="6913" title="Fiber-optic cable" label="OFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="6915" end="6930" title="telephone lines" label="telephone lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="6932" end="6936" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="6949" end="6954" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036044" start="7039" end="7059" title="channel service unit" label="channel service unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227349" start="7064" end="7081" title="data service unit" label="data service unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101148" start="7102" end="7107" title="Communications in Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="7370" end="7389" title="telephone company" label="telephone companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309596" start="7475" end="7483" title="dry pair" label="dry pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="7752" end="7756" title="plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="7860" end="7863" title="DSL" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050434" start="7868" end="7882" title="metro Ethernet" label="metro Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="7996" end="8000" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079349" start="8002" end="8006" title="Symmetric digital subscriber line" label="SDSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="8059" end="8070" title="leaseholder" label="leaseholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046350" start="8197" end="8213" title="carrier Ethernet" label="carrier Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="8366" end="8377" title="full-duplex" label="full-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="8422" end="8433" title="half-duplex" label="half-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121583" start="8488" end="8498" title="Circuit ID" label="Circuit ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878571" start="8500" end="8510" title="Dark fibre" label="Dark fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309596" start="8512" end="8520" title="Dry loop" label="Dry loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800957" start="8522" end="8542" title="Tie line (telephony)" label="Tie line (telephony)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481816" wikidata="Q5457780" url="?curid=481816" title="Flat River (Michigan)">
<text>The Flat River (Ottawa: &quot;Quabahquasha&quot;, &quot;Winding Stream&quot;) is a tributary of the Grand River in the western part of the U.S. state of Michigan. It rises as the outflow of First Lake, the last in a chain of geographically close, connected lakes known as Six Lakes in Belvidere Township, west of Edmore in Montcalm County. It flows mostly south and slightly west through Montcalm County, Ionia County, and Kent County, flowing into the Grand River in Lowell. Other cities it flows through along the way include Greenville and Belding.

The river was an important water route and fishing source for the Grand River Band of Ottawa who lived along it in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Two historic covered bridges cross the river. One, the Fallasburg Bridge, in Vergennes Township, Kent County is in Fallasburg County Park a few miles north of Lowell. The other, Whites Bridge is a few miles to the northeast in adjacent northwest Keene Township, Ionia County, near Smyrna. On July 7, 2013, an arson fire destroyed White&#x27;s Bridge. Fund-raising efforts are underway in attempt to have the bridge rebuilt. At the time of its destruction, it was the oldest covered bridge of its kind in Michigan.

There are 5 dams along the river: Greenville, Belding, Whites Bridge, Burroughs and Lowell.

It is the river named in the song &quot;Sad Ballad of Jack Haggerty&quot;, sometimes known as &quot;Flat River Girl.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Sad Ballad of Jack Haggerty&quot; Lyrics </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5457780" start="4" end="14" title="Flat River (Michigan)" label="Flat River"/>
<link wikidata="Q133678" start="16" end="22" title="Ottawa dialect" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457780" start="24" end="49" title="Flat River (Michigan)" label="&amp;quot;Quabahquasha&amp;quot;,"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="83" end="92" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542859" start="100" end="111" title="Grand River (Michigan)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="139" end="149" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="153" end="161" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884913" start="285" end="303" title="Belvidere Township, Michigan" label="Belvidere Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228001" start="313" end="319" title="Edmore, Michigan" label="Edmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82603" start="323" end="338" title="Montcalm County, Michigan" label="Montcalm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q94663" start="405" end="417" title="Ionia County, Michigan" label="Ionia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q82499" start="423" end="434" title="Kent County, Michigan" label="Kent County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771152" start="468" end="474" title="Lowell, Michigan" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011822" start="528" end="538" title="Greenville, Michigan" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150417" start="543" end="550" title="Belding, Michigan" label="Belding"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="639" end="645" title="Odawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825472" start="711" end="725" title="covered bridge" label="covered bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394523" start="753" end="770" title="Fallasburg Bridge" label="Fallasburg Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921266" start="775" end="793" title="Vergennes Township, Michigan" label="Vergennes Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996212" start="876" end="889" title="Whites Bridge" label="Whites Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382906" start="944" end="958" title="Keene Township, Michigan" label="Keene Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q518819" start="979" end="985" title="Smyrna, Michigan" label="Smyrna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481817" wikidata="Q3529079" url="?curid=481817" title="Timothy Shriver">
<text>Timothy Perry Shriver (born August 29, 1959) is an American disability rights activist, film producer, and former educator who has been Chairman of Special Olympics since 1996 and is the founder of UNITE. He is a member of the prominent Shriver and Kennedy families, as the third child of Eunice Kennedy Shriver (who founded the Special Olympics), and Sargent Shriver, who helped found the Peace Corps.

==Early life and education==
Timothy Shriver was born in Boston, Massachusetts to Sargent Shriver, a former United States Ambassador to France and the Democratic Party&#x27;s vice-presidential candidate in 1972, and Eunice Kennedy Shriver, the founder of Special Olympics. He was raised as a Catholic along with his siblings, Bobby Shriver, Maria Shriver, Mark Shriver, and Anthony Shriver. He is a member of the Kennedy Family through his mother, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, a younger sister of President John F. Kennedy. He is also a part of the prominent Shriver family since his ancestor David Shriver was a delegate of Frederick County, Maryland, who signed the Maryland Constitution and Bill of Rights at Maryland&#x27;s Constitutional Convention of 1776.

Shriver graduated from St. Albans School. He received his B.A. from Yale University in 1981, his M.A. in religion and religious education from The Catholic University of America in 1988, and his Ph.D. in education from the University of Connecticut in 1996. He participated in the 1997 class of the Global Leaders for Tomorrow program hosted by the World Economic Forum.

==Career==
Shriver spent 15 years in public education—some in special education—as a teacher. He served as a high school teacher in the New Haven, Connecticut public school system, and as a counselor and teacher in the University of Connecticut branch of the Upward Bound program for disadvantaged youth. He became a Fellow at the School Development Program at the Yale Child Study Center.

He was instrumental in establishing the Social Development Project at the public schools in New Haven, Connecticut and also established the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

He was the executive producer on &quot;The Ringer&quot;, a co-producer on &quot;Amistad&quot; and the Disney movie &quot;The Loretta Claiborne Story&quot;, and has served as a producer or co-producer on shows for the American Broadcasting Company, the National Broadcasting Corporation, and the TNT cable channel. He is currently a board member of Malaria No More, a New York-based nonprofit that was launched at the 2006 White House Summit with the goal of ending all deaths caused by malaria.

He is currently the Chairman of Special Olympics. Timothy and his brother Anthony Shriver have recently aligned the Special Olympics and Best Buddies (founded by Anthony Shriver), to create the Eunice Kennedy Shriver Challenge event, aimed to encourage greater acceptance and inclusion for those with intellectual and developmental disabilities, a condition that affected their late aunt Rosemary Kennedy. Shriver has served on the Board of Directors of The Future Project, a national initiative to empower young people to discover their passion and change the world, since its founding. And he has written a memoir &quot;Fully Alive: Discovering What Matters Most&quot;, published by Farrar, Straus and Giroux (2014).

In recent years, Shriver stepped down as CEO from the Special Olympics to launch UNITE, a national initiative for bringing Americans across divides together in common purpose to address universal challenges that can only be solved together.

===Activism===
As chairman of Special Olympics, Timothy Shriver has campaigned against mocking of and discrimination against participants in Special Olympics. He has specifically argued against use of what he calls &quot;the R word,&quot; meaning &quot;retarded&quot;, stating that the word, &quot;retard&quot;, is very offensive and people with intellectual disabilities should be respected and treated like all other people.

In 2008, Shriver and supporters called for a boycott of the movie &quot;Tropic Thunder&quot;, claiming that it mocks people with mental disabilities. The movie is written, produced by, and stars Ben Stiller. In a commentary for CNN, Shriver wrote in part,

==&quot;Fully Alive: Discovering What Matters Most&quot;==
In November 2014, Shriver released a book called &quot;Fully Alive: Discovering What Matters Most&quot;.

==Personal life==
Shriver married Linda Potter (born January 13, 1956) on May 31, 1986 at Dahlgren Chapel on the Georgetown University campus. They reside in Chevy Chase, Maryland and have five children: Sophia Rose Shriver (born 1987); Timothy Perry Shriver, Jr. (born 1988); Samuel Kennedy Shriver (born 1992); Kathleen Francis Shriver (born 1994); Caroline Elizabeth Shriver (born 1997).

Linda Potter is the great-granddaughter of Archibald D. Russell, a great-great-granddaughter of Percy Rivington Pyne I, and a great-great-great-granddaughter of Dr. James Russell, a former president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and Moses Taylor, who was one of the greatest railroad, iron, and coal company financiers and was president of National City Bank for 27 years. She is also a direct descendant of the merchant Russell Sturgis (1750-1826), Elizabeth (née Perkins) Sturgis (a sister of merchant Thomas Handasyd Perkins), Walter Rutherfurd (1723–1804) and Catherine Alexander (1727–1801), daughter of James Alexander and Mary Spratt Provoost. Her sister Isabel Tweedy Potter is married to Richard S. Aldrich Jr, a grandson of Richard S. Aldrich, who served in Congress from 1923 to 1933, a great-grandson of Nelson W. Aldrich, who served as a Senator from Rhode Island and a great-nephew of Abby Aldrich, who became the wife of financier and philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr.

==Awards and honors==
*2024 Honorary degree from Grand Valley State University
*2022 Honorary degree from Georgetown University
*2019 Honorary degree from Fordham University
*2012 Honorary degree from Villanova University
*2011 Honorary degree from La Salle University
* Honorary degree from University of Connecticut
* Honorary degree from Niagara University
* Honorary degree from Albertus Magnus College
* The Medal of the City of Athens, Greece
* 1995 Connecticut Citizen of the Year.
* Honorary degree from Loyola University
* Honorary degree from New England College
* The Order de Manuel Amador Guerrera of the Republic of Panama
* Presidential Medallion from University of Illinois
* Honorary degree from Springfield College
*Walter Camp 2015 &quot;Distinguished American&quot;
*Honorary degree from Saint Peter&#x27;s University

==Board membership==
*American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
*Board of the Education Commission of the States&#x27; Compact for Learning and Citizenship
*Chairman, Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
*Council on Foreign Relations
*The Edison Schools Incorporated
*The Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
*Board of Advisors for HealthCorps
*Chairman UNESCO at IT Tralee (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization)

==See also==

Siblings of Timothy Shriver:

* Maria Owings Shriver (b. 1955)
* Mark Kennedy Shriver (b. 1964)
* Robert Sargent Shriver III (b. 1954)
* Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver (b. 1965)

== Further reading ==

==References==
==External links==
*Religion from the Heart: Re-thinking, Re-feeling and Reviving Faith By: Timothy Shriver
*Full Biography from the Special Olympics Website
*The Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
*Malaria No More
*&quot;Timothy &amp; Anthony Shriver — Eunice’s Legacy&quot;. &quot;ABILITY&quot; Magazine. Aug/Sept 2010.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3529079" start="0" end="21" title="Timothy Shriver" label="Timothy Perry Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="148" end="164" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131124818" start="237" end="244" title="Shriver family" label="Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="249" end="265" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy families"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="289" end="311" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="352" end="367" title="Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="390" end="401" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="461" end="482" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="486" end="501" title="Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="512" end="546" title="United States Ambassador to France" label="United States Ambassador to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="555" end="578" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="620" end="642" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="659" end="675" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="696" end="704" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436301" start="730" end="743" title="Bobby Shriver" label="Bobby Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="745" end="758" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769708" start="760" end="772" title="Mark Kennedy Shriver" label="Mark Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="778" end="793" title="Anthony Shriver" label="Anthony Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="817" end="831" title="Kennedy Family" label="Kennedy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="852" end="874" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="906" end="921" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131124818" start="958" end="972" title="Shriver family" label="Shriver family"/>
<link wikidata="Q108928251" start="992" end="1005" title="David Shriver" label="David Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586750" start="1186" end="1203" title="St. Albans School (Washington, D.C.)" label="St. Albans School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1231" end="1246" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1260" end="1264" title="Master of Arts" label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1412471" start="1281" end="1300" title="religious education" label="religious education"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="1306" end="1340" title="The Catholic University of America" label="The Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="1386" end="1411" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624519" start="1462" end="1489" title="Young Global Leaders" label="Global Leaders for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="1512" end="1532" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="1671" end="1693" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="1754" end="1779" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899477" start="1794" end="1806" title="Upward Bound" label="Upward Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="2018" end="2040" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="2131" end="2164" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156530" start="2206" end="2216" title="The Ringer (2005 film)" label="The Ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q472361" start="2247" end="2254" title="Amistad (1997 film)" label="Amistad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="2269" end="2275" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2384" end="2413" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2419" end="2452" title="NBC" label="National Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="2462" end="2465" title="Turner Network Television" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741346" start="2515" end="2530" title="Malaria No More" label="Malaria No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="2589" end="2600" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="2737" end="2752" title="Anthony Shriver" label="Anthony Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="2779" end="2795" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q830275" start="2800" end="2812" title="Best Buddies" label="Best Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="2825" end="2840" title="Anthony Shriver" label="Anthony Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q265595" start="3051" end="3067" title="Rosemary Kennedy" label="Rosemary Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3117" end="3135" title="The Future Project" label="The Future Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="3348" end="3373" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus and Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="3655" end="3671" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q571571" start="3712" end="3719" title="Insult" label="mocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="3878" end="3886" title="mental retardation" label="retarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="4098" end="4105" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q380981" start="4125" end="4139" title="Tropic Thunder" label="Tropic Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="4281" end="4284" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807293" start="4565" end="4580" title="Dahlgren Chapel of the Sacred Heart" label="Dahlgren Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="4588" end="4609" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q754478" start="4633" end="4654" title="Chevy Chase, Maryland" label="Chevy Chase, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q69427559" start="4910" end="4930" title="Archibald D. Russell" label="Archibald D. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167530" start="4963" end="4985" title="Percy Rivington Pyne I" label="Percy Rivington Pyne I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18671637" start="5032" end="5045" title="James Russell (surgeon)" label="James Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="5073" end="5099" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035284" start="5104" end="5116" title="Moses Taylor" label="Moses Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="5211" end="5229" title="Citibank" label="National City Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381806" start="5292" end="5307" title="Russell Sturgis (1750–1826)" label="Russell Sturgis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505091" start="5375" end="5398" title="Thomas Handasyd Perkins" label="Thomas Handasyd Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q66029325" start="5401" end="5418" title="Walter Rutherfurd" label="Walter Rutherfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128503" start="5480" end="5495" title="James Alexander (lawyer)" label="James Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198820" start="5500" end="5520" title="Mary Alexander" label="Mary Spratt Provoost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464195" start="5605" end="5623" title="Richard S. Aldrich" label="Richard S. Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q927573" start="5687" end="5704" title="Nelson W. Aldrich" label="Nelson W. Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="5735" end="5747" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q306870" start="5770" end="5782" title="Abby Aldrich Rockefeller" label="Abby Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="5836" end="5859" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1472315" start="5910" end="5939" title="Grand Valley State University" label="Grand Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="5967" end="5988" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q130965" start="6016" end="6034" title="Fordham University" label="Fordham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="6062" end="6082" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106542" start="6110" end="6129" title="La Salle University" label="La Salle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="6153" end="6178" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551657" start="6202" end="6220" title="Niagara University" label="Niagara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815354" start="6244" end="6267" title="Albertus Magnus College" label="Albertus Magnus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="6295" end="6301" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="6317" end="6328" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="6373" end="6390" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705363" start="6414" end="6433" title="New England College" label="New England College"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="6491" end="6497" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="6528" end="6550" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443737" start="6669" end="6698" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s University" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="6953" end="6981" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="7072" end="7115" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="7295" end="7315" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria Owings Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769708" start="7328" end="7348" title="Mark Kennedy Shriver" label="Mark Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436301" start="7361" end="7387" title="Robert Sargent Shriver III" label="Robert Sargent Shriver III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="7400" end="7428" title="Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver" label="Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481818" wikidata="Q6769708" url="?curid=481818" title="Mark Kennedy Shriver">
<text>Mark Kennedy Shriver (born February 17, 1964) is an American Democratic politician who served as a member of the Maryland House of Delegates for two consecutive terms, from 1995 to 2003.

Since 2014, he has served as President of Save the Children Action Network, where he campaigns to end child mortality. He is also Senior Vice President of U.S. Programs &amp; Advocacy of Save the Children.

==Early life and education==
Shriver was born in Washington, D.C. He is part of the Kennedy political family, since his mother was Eunice Mary Kennedy. He is also a part of the prominent Shriver family since his ancestor David Shriver was a delegate of Frederick County, Maryland, who signed the Maryland Constitution and Bill of Rights at Maryland&#x27;s Constitutional Convention of 1776. His father is Sargent Shriver, the first director of the Peace Corps upon its establishment by President John F. Kennedy on March 1, 1961, a former ambassador to France and the 1972 Democratic vice presidential candidate. His sister, Maria Shriver, is a former journalist and the former First Lady of California (she was married to former Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger until mid-year 2011). His brother, Bobby Shriver, served as a city council member and mayor of Santa Monica, California. 

Shriver attended high school at the Georgetown Preparatory School, in North Bethesda, Maryland, and graduated in 1982. Afterward, he earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree from the College of the Holy Cross in 1986, and a master&#x27;s degree in public administration from Harvard University in 1993.

Shriver&#x27;s godfather is former professional tennis player Donald Dell.

==Career==
From 1989 to 1994, he was a member of the Maryland Juvenile Justice Advisory Council. Starting in 1991, he also served on the board of directors of the Public Justice Center. From 1991 to 1992, he served on the Maryland Governor&#x27;s Task Force on Alternative Sanctions to Incarceration. From 1994 to 1995, he served on the Maryland Governor&#x27;s Commission on Service.

In 1994, he was elected to the Maryland House of Delegates, the lower house of the Maryland state legislature, representing Montgomery County, Maryland, District 15, and was reelected in 1998. He did not seek reelection in 2002 and was succeeded in that post by Brian Feldman.

In addition to serving as a delegate, he worked on the Task Force on the Maryland Prepaid-Tuition Savings Program in 1996, and on the Task Force to Study the Governance, Coordination, and Funding of the University System of Maryland from 1998 to 1999. He was a Founder and Executive Director of The Choice Program, an at-risk youth intervention project of the Shriver Center at University of Maryland, Baltimore County established in 1987. He then served on the Advisory Board on After-School Opportunity Programs from 1999 to 2003. From 2000 to 2001, he served on the Judith P. Hoyer Blue Ribbon Commission on Early Child Care and Education.

In 2002, he ran for U.S. Representative from the 8th Congressional District of Maryland, but was defeated in the Democratic primary by Chris Van Hollen. Van Hollen received 43.5% of the vote to Shriver&#x27;s 40.6%.

Shriver joined Save the Children in 2003, serving as Senior Vice President for U.S. Programs until 2013. In that capacity, he created and oversaw the agency&#x27;s early childhood education, literacy, health, and emergency preparedness and response programs in the United States.

As president of Save the Children Action Network, he is working to build bipartisan political will to increase access to early-childhood education in the United States and to end preventable deaths of mothers and children around the world. Shriver told &quot;The Washington Post&quot; in 2016: &quot;We&#x27;re actually engaged in elections, and we&#x27;re trying to support candidates who are good on [kids&#x27;] issues. And we&#x27;re going to try and defeat those who aren&#x27;t. So we want to be the NRA for kids. We want to be a movement, but we want to have political juice as well.&quot;

In 2021, Shriver became the President of Don Bosco Cristo Rey High School.

==Personal life==
On June 26, 1992, Shriver married Jeanne Ripp (born 1965), territory manager for American Express Travel Related Services. Shriver resides in Bethesda, Maryland, with his wife Jeanne and their three children.

Mark Shriver has written a memoir about his father, &quot;A Good Man: Rediscovering My Father, Sargent Shriver&quot;. In 2013, Shriver won a Christopher Award for the book. In 2016, he wrote a second book, &quot;Pilgrimage: My Search for the Real Pope Francis&quot;.

==Awards and honors==
*Honorary Doctorate, La Roche College, 2016.
*Honorary Doctorate, Seattle University, 2015.
*Honorary Doctorate, Wheelock College, 2013.
*Honorary Doctorate, College of the Holy Cross, 2010.
*Honorary Doctorate, Loyola College in Maryland, 1994.
*Legislative Sponsor Award, Maryland Children&#x27;s Action Network, 1999, 2000, 2001.
*Environmental Leadership Award, Maryland League of Conservation Voters, 1999, 2000, 2001.
*Leadership Award, Maryland Alliance of Boys and Girls Clubs, 2001.
*Award of Excellence, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, 2002.
*Outstanding Legislative Leadership Award, The Arc of Maryland, 2002.
*Father of the Year Award, Mother&#x27;s Day/Father&#x27;s Day Council, 2008.

==References==
==External links==
*Curriculum vitae at Maryland legislature
*Biography at the Trust for Early Education
*Ancestor David Shriver</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6769708" start="0" end="20" title="Mark Kennedy Shriver" label="Mark Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="61" end="71" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165752" start="113" end="140" title="Maryland House of Delegates" label="Maryland House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="444" end="460" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="479" end="503" title="Kennedy political family" label="Kennedy political family"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="526" end="545" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Mary Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131124818" start="582" end="596" title="Shriver family" label="Shriver family"/>
<link wikidata="Q108928251" start="616" end="629" title="David Shriver" label="David Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="648" end="674" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="800" end="815" title="Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="843" end="854" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="948" end="954" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="1020" end="1033" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1087" end="1097" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="1148" end="1169" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436301" start="1205" end="1218" title="Bobby Shriver" label="Bobby Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q771207" start="1329" end="1358" title="Georgetown Preparatory School" label="Georgetown Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q602896" start="1363" end="1377" title="North Bethesda, Maryland" label="North Bethesda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1379" end="1387" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1435" end="1457" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620177" start="1467" end="1492" title="College of the Holy Cross" label="College of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1508" end="1528" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1559" end="1577" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q947757" start="1650" end="1661" title="Donald Dell" label="Donald Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q165752" start="2081" end="2108" title="Maryland House of Delegates" label="Maryland House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="2133" end="2141" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="2142" end="2159" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="2174" end="2201" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963730" start="2312" end="2325" title="Brian Feldman (politician)" label="Brian Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="2531" end="2560" title="University System of Maryland" label="University System of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="2706" end="2746" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2992" end="3011" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q505410" start="3025" end="3047" title="Congressional District" label="Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077819" start="3107" end="3123" title="Chris Van Hollen" label="Chris Van Hollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="3729" end="3748" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292261" start="4109" end="4141" title="Don Bosco Cristo Rey High School" label="Don Bosco Cristo Rey High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="4243" end="4259" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q584451" start="4304" end="4322" title="Bethesda, Maryland" label="Bethesda, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377086" start="4513" end="4530" title="Christopher Award" label="Christopher Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464919" start="4683" end="4699" title="La Roche College" label="La Roche College"/>
<link wikidata="Q615873" start="4728" end="4746" title="Seattle University" label="Seattle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992330" start="4775" end="4791" title="Wheelock College" label="Wheelock College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620177" start="4820" end="4845" title="College of the Holy Cross" label="College of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399470" start="4874" end="4900" title="Loyola College in Maryland" label="Loyola College in Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509032" start="5037" end="5066" title="League of Conservation Voters" label="League of Conservation Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923055" start="5126" end="5146" title="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America" label="Boys and Girls Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460845" start="5176" end="5205" title="Mothers Against Drunk Driving" label="Mothers Against Drunk Driving"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481821" wikidata="Q4773467" url="?curid=481821" title="Anthony Shriver">
<text>Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver (born July 20, 1965) is an American activist for people with intellectual disabilities. In 1989, he founded Best Buddies International, an international organization that helps people with intellectual disabilities to find employment and social opportunities. Through his mother, he is a nephew of World War II casualty Joseph P. Kennedy Jr., President John F. Kennedy, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, and Senator Ted Kennedy. 

==Early life and education==
Anthony Shriver was born in Boston, Massachusetts, to Eunice Kennedy Shriver and Sargent Shriver, Jr. His mother is the founder of Special Olympics and his father is a founding director of the Peace Corps. 

He graduated from the Georgetown Preparatory School in 1984. He then attended Brown University before transferring to Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., from which he graduated in 1988 with a double major in theology and history.

==Career==
Shriver is the founder and chairman of Best Buddies International a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization which he created in 1989. Best Buddies is a nonprofit organization that provides adults and children with intellectual and developmental disabilities social inclusion and job opportunities. He has been able to get the organization to spread throughout the world and it has over 1500 chapters today. Shriver spoke in 2008 about the all-inclusive nature of the program:
&quot;The great thing about Best Buddies is there&#x27;s something for everybody. You can be a volunteer in some shape, form or fashion, whether you&#x27;re volunteering to get your kids involved, whether your son or daughter is involved in their school program, whether you want to be a mentor yourself as an adult, whether you want to get an online Buddy, whether you&#x27;re an employer and want to hire someone with a disability to work in your office—if you&#x27;ve got any sense of motivation and determination and want to give back, there&#x27;s a role for you at Best Buddies, which I think is pretty unique. Even in Special Olympics, for most people, you can be a coach or a spectator, but you&#x27;re not going to run the 50-yard dash. In Best Buddies, you&#x27;re running the 50-yard dash with your Buddy. People get a different level of experience by participating, as opposed to writing a check, though that&#x27;s important, too. But beyond writing checks, we need people to get involved and give their time.&quot;

Best Buddies has grown into a leading nonprofit entity with increasing international reach across six continents and 54 countries worldwide; establishing a global volunteer movement that creates opportunities for one-to-one friendships, integrated employment and leadership development for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities.

In 2017, the Boston Globe uncovered that donations from Best Buddies had been given to Tom Brady&#x27;s personal charity. &quot;Since 2011, while Brady has served as the face of its signature Massachusetts fund-raiser and helped it raise nearly $20 million, Best Buddies has paid $2.75 million to Brady&#x27;s own charitable trust and has pledged to grant the organization an additional $500,000 in 2017--a total of $3.25 million.&quot;. In 2017, Boston Globe journalists were denied access to the annual Hyannis Port Challenge at Harvard university, Best Buddies later apologized for the incident.

In addition, Anthony and his brother Timothy (the chairman of the Special Olympics) have recently aligned Best Buddies and the Special Olympics to create the Eunice Kennedy Shriver Challenge event, aimed to encourage greater acceptance and inclusion for those with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Shriver has also been a director of UniCapital Corp, an investment house, since March 1998. He participated in the inaugural Forum of Young Global Leaders in 2005, hosted by the World Economic Forum in Zermatt, Switzerland.

Shriver is currently on the board of directors of Level Brands.

==Politics==
Shriver - along with most members of the extended Kennedy family - is a part of the Democratic Party. In 2005, he considered running for Governor of Florida in the 2006 election. He was also said to have considered a run for Governor of Florida in the 2010 election.

==Personal life==
Shriver married Alina Mojica on July 2, 1993, in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. Until March 2020, he resided in Miami Beach, Florida, with Alina and their five children: Edward Nunez (Teddy), Eunice Julia Shriver, Francesca Maria Shriver, Carolina Fitzgerald Kennedy Shriver, and John Joseph Sargent Shriver (b. July 1, 2009). Alina and Anthony filed for divorce in November 2018; they sold their shared Miami Beach home in March 2020.

==References==

9. International programs- Best Buddies, https://www.bestbuddies.org/international-programs/

==External links==
* bestbuddies.org, Best Buddies International official website
* Timothy &amp; Anthony Shriver — Eunice&#x27;s Legacy ABILITY Magazine, Aug/Sept 2010
* Profile by Betsy J. Rosenblatt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4773467" start="0" end="28" title="Anthony Shriver" label="Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="90" end="115" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q830275" start="137" end="163" title="Best Buddies International" label="Best Buddies International"/>
<link wikidata="Q505178" start="349" end="370" title="Joseph P. Kennedy Jr." label="Joseph P. Kennedy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="382" end="397" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="407" end="424" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="438" end="449" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="510" end="531" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="536" end="558" title="Eunice Mary Kennedy" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="563" end="578" title="Robert Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q771207" start="712" end="741" title="Georgetown Preparatory School" label="Georgetown Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="768" end="784" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="808" end="829" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="833" end="849" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q830275" start="979" end="1005" title="Best Buddies International" label="Best Buddies International"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="1085" end="1107" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="3453" end="3469" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624519" start="3822" end="3851" title="Forum of Young Global Leaders" label="Forum of Young Global Leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="3875" end="3895" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27494" start="3899" end="3919" title="Zermatt" label="Zermatt, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="3950" end="3968" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3972" end="3984" title="Level Brands" label="Level Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4084" end="4100" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060635" start="4335" end="4362" title="Hyannis Port, Massachusetts" label="Hyannis Port, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="4396" end="4416" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q830275" start="4869" end="4895" title="Best Buddies International" label="Best Buddies International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481822" wikidata="Q437930" url="?curid=481822" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine Old Communal Cemetery">
<text>The [[Neuilly-sur-Seine]] Old Communal Cemetery in the Hauts-de-Seine &quot;département&quot; of France is in the western suburbs of Paris, between Paris and La Défense.

The first is called &quot;cimetière ancien&quot; (Old Cemetery) and is to be found in Neuilly; the second (New Cemetery) is to be found in Nanterre, near La Défense and adjacent to Paris La Défense Arena, but belongs to Neuilly. It is called &quot;cimetière nouveau&quot;.

==Notable interments==

===Old Cemetery===
* Alessandro Anzani (1877–1956), inventor
* Liliane Bettencourt (1922–2017), principal shareholder L&#x27;Oréal
* Henri Betti (1917–2005), composer and pianist
* Louis de Broglie (1892–1987), Nobel Prize Laureate in science
* René Clair (1898–1981), film director
* Pierre Drieu La Rochelle (1893–1945), writer
* Anatole France (1844–1924), novelist
* Pierre Fresnay (1897–1975), actor
* Alexander Glazunov (1865–1936), composer

* André Maurois (1885–1967), writer
* Antonia &quot;La Argentina&quot; Mercé (1890–1936), dancer
* Paul Meurisse (1912–1979), actor
* Pierre Mondy (1925–2012), actor

* Yvonne Printemps (1894–1977), actress and singer
* Pierre Puvis de Chavannes (1824–1898), painter
* Jane Rhodes (1929–2011), operatic soprano
* Alain Robbe-Grillet (1922-2018) author, filmmaker, member of the Académie Française
* Countess Iréne Sampieri (1872–1963), socialite
* Michel Serrault (1928–2007), actor

The cemetery contains one Commonwealth war grave, of a British Red Cross Society officer of World War I.

===New Cemetery===
* Grégoire Aslan (1908–1982), actor
* Wassily Kandinsky (1866–1944), painter

The cemetery contains 33 Commonwealth war graves, of 32 service personnel from World War I and one from World War II, as well as an American Legion memorial bearing the names of 250 Americans.

==References==

==External links==
* &quot;Adapted from the article Neuilly-sur-Seine community cemetery, from Wikinfo, licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q437930" start="4" end="47" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine Old Communal Cemetery" label="[[Neuilly-sur-Seine]] Old Communal Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12543" start="55" end="69" title="Hauts-de-Seine" label="Hauts-de-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="76" end="87" title="département in France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="97" end="103" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="133" end="138" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q987729" start="158" end="168" title="La Défense" label="La Défense"/>
<link wikidata="Q170507" start="310" end="318" title="Nanterre" label="Nanterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860806" start="352" end="374" title="Paris La Défense Arena" label="Paris La Défense Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957753" start="490" end="507" title="Alessandro Anzani" label="Alessandro Anzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q297804" start="532" end="551" title="Liliane Bettencourt" label="Liliane Bettencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156077" start="587" end="599" title="L&amp;#x27;Oréal" label="L&amp;#x27;Oréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130682" start="602" end="613" title="Henri Betti" label="Henri Betti"/>
<link wikidata="Q83331" start="650" end="666" title="Louis de Broglie" label="Louis de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388" start="714" end="724" title="René Clair" label="René Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q325974" start="754" end="778" title="Pierre Drieu La Rochelle" label="Pierre Drieu La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="801" end="815" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q201483" start="840" end="854" title="Pierre Fresnay" label="Pierre Fresnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="876" end="894" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q224029" start="920" end="933" title="André Maurois" label="André Maurois"/>
<link wikidata="Q292658" start="956" end="994" title="La Argentina (dancer)" label="Antonia &amp;quot;La Argentina&amp;quot; Mercé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384411" start="1017" end="1030" title="Paul Meurisse" label="Paul Meurisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q738944" start="1052" end="1064" title="Pierre Mondy" label="Pierre Mondy"/>
<link wikidata="Q449794" start="1087" end="1103" title="Yvonne Printemps" label="Yvonne Printemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q216873" start="1138" end="1163" title="Pierre Puvis de Chavannes" label="Pierre Puvis de Chavannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q511561" start="1187" end="1198" title="Jane Rhodes" label="Jane Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216266" start="1231" end="1250" title="Alain Robbe-Grillet" label="Alain Robbe-Grillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937570" start="1317" end="1340" title="Portrait of Irène Cahen d&amp;#x27;Anvers" label="Countess Iréne Sampieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q318088" start="1366" end="1381" title="Michel Serrault" label="Michel Serrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="1428" end="1450" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth war grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970966" start="1457" end="1482" title="British Red Cross Society" label="British Red Cross Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1494" end="1505" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551529" start="1529" end="1543" title="Grégoire Aslan" label="Grégoire Aslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="1565" end="1582" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Wassily Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="1630" end="1653" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth war graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1709" end="1721" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="1737" end="1752" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871082" start="1910" end="1917" title="Wikinfo" label="Wikinfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22169" start="1938" end="1968" title="GNU Free Documentation License" label="GNU Free Documentation License"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481823" wikidata="Q5473279" url="?curid=481823" title="Forward market">
<text>The forward market is the informal over-the-counter financial market by which contracts for future delivery are entered into. It is mainly used for trading in foreign currencies, where the contracts are used to hedge against foreign exchange risk. Commodities are also traded on forward markets. Examples include agricultural products such as rice, and energy futures, such as oil and natural gas. Transactions on a forward market are typically not standardized, and contracts are customised to the needs of the trading parties. In contrast, standardized forward contracts are called futures contracts and traded on a futures exchange.

==See also==
*Forward exchange market

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5473279" start="4" end="18" title="Forward market" label="forward market"/>
<link wikidata="Q66320" start="35" end="51" title="over-the-counter (finance)" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208697" start="52" end="68" title="financial market" label="financial market"/>
<link wikidata="Q744762" start="78" end="107" title="Forward contract" label="contracts for future delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="148" end="177" title="Foreign exchange market" label="trading in foreign currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q547416" start="211" end="216" title="Hedge (finance)" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542397" start="225" end="246" title="foreign exchange risk" label="foreign exchange risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="248" end="259" title="Commodities" label="Commodities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="353" end="367" title="Energy derivative#Futures contracts" label="energy futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="377" end="380" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="385" end="396" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="584" end="600" title="futures contract" label="futures contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298435" start="618" end="634" title="futures exchange" label="futures exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="651" end="674" title="Forward exchange market" label="Forward exchange market"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481825" wikidata="Q6590234" url="?curid=481825" title="List of covered bridges in Michigan">
<text>This is a partial list of wooden covered bridges in the U.S. state of Michigan. These covered bridges may be listed on the National Register of Historic Places and as Michigan State Historic Sites.

==References==
==External links==

*The Covered Bridges of Michigan
*Michigan&#x27;s Historic Sites Online: Bridge Tour</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6590234" start="18" end="48" title="List of covered bridges in Michigan" label="list of wooden covered bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="70" end="78" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825472" start="86" end="101" title="covered bridges" label="covered bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="123" end="159" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837699" start="167" end="196" title="Michigan State Historic Preservation Office" label="Michigan State Historic Sites"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481828" wikidata="Q415793" url="?curid=481828" title="Pentazocine">
<text>Pentazocine, sold under the brand name Talwin among others, is an analgesic medication used to treat moderate to severe pain. It is believed to work by activating (agonizing) κ-opioid receptors (KOR) and μ-opioid receptors (MOR). As such it is called an opioid as it delivers its effects on pain by interacting with the opioid receptors. It shares many of the side effects of other opioids like constipation, nausea, itching, drowsiness and respiratory depression, but unlike most other opioids it fairly frequently causes hallucinations, nightmares and delusions. It is also, unlike most other opioids, subject to a ceiling effect, which is when at a certain dose (which differs from person to person) no more pain relief is obtained by increasing the dose any further.

Chemically it is classed as a benzomorphan and it comes in two enantiomers, which are molecules that are exact (non-superimposable) mirror images of one another.
It was patented in 1960 and approved for medical use in 1964. Usually, in its oral formulations, it is combined with naloxone so as to prevent people from crushing the tablets, dissolving them in a solvent (like water) and injecting them for a high (as orally administered naloxone produces no opioid-negating effects, whereas intravenous or intramuscular administration does).

==Use==

===Medical===
Pentazocine is used primarily to treat pain, although its analgesic effects are subject to a ceiling effect. It has been discontinued by its corporate sponsor in Australia, although it may be available through the special access scheme.

===Recreational===
In the 1970s, recreational drug users discovered that combining pentazocine with tripelennamine (a first-generation ethylenediamine antihistamine most commonly dispensed under the brand names Pelamine and Pyribenzamine) produced a euphoric sensation. Since tripelennamine tablets are typically blue in color and brand-name Pentazocine is known as Talwin (hence &quot;Ts&quot;), the pentazocine/tripelennamine combination acquired the slang name &quot;Ts and blues&quot;.
After health-care professionals and drug-enforcement officials became aware of this scenario, the mu opioid receptor antagonist naloxone was added to oral preparations containing pentazocine to prevent perceived &quot;misuse&quot; via injection, and the reported incidence of its recreational use has declined precipitously since.

===Research===
In an open-label, add-on, single-day, acute-dose small clinical study, pentazocine was found to rapidly and substantially reduce symptoms of mania in individuals with bipolar disorder that were in the manic phase of the condition. It was postulated that the efficacy observed was due to κ-opioid receptor activation-mediated amelioration of hyperdopaminergia in the reward pathways. Minimal sedation and no side effects including psychotomimetic effects or worsening of psychosis were observed at the dose administered.

==Adverse effects==

Side effects are similar to those of morphine, but pentazocine, due to its action at the kappa opioid receptor is more likely to invoke psychotomimetic effects. High dose may cause high blood pressure or high heart rate. It may also increase cardiac work after myocardial infarction when given intravenously and hence this use should be avoided where possible. Respiratory depression is a common side effect, but is subject to a ceiling effect, such that at a certain dose the degree of respiratory depression will no longer increase with dose increases. Likewise rarely it has been associated with agranulocytosis, erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

===Tissue damage at injection sites===
Severe injection site necrosis and sepsis has occurred (sometimes requiring amputation of limb) with multiple injection of pentazocine lactate. In addition, animal studies have demonstrated that Pentazocine is tolerated less well subcutaneously than intramuscularly.

==History==
Pentazocine was developed by the Sterling Drug Company, Sterling-Winthrop Research Institute, of Rensselaer, New York. The analgesic compound was first made at Sterling in 1958. U.S. testing was conducted between 1961 and 1967. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in June 1967 after being favorably reviewed following testing on 12,000 patients in the United States. By mid 1967 Pentazocine was already being sold in Mexico, England, and Argentina, under different trade names.

==Society and culture==
===Legal status===
Pentazocine was originally unclassified under the Controlled Substances Act. A petition was filed with the Drug Enforcement Administration on October 1, 1971, to shift it to Schedule III. The petition was filed by Joseph L. Fink III, a pharmacist and law student at Georgetown University Law Center as part of the course Lawyering in the Public Interest. That petition was accepted for review on November 10, 1971. D.E.A. published a Final Rule transferring it to schedule IV on January 10, 1979, with an effective date of February 9, 1979. This is understood to be the first instance of a successful petition to reclassify a substance under the relatively recently enacted Controlled Substances Act. Pentazocine is still classified in Schedule IV under the Controlled Substances Act in the United States, even with the addition of Naloxone. Some states classify it in Schedule II, such as Illinois and South Carolina (injectable form only), or Schedule III such as Kentucky.) Internationally, pentazocine is a Schedule III drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Pentazocine has a DEA ACSCN of 9720; being a Schedule IV substance, the DEA does not assign an annual manufacturing quota for pentazocine for the United States.

===Brand names===
Pentazocine is sold under several brand names, such as Fortral, Sosegon, Talwin NX (with naloxone), Talwin, Talwin PX, Fortwin and Talacen (with paracetamol (acetaminophen)).

== See also ==
* Cyclazocine (hallucinogenic)
* Volazocine

== References ==
== External links ==
* Eurekalert report on PNAS article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q415793" start="0" end="11" title="Pentazocine" label="Pentazocine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415793" start="39" end="45" title="Pentazocine" label="Talwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="66" end="75" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897645" start="175" end="193" title="kappa opioid receptor" label="κ-opioid receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911924" start="204" end="222" title="mu opioid receptor" label="μ-opioid receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="254" end="260" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="523" end="537" title="hallucinations" label="hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="554" end="563" title="delusions" label="delusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347102" start="802" end="814" title="benzomorphan" label="benzomorphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="835" end="846" title="enantiomers" label="enantiomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="1051" end="1059" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1498" end="1507" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q415203" start="1674" end="1688" title="tripelennamine" label="tripelennamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="1725" end="1738" title="antihistamine" label="antihistamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="2027" end="2032" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911924" start="2162" end="2180" title="mu opioid receptor" label="mu opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="2552" end="2557" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2578" end="2594" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897645" start="2698" end="2715" title="κ-opioid receptor" label="κ-opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="2752" end="2769" title="dopamine" label="hyperdopaminergia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569460" start="2777" end="2791" title="reward pathway" label="reward pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="2802" end="2810" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="2818" end="2829" title="side effect" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256512" start="2841" end="2856" title="psychotomimetic" label="psychotomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="2881" end="2890" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="2990" end="2998" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256512" start="3089" end="3104" title="psychotomimetic" label="psychotomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="3134" end="3153" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="3157" end="3172" title="tachycardia" label="high heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="3214" end="3235" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641494" start="3314" end="3336" title="Respiratory depression" label="Respiratory depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q396013" start="3552" end="3567" title="agranulocytosis" label="agranulocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363732" start="3569" end="3588" title="erythema multiforme" label="erythema multiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878682" start="3593" end="3619" title="toxic epidermal necrolysis" label="toxic epidermal necrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611398" start="3974" end="3987" title="Sterling Drug" label="Sterling Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380769" start="4038" end="4058" title="Rensselaer, New York" label="Rensselaer, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="4064" end="4073" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="4192" end="4220" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4309" end="4322" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4374" end="4380" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4382" end="4389" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="4395" end="4404" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="4586" end="4617" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5215" end="5226" title="Controlled Substances Act#Schedule IV controlled substances" label="Schedule IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q928770" start="5237" end="5262" title="Controlled Substances Act" label="Controlled Substances Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5270" end="5283" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="5518" end="5555" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances" label="Convention on Psychotropic Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="5882" end="5893" title="paracetamol" label="paracetamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198126" start="5930" end="5941" title="Cyclazocine" label="Cyclazocine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="5943" end="5957" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940005" start="5961" end="5971" title="Volazocine" label="Volazocine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481834" wikidata="Q3137454" url="?curid=481834" title="History of the Jews in China">
<text>The history of the Jews in China goes back to ancient times. Modern-day Jews in China are predominantly composed of Sephardic Jews and their descendants. Other Jewish ethnic divisions are also represented, including Ashkenazi Jews, Mizrahi Jews and a number of converts to Judaism.

The Jewish Chinese community manifests a wide range of Jewish cultural traditions and it also encompasses the full spectrum of Jewish religious observance. Though a small minority, Chinese Jews have had an open presence in the country since the arrival of the first Jewish immigrants during the 8th century CE. Relatively isolated communities of Jews developed through the Han and Song dynasties (7th to 13th centuries CE) all the way through the Qing dynasty (19th century), most notably the Kaifeng Jews (the term &quot;Chinese Jews&quot; is often used in a restricted sense in order to refer to these communities). In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Jewish merchants from around the world began to trade in Chinese ports, particularly in the commercial centres of Hong Kong, which was for a time a British colony; Shanghai (the International Settlement and French Concession); and Harbin (the Trans-Siberian Railway). In the first half of the 20th century, thousands of Jewish refugees escaping from pogroms in the Russian Empire arrived in China. By the time of the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, only a few Jews were known to have maintained the practice of their religion and culture. Since 2015, descendants of the Kaifeng Jews have come under government pressure and suspicion.

==Overview==
The presence of a community of Jewish immigrants in China arguably began sometime in the Song dynasty, but a number of scholars have argued for its presence in China during the earlier Tang dynasty. In the 9th century, the Persian geographer Ibn Khordadbeh noted the travels of Jewish merchants called &quot;Radhanites&quot;, whose trade took them to China via the Silk Road through Central Asia and India. He mentioned the presence of Jewish merchants in a number of Chinese cities, and the important economic role they played transporting merchandise as well as transmitting scientific and technological expertise all the way from Spain and France via the Middle East to China by land and by sea. The medieval Italian explorer Jacob of Ancona, the supposed author of a book of travels, was a scholarly Jewish merchant who wrote in vernacular Italian, and he reached China in 1271, although some authors question its veracity.

When the Ming Dynasty closed off the Silk Road by land, Ningbo became an important trading port on the Maritime Silk Road. The 1489 stone tablet stated that the Jewish communities of Ningbo and Kaifeng had a very good relationship with each other and that after the Kaifeng Jews lost their holy texts during a flood which occurred in 1461, the Ningbo Jews gave two Torah scrolls to their brethren in Kaifeng. The tablet stated, &quot;When the synagogue was rebuilt, Shi Bin, Li Rong, and Gao Jian, and Zhang Xuan went to Ningbo and brought back a scroll of the Scriptures. Zhao Ying of Ningbo brought another scroll to Kaifeng and respectfully presented it to our synagogue&quot;. It is believed the Ningbo Jewish community was fairly sizable for a smaller one would not be able to spare two Torah scrolls. The availability of these scrolls could also mean the Ningbo Jewish community was vibrant and observant. The descendant of Ningbo Jewish community moved out of Ningbo to Shanghai and Hong Kong in the early 20th century due to war and to seek better economic opportunities, they have built a reputation for achieving immense success in the business, science and media industries.

During the period of China&#x27;s opening to the West which coincided with the period of British quasi-colonialism, the first group of Jews who settled in China consisted of Jews who arrived in China under British protection following the First Opium War. Many of these Jews were of Indian or Iraqi origin, due to significant British colonialism in these regions. The second Jewish community settled in China during the first decades of the 20th century when many Jews arrived in Hong Kong and Shanghai during those cities&#x27; periods of economic expansion. Many more Jews arrived as refugees from the Russian Revolution of 1917. During the late 1930s and 1940s, a surge of individual Jews and a serge of Jewish families settled in China for the purpose of seeking refuge from The Holocaust in Europe and they were predominantly of European origin. Shanghai was notable for its special area established for the housing of Jewish refugees, most of them left after the war, the rest of them relocated either prior to or immediately after the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

Some Jews who lived in China converted to Islam and became Hui Muslims.

A manuscript states that they prayed in both Hebrew and Chinese. Ancient Jewish communities in China adapted well to the Han Chinese customs, including patrilineal descent and intermarriage with Han Chinese, while maintaining their Jewish identities. Over the centuries, most of the Jewish community came to be virtually indistinguishable from the Han and Hui Chinese population. Due to the fact that Chinese Jews historically hold a strong Chinese identity, the current government does not recognize them as one of the 56 ethnic minorities. 

Since their religious practices are considered functionally extinct, under the Law of Return, they are required to undergo conversions to Orthodox Judaism in order to become eligible for expedited immigration to Israel. 

Some international Jewish communities are beginning to search for the descendants of these Jews in an attempt to help them revive their interest in their Jewish roots.

Since the expansion of the University of Nottingham in Ningbo in Zhejiang province, more Jewish scholars have moved there in an attempt to reach out to the Jewish Communities of Zhejiang, including a prominent tribe which lives in Ningbo.

Contrary to a popular belief in the Western world, the Kaifeng Jews are not the only Chinese Jewish community. The Kaifeng Jews are recognized as Jews because they have become more observant in modern times, but they are just one of many ancient Jewish communities which live in China. The Ningbo Jews are also known for their contributions to their Jewish Heritage, but nowadays, they are non-practicing Jews. The term &quot;Kaifeng Jews&quot; is not interchangeable with &quot;Chinese Jews&quot;.

==History==
Some scholars have claimed that the ancestors of the Jews who have historically resided in various places in China were members of the Ten Lost Tribes of the exiled ancient Kingdom of Israel which relocated to places which were located in present-day China. The observance of some ancient Jewish rituals has been documented in some places.

One well-known group was the Kaifeng Jews, who are purported to have traveled from Persia to India during the mid-Han dynasty and later migrated from the Muslim-inhabited regions of northwestern China (modern day Gansu province) to Henan province during the early Northern Song dynasty (960–1127).

===Origins===

According to an oral tradition, the first Jews immigrated to China through Persia after the Roman Emperor Titus&#x27;s capture of Jerusalem in 70 CE. A large number of Jews emigrated from Persia during the reign of Emperor Ming of Han (58–75 CE). Writing in 1900, Father Joseph Brucker hypothesized that Jews came to China from India by a sea route in ancient times.

Three steles with inscriptions which were found at Kaifeng bear some historical suggestions. The oldest, dating from 1489, commemorates the construction of a synagogue (1163) (bearing the name &quot;Qīngzhēn Sì&quot;, a term for a mosque which is frequently used in Chinese), states that the Jews entered China from India in the Later Han dynasty (25–220 CE), the Jews&#x27; 70 Chinese surnames, their audience with an &quot;un-named&quot; Song-dynasty emperor, and it finally lists the transmission of their religion from Abraham down to the prophet Ezra. The second tablet, which dates back to 1512 (found in the &quot;Xuanzhang Daojing Si&quot; synagogue) contains a detailed description of the Jews&#x27; religious practices. The third tablet dates back to 1663 and it commemorates the re-rebuilding of the &quot;Qingzhen si&quot; synagogue and it also recaps the information which is written on the other two steles.

Father Joseph Brucker believed that Matteo Ricci&#x27;s manuscripts state that only approximately ten or twelve Jewish families lived in Kaifeng in the late 16th and early 17th centuries, and according to Matteo Ricci&#x27;s manuscripts, they had reportedly resided there for five or six hundred years. The manuscripts also state that a larger Jewish community lived in Hangzhou. The Jewish community of Hangzhou was larger than the Jewish community of Kaifeng because loyal Jews fled south to Hangzhou along with the soon-to-be crowned Emperor Gaozong. In fact, the 1489 stele states that the Jews &quot;abandoned Bianliang&quot; (Kaifeng) after the Jingkang Incident.

Many Jewish communities were established in China during the Middle Ages. However, not all of them left evidence of their existence. The following is a list of the names of those Jewish communities which are known about today: Kaifeng, Hangzhou, Ningbo, Yangzhou, Ningxia, Guangzhou, Beijing, Quanzhou, Nanjing, Xi&#x27;an and Luoyang.

===Names===
Today, the Mandarin Chinese term for Jews is &quot;Youtairen&quot; () and the Cantonese term for Jews is &quot;yau tai yan&quot;. The proper pronunciation of these terms is similar to the proper pronunciation of the term &quot;יהודאי&quot; (&quot;Yehudai&quot;)—the Aramaic word for Jew—and to &quot;Ἰουδαῖος&quot; (&quot;iudaios&quot;), the Greek word for Jew.

Historically, the Chinese people called the Jews &quot;Tiao jin jiao&quot; (挑筋教), loosely, &quot;the religion which removes the sinew,&quot; probably referring to the Jewish dietary prohibition against eating the sciatic nerve (from &quot;Genesis&quot; 32:32).

Jewish dietary laws (&quot;kashrut&quot;), which forbid the eating of, among other foods, non-ruminant mammals, shellfish and reptiles, would have most likely caused Jewish communities to stand out from the surrounding mainstream Chinese population, as Chinese culture is typically very free in the range of items it deems suitable for food.

Jews have also been called the Blue-Hat Hui (), in contrast to other populations of Hui people, who have identified with hats of other colors. The distinction between Muslim and Jewish Hui is not, and historically has not been, well recognised by the dominant Han population.

A modern translation of the &quot;Kaifeng Steles&quot; has shown that the Jews referred to their synagogue as &quot;The Pure and Truth&quot;, which is essentially the same as the modern Chinese term for mosques (清真寺). lǐbàisì 禮拜寺 and qīngzhēnsì 清真寺 were both used as names for synagogues and mosques, these terms were used by Jews as well as by Muslims.

According to an oral tradition which was documented by Xu Xin, Director of the Centre for Judaic Studies at Nanjing University, in his book &quot;Legends of the Chinese Jews of Kaifeng&quot;, the Kaifeng Jews called Judaism &quot;Yīcìlèyè jiào&quot; (一賜樂業教), lit. the religion of Israel. &quot;Yīcìlèyè&quot; is a transliteration and partial translation of &quot;Israel&quot;. Xu Xin translates this phrase as &quot;Chosen people, endowed by God, and contented with their lives and work&quot;.

===Early record===

The oldest evidence of the presence of Jews in China dates back to the beginning of the 8th century: a business letter which was written in the Judeo-Persian language, discovered by Marc Aurel Stein. The letter (now housed in the British Museum) was found in Dandan Uiliq, an important post along the Silk Road in northwest China during the Tang dynasty (618–907). The text is thirty-seven lines in length and was written on paper, a product then manufactured only in China. It was identified, by David Samuel Margoliouth, as dating from 718 CE. Ibn Zeyd al Hassan of Siraf, a 9th-century Arabian traveler, reports that in 878 followers of the Chinese rebel leader Huang Chao besieged Canton (Guangzhou) and killed a large number of foreign merchants, Arabs, Persians, Christians and Jews, resident there.

China was a destination for Radhanite Jews who brought boys, female slaves from Europe to sell to any local according to the Book of Roads and Kingdoms by ibn Khordadbeh. At Dandan Oilik an 8th-century document written in Judeo-Persian was found and translated by Aurel Stein.

Sources indicate that Jews in China were often mistaken for Muslims by other Chinese. The first plausible recorded written Chinese mention of Jews uses the term &quot;Zhuhu&quot; (竹忽) or &quot;Zhuhudu&quot; (朱乎得) (perhaps from Arabic &quot;Yehoud&quot; or from Hebrew &quot;Yehudim&quot;, &quot;Jews&quot;) found in the &quot;Annals of the Yuan Dynasty&quot; in 1329 and 1354. The text spoke of the reinforcement of a tax levied on &quot;dissenters&quot; and of a government decree that the Jews come en-masse to Beijing, the capital.

Famous Venetian traveler Marco Polo, who visited China, then under the Yuan dynasty, in the late 13th century, described the prominence of Jewish traders in Beijing. Similar references can be found in the notes of the Franciscan John of Montecorvino, first archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Beijing in the early 14th century, and the writings of Ibn Batuta, an Arabian envoy to the Mongol Empire in the middle of the 14th century.

Genghis Khan called both Jews and Muslims &quot;Huihui&quot; when he forbade Jews and Muslims from practicing kosher and halal preparation of their food, calling both of them &quot;slaves&quot; and forcing them to eat Mongol food, and banned them from practicing circumcision.
Among all the [subject] alien peoples only the Hui-hui say &quot;we do not eat Mongol food&quot;. [Cinggis Qa&#x27;an replied:] &quot;By the aid of heaven we have pacified you; you are our slaves. Yet you do not eat our food or drink. How can this be right?&quot; He thereupon made them eat. &quot;If you slaughter sheep, you will be considered guilty of a crime.&quot; He issued a regulation to that effect ... [In 1279/1280 under Qubilai] all the Muslims say: &quot;if someone else slaughters [the animal] we do not eat&quot;. Because the poor people are upset by this, from now on, Musuluman [Muslim] Huihui and Zhuhu [Jewish] Huihui, no matter who kills [the animal] will eat [it] and must cease slaughtering sheep themselves, and cease the rite of circumcision.
During the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), a Ming emperor conferred seven surnames upon the Jews, by which they are identifiable today: Ai (艾), Shi (石), Gao (高), Jin (金), Li (李), Zhang (張), and Zhao (趙).
Two of these, Jin and Shi, are the equivalent of common Jewish names in the west: Gold and Stone.

The first modern Western record of Jews residing in China is found in the records of the 17th-century Jesuit missionaries in Beijing. The prominent Jesuit Matteo Ricci, received a visit from a young Jewish Chinese man in 1605. Ricci mentioned this man&#x27;s name as Ngai, who has since been identified by the French sinologist Paul Pelliot as a Jew named Ai T&#x27;ien, who explained that the community he belonged to was monotheistic, or believing in only one God. It is recorded that when he saw a Christian image of Mary with the child Jesus, he took it to be a picture of Rebecca with Esau or Jacob, figures from Hebrew Scripture. Ngai (Ai Tian, Ai T&#x27;ien) declared that he had come from Kaifeng, and stated that this was the site of a large Jewish population. Ricci sent an ethnic Chinese Jesuit Lay Brother to visit Kaifeng; later, other Jesuits (mostly European) also visited the city. It was later discovered that the Jewish community had a synagogue (&quot;Libai si&quot;), which was constructed facing the west, and housed a number of written materials and books.

The Jews who managed the synagogue were called &quot;Mullahs&quot;. Floods and fire repeatedly destroyed the books of the Kaifeng synagogue. They obtained some from Ningxia and Ningbo to replace them. Another Hebrew roll of law was bought from a Muslim in Ning-keang-chow in Shen-se (Shanxi), who acquired it from a dying Jew at Canton.

The Chinese called Muslims, Jews, and Christians in ancient times by the same name, &quot;Hui Hui&quot; (Hwuy-hwuy). Crossworshipers (Christians) were called the &quot;Huay who abstain from animals without the cloven foot&quot;, Muslims were called &quot;Hwuy who abstain from pork&quot;, Jews were called &quot;Hwuy who extract the sinews (removes the sciatic nerve)&quot;. Hwuy-tsze (Hui zi) or Hwuy-hwuy (Hui Hui) is presently used almost exclusively for Muslims, but Jews were still called Lan Maou Hwuy tsze (Lan mao Hui zi) which means &quot;Blue cap Hui zi&quot;. At Kaifeng, Jews were called &quot;Teaou kin keaou &quot;extract sinew religion&quot;. Jews and Muslims in China shared the same name for synagogue and mosque, which were both called &quot;Tsing-chin sze&quot; (Qingzhen si) &quot;Temple of Purity and Truth&quot;, the name dated to the 13th century. The synagogue and mosques were also known as Le-pae sze (Libai si). A tablet indicated that Judaism was once known as &quot;Yih-tsze-lo-nee-keaou&quot; (israelitish religion) and synagogues known as Yih-tsze lo nee leen (Israelitish Temple), but it faded out of use.

A Muslim in Nanjing told Semedo that four families of Jews converted to Islam since they were the last Jews in Nanjing, their numbers diminishing.

Various Jewish Chinese individuals worked in government service and owned big properties in China in the 17th century.

Shanghai&#x27;s first wave of Jews came in the second half of the 19th century, many being Mizrahi Jews from Iraq. The first Jew who arrived there was Elias David Sassoon, who, about the year 1850, opened a branch in connection with his father&#x27;s Bombay house. Since that period Jews gradually migrated from India to Shanghai, most of them being engaged from Bombay as clerks by the firm of David Sassoon &amp; Co. The community was composed mainly of &quot;Asian&quot;, (Sephardi) German, and Russian Jews, though there were a few of Austrian, French, and Italian origin among them. Jews took a considerable part in developing trade in China, and several served on the municipal councils, among them being Silas Aaron Hardoon, partner in the firm of E. D. Sassoon &amp; Co., who served on the French and English councils at the same time. During the early days of Jewish settlement in Shanghai, Jews were involved in the trade in opium and Bombay cotton yarn.

==Modern times==

Contemporaneous sources estimated the Jewish population in China in 1940—including Manchukuo—at 36,000 (source: Catholic Encyclopedia).

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Jewish merchants from around the world began to trade in Chinese ports, particularly in the commercial centres of Hong Kong, which was for a time a British colony; Shanghai (the International Settlement and French Concession); and Harbin (the Trans-Siberian Railway). In the first half of the 20th century, thousands of Jewish refugees escaping from pogroms in the Russian Empire arrived in China. By the time of the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, only a few Jews were known to have maintained the practice of their religion and culture. China&#x27;s Jewish communities have been ethnically diverse, ranging from the Jews of Kaifeng and all other ports throughout China. Kaifeng Jewish ancestry has been found among their descendants living among the Hui Muslims, such as during a hajj pilgrimage the Hui Muslim woman Jin Xiaojing (金效靜) found out about her Jewish ancestry and wrote about it in an article, &quot;China&#x27;s Jews&quot; (中国的犹太人) published in &quot;Points East&quot; in 1981. Scholars have pointed out that Hui Muslims may have absorbed Kaifeng Jews instead of Han Confucians and Buddhists. Jewish converts to Islam who became Hui Muslims in 16th-century China were called the blue hat Hui (藍帽回回) since they converted to Islam due to similarities in their traditions. One of the seven prominent Hui Muslim clans of Kaifeng, the Zhang Jewish clan, became Muslim. The Zhang family, among several Hui Muslims with Kaifeng Jewish ancestry call themselves &quot;fake Muslims&quot; since they are openly proud of their ancestry Instead of being absorbed into Han, a portion of the Jews of China of Kaifeng became Hui Muslims. In 1948 Samuel Stupa Shih (Shi Hong Mo) (施洪模) said he saw a Hebrew language &quot;Religion of Israel&quot; Jewish inscription on a tombstone in a Qing dynasty Muslim cemetery to a place west of Hangzhou. It is reported that they came to be more or less totally assimilated into the Hui Muslim populace, due to widespread intermarriage; especially during the Ming dynasty. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, however, some international Jewish groups, most notably Shavei Israel, have helped Chinese Jews rediscover their Jewish heritage and reconnect with their Jewish roots.

===Shanghai ===

Jewish life in Shanghai had really taken off with the arrival of the British. Mizrahi Jews from the Middle East came as traders via India and Hong Kong and established some of the leading trading companies in the second half of the 19th century. Later, after World War I, many Ashkenazi Jews came from Europe. Rebbe Meir Ashkenazi (Chabad-Lubavitch) was the Chief Rabbi of Shanghai (1926–1949).

===Russian Jews ===
In the early 20th century, many Russian Jews fleeing pogroms in several towns in Russian Empire decided to move to northeast China for permanent settlement (Rabbi Aharon Moshe Kiselev served in Harbin from 1913 until his death in 1949). After the Russian Revolution of 1917, many White Russians, fled to Harbin (former Manchuria). These included, among others, Dr. Abraham Kaufman, who played a leading role in the Harbin Jewish community after 1919, and the parents of future Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert. According to estimates, over 20,000 Jews lived in Harbin and played a key role in the shaping of local politics, economy and international trade.

Soviet Russian Jew Grigori Voitinsky played an important role in the establishment of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in 1921 through the Comintern.

Dr. Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Republic of China, admired the Jewish people and Zionism, and he also saw parallels between the persecution of Jews and the domination of China by the Western powers. He stated, &quot;Though their country was destroyed, the Jewish nation has existed to this day ... [Zionism] is one of the greatest movements of the present time. All lovers of democracy cannot help but support wholeheartedly and welcome with enthusiasm the movement to restore your wonderful and historic nation, which has contributed so much to the civilization of the world and which rightfully deserve [&quot;sic&quot;] an honorable place in the family of nations.&quot;

The Japanese occupation of Northeast China in 1931 and the establishment of Manchukuo in 1932 had a negative impact on the Harbin Jewish community (13,000 in 1929). Most of those Jews left Harbin for Tianjin, Shanghai and the British Mandate of Palestine. Until 1939, the Russian Jews were about 5,000 in Shanghai.

===World War II===
Another wave of 18,000 Jews from Germany, Austria and Poland immigrated to Shanghai in the late 1930s and early 1940s to escape the Holocaust. Shanghai was an open city at the time and it did not have restrictions on immigration, and some Chinese diplomats such as Ho Feng Shan issued &quot;protective&quot; passports and the Japanese diplomat Chiune Sugihara issued transit visas with which refugees could go to Shanghai after a short stay in Japan. In 1943, the occupying Japanese army required these 18,000 Jews, formally known as &quot;stateless refugees,&quot; to relocate to an area of in Shanghai&#x27;s Hongkew district (today known as the Hongkou District) where many lived in group homes called &quot;Heime&quot;. The total number of Jews who entered Shanghai during this period equaled the total number of Jews who fled to Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand and South Africa combined. Many of the Jews in China later moved to found the modern state of Israel.

Shanghai was an important safe-haven for Jewish refugees during the Holocaust, since it was one of the few places in the world where one didn&#x27;t need a visa. However, it was not easy to get there. The Japanese, who controlled the city, preferred to look the other way. However, some corrupt officials also exploited the plight of the Jews. By 1941, nearly 20,000 European Jews had found shelter there.
Notable Jews during the Second Sino-Japanese War include Dr. Jakob Rosenfeld, Stanisław Flato, Ruth Weiss, Eva Sandberg (photographer and wife of Communist leader Xiao San), and Morris Abraham Cohen.

Late in the war, Nazi representatives pressured the Japanese army to devise a plan to exterminate Shanghai&#x27;s Jewish population, and this pressure eventually became known to the Jewish community&#x27;s leadership. However, the Japanese had no intention of further provoking the anger of the Allies after their already notorious invasion of China and their additional invasion of a number of other Asian nations, so they delayed the German request until the War ended. With the intercession of the Amshenower Rebbe and the translation skills of Leo (Ariyeh) Hanin, the Japanese ultimately kept the Jews of Shanghai safe.

In general, in the period from 1845 to 1945, more than 40,000 Jews came to China to do business or in search of a safe haven.

===Late 20th century===
After World War II and the establishment of the PRC in 1949, most of these Jews emigrated to Israel or the West, although a few remained. Three prominent non-Chinese lived in China from the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China to the contemporary period: Sidney Shapiro, Israel Epstein, and Ruth Weiss, one American, one Polish and one Austrian emigre, were of Jewish descent. Another Jewish American, Sidney Rittenberg, served as interpreter to many top Chinese officials. Klara Blum established herself as one of the few Jewish women writers in post-1949 China.

Structured Jewish life returned to Beijing in 1979 with the founding of Kehillat Beijing, an egalitarian lay-led community serving ex-patriate Jews from all over the world.

Sara Imas, the Shanghai-born daughter of Shanghai&#x27;s Jewish Club president, Leiwi Imas, became the first Chinese Jewish immigrant to Israel after the two countries established formal diplomatic relations in 1992. Leiwi Imas, who had to leave Germany for Poland in 1939, arrived in Shanghai the same year. He spent his final years in Shanghai until 1962, prior to the beginning of the Cultural Revolution. Although Sara Imas&#x27;s non-Chinese appearance and family background brought her much trouble during the Cultural Revolution when she was accused of being a foreign capitalist and spy, today Sara Imas has returned to Shanghai, working as the Chinese representative of an Israeli diamond company.

On June 27, 1985, an international group of scholars and activists gathered in Palo Alto, California to establish the Sino-Judaic Institute. Rabbi Anson Laytner serves as the incumbent president.

The Institute of Jewish Studies was established at Nanjing University in 1992.

Since the 1990s, the Shanghai municipal government has taken the initiative to preserve historical Western architectures that were constructed during Shanghai&#x27;s colonial past. Many formerly Jewish-owned hotels and private residence have been included in the preservation project. In 1997, the Kadoorie-residence-turned Shanghai Children&#x27;s Palace, had their spacious front garden largely removed in order to make room for the city&#x27;s overpass system under construction. A One Day Tour of the history of Jewish presence in Shanghai can be arranged through the Center of Jewish Studies Shanghai. Rabbi Shalom Greenberg from Chabad-Lubavitch in New York City arrived in Shanghai to serve this community in August 1998. Rabbi Arthur Schneier, president of the Appeal of Conscience Foundation of New York, donated a Torah to the community that same year. On the first day of Rosh Hashanah, in September 1999, a Jewish New Year service was held at the Ohel Rachel Synagogue for the first time since 1952.

===21st century===
As of 2010, it is estimated that 2,000 to 3,000 Jews lived in Shanghai. In May 2010, the Ohel Rachel Synagogue in Shanghai was temporarily reopened to the local Jewish community for weekend services. Synagogues are found in Beijing, Shanghai and Hong Kong, serving both native Chinese Jews, Israelis and diaspora Jewish communities across the world.

In 2001, Rabbi Shimon Freundlich from the Chabad-Lubavitch movement came and settled in Beijing with the mission of building and leading the Chabad-Lubavitch Centre of Beijing. Kehillat Beijing continues its practice of conducting weekly lay-led Shabbat services, regular holiday observance, and community activities including retreats and celebrations. In 2007, the Sephardic community of Shanghai opened a synagogue, study hall, kosher kitchen, and educational classes for children and adults. The community has its own hacham, who functions as a teacher and chazan, in addition to Rabbi Ephraim Bezalel, who manages local community affairs and kashrut needs. Since a significant amount of Chinese food products and food ingredients are exported to the American market, a number of kosher certification agencies send rabbis to China to serve as kosher inspectors (mashgichim). As of 2009, over 50 mashgichim have been stationed in China, seven of them from the Orthodox Union.

As of 2019, Harbin could claim a single Jewish inhabitant, professor Dan Ben-Canaan, who helped advise the local government on restoring the city&#x27;s synagogues and other Jewish-related buildings.

Kaifeng&#x27;s Jewish community has reported increasing suppression by the authorities since 2015, reversing the modest revival it experienced in the 1990s. The observance of public religious services and the celebration of religious festivals like Passover and Sukkot have been prohibited, and Jewish community groups have been shut down. Signs have been removed from the Kaifeng Synagogue, a historical site located on Teaching the Torah Lane that is now under strict surveillance.

A small number of Chinese Jews have succeeded in making aliyah and immigrating to Israel with the help of private organisations such as Shavei Israel.

==== Antisemitism ====
==Epitomes of Chinese-born people having Jewish ancestry==
Note: 

# There is a large number of people unaware of their Jewish background. 
# Some of them do not accord with the definition of &quot;Jew&quot; in &quot;Ḥukey HaYesod&quot;. 
*Song Dandan, an actress who often appears in the Chinese New Year&#x27;s Gala on CCTV
*Sir Run Run Shaw GBM CBE, also known as Shao Yifu and Siu Yat-fu, was a Hong Kong businessman, filmmaker, and philanthropist, a member of the Ningbo Jewish community.
*Stephen Chow, a Hong Kong filmmaker, former actor and comedian, member of the Ningbo community
*Robert Hotung, Stanley Ho&#x27;s grand-uncle
*Stanley Ho, founder and Chairman of SJM Holdings which owns nineteen casinos in Macau including the Grand Lisboa, nicknamed variously &quot;Godfather&quot; and &quot;King of Gambling&quot;, reflecting the government-granted monopoly he held on the Macau gambling industry for 75 years
*Lawrence Ho, Stanley Ho&#x27;s son, who is of Dutch Jewish ancestry. CEO and chairman of Melco International Development
*Daisy Ho, Stanley Ho&#x27;s daughter, who is of Dutch Jewish ancestry. Chairman and executive director of SJM Holdings
*Josie Ho, Stanley Ho&#x27;s daughter, who is of Dutch Jewish ancestry. Hong Kong-based actress
*Pansy Ho, Stanley Ho&#x27;s daughter, who is of Dutch Jewish ancestry. Managing director of Shun Tak Holdings
*Laurence Tribe, an American professor of constitutional law born to European Jewish parents
*Ron Klinger, an Australian leading English-language bridge writer, born in Shanghai to European Jewish parents
*Mike Medavoy, an American film producer of Ukrainian Jewish descent
*Zhao Yingcheng, a high-ranking Ming-dynasty government official from the 17th century, member of the Kaifeng Jewish community
*Sir Yue-Kong Pao CBE JP, a Hong Kong shipping magnate, philanthropist, member of the Ningbo Jewish community.
*Sir Michael David Kadoorie, a Hong Kong billionaire businessman, and the chairman and 18% owner of CLP Group
*Harry Triguboff, Australian property tycoon

==See also==

*Antisemitism in China
*China–Israel relations
*Chinese people in Israel
*Israelis in China
*East Asian Jews
*Jews in Hong Kong
*Jews in Taiwan
*Kaifeng Jews
*Ten Lost Tribes
*Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites
*Religion in China
*Freedom of religion in China
*Antireligious campaigns in China
*Shanghai Ghetto

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Works cited
* 
; General references
* 


==Further reading==
* Adler, Marcus N. &quot;Chinese Jews.&quot; &quot;The Jewish Quarterly Review&quot; 13.1 (1900): 18-41. online
* Eber, Irene, and Kathryn Hellerstein, eds. &quot;Jews in China: Cultural Conversations, Changing Perceptions&quot; (2021) excerpt
* Ehrlich, M. Avrum. &quot;Jews and Judaism in modern China&quot; (Routledge, 2009).
* Finn, James. &quot;The Jews in China: Their Synagogue, Their Scriptures, Their History&quot; (1843) very old guide online.
* Katz, Yossi. &quot;The Jews of China and their Contribution to the Establishment of the Jewish National Home in Palestine in the First Half of the Twentieth Century.&quot; &quot;Middle Eastern Studies&quot; 46.4 (2010): 543-554.
* Kaufman, Jonathan. &quot;The Last Kings of Shanghai: The Rival Jewish Dynasties That Helped Create Modern China&quot; (2021) excerpt
* Laytner, Anson, and Jordan Paper, &quot;The Chinese Jews of Kaifeng: A Millennium of Adaptation and Endurance&quot; (Lexington Books, 2017).
* Loewenthal, Rudolf. &quot;The nomenclature of Jews in China.&quot; &quot;Monumenta Serica&quot; 12.1 (1947): 97-126.
* Malek, Roman. &quot;From Kaifeng to Shanghai: Jews in China&quot; (Routledge, 2017).
* Neubauer, Adolf. &quot;Jews in China.&quot; &quot;The Jewish Quarterly Review&quot; 8.1 (1895): 123-139. online
* Paper, Jordan. &quot;The Theology of the Kaifeng Jews, 1000–1850&quot; (Wilfrid Laurier UP, 2012)
* Perlmann, S. M. &quot;The History of the Jews in China&quot; (R. Mazin, 1913) online.
* Pollack, Michael. &quot;Mandarins, Jews, and Missionaries: the Jewish experience in the Chinese Empire&quot;, (New York: Weatherhill, 1998), .
* Wald, Shalom Salomon. &quot;China and the Jewish People&quot; (2004)
* White, William Charles. &quot;Chinese Jews&quot;, (2nd ed, Paragon, 1966).
* Xu, Xin. &quot;The Jews of Kaifeng, China: History, Culture, and Religion&quot; (2003). online
* Xun, Zhou. &quot;Chinese Perceptions of the Jews&#x27; and Judaism: A History of the Youtai&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* Zane, Nicholas. &quot;Jews in China: A History of Struggle&quot; (2019) excerpt

===Historiography and Memory===
* Goldstein, Jonathan, and Benjamin I. Schwartz. &quot;The Jews of China: v. 1: Historical and Comparative Perspectives&quot; (Routledge, 2015).
* Goldstein, Jonathan. &quot;The Jews of China: v. 2: A Sourcebook and Research Guide&quot; (Routledge, 2018) online
* Raiskin, Shlomy. &quot;A Bibliography on Chinese Jewry&quot;, &quot;Moreshet Israel&quot; (Journal of Judaism, Zionism and Eretz-Israel), No. 3 (September 2006), pp. 60–85.
* Ross, James R. et al. eds. &quot;The Image of Jews in Contemporary China&quot; (2019) excerpt
* Shapiro, Sidney. &quot;Jews in Old China, Studies by Chinese Scholars&quot;, (Hippocrene Books, 1984), online
* Shulman, Frank Joseph. &quot;The Chinese Jews and the Jewish Diasporas in China from the Tang Period (CE 618-906) through the Mid-1990s: A Selected Bibliography.&quot; &quot;The Jews of China&quot; (Routledge, 2018) pp. 157–183.
* Song, Lihong. &quot;From &#x27;Jews in China&#x27; to &#x27;Jews and China&#x27;.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern Jewish Studies&quot; 17.4 (2018): 487-495.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3137454" start="4" end="32" title="History of the Jews in China" label="history of the Jews in China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46" end="59" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="72" end="76" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="116" end="130" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="160" end="183" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="Jewish ethnic divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="216" end="230" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="232" end="244" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086136" start="261" end="280" title="Conversion to Judaism" label="converts to Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="664" end="668" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="730" end="742" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167231" start="776" end="788" title="Kaifeng Jews" label="Kaifeng Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1053" end="1062" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="1103" end="1111" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170587" start="1117" end="1141" title="Shanghai International Settlement" label="International Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571993" start="1146" end="1163" title="French Concession" label="French Concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="1170" end="1176" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="1182" end="1204" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="1289" end="1318" title="pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="pogroms in the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1377" end="1408" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1706" end="1718" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q380004" start="1859" end="1873" title="Ibn Khordadbeh" label="Ibn Khordadbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677126" start="1925" end="1934" title="Radhanite" label="Radhanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="1982" end="1991" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2000" end="2012" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2017" end="2022" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2250" end="2255" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2260" end="2266" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2275" end="2286" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903086" start="2346" end="2361" title="Jacob of Ancona" label="Jacob of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="2555" end="2559" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="2602" end="2608" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3523" end="3531" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3536" end="3545" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="3972" end="3987" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q573598" start="4016" end="4022" title="Indian Jews" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112405" start="4026" end="4038" title="Baghdadi Jews" label="Iraqi origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905389" start="4202" end="4222" title="History of the Jews in Hong Kong" label="arrived in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="4227" end="4235" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4337" end="4363" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="4512" end="4525" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q314645" start="4613" end="4672" title="Shanghai Ghetto" label="special area established for the housing of Jewish refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4796" end="4827" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996414" start="4859" end="4877" title="Conversion to Islam" label="converted to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="4889" end="4900" title="Hui people" label="Hui Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="5055" end="5074" title="patrilineal descent" label="patrilineal descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="5426" end="5443" title="minorities of China" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="5526" end="5539" title="Law of Return" label="Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="5644" end="5665" title="Aliyah" label="immigration to Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075625" start="5865" end="5899" title="University of Nottingham Ningbo China" label="University of Nottingham in Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="5903" end="5911" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="6368" end="6374" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190131" start="6468" end="6487" title="non-practicing Jews" label="non-practicing Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="6725" end="6740" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="Ten Lost Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="6763" end="6780" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637842" start="6879" end="6893" title="613 mitzvot" label="Jewish rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167231" start="6960" end="6972" title="Kaifeng Jews" label="Kaifeng Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7014" end="7020" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7024" end="7029" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7045" end="7056" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="7144" end="7149" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="7163" end="7168" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="7195" end="7216" title="Northern Song dynasty" label="Northern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="7351" end="7356" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271" start="7460" end="7479" title="Emperor Ming of Han" label="Emperor Ming of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="7619" end="7624" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="7771" end="7780" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7948" end="7959" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="7968" end="7970" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093580" start="7991" end="8007" title="Chinese surnames" label="Chinese surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="8053" end="8065" title="Song dynasty" label="Song-dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="8136" end="8143" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="8164" end="8168" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="8572" end="8584" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="8906" end="8914" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="9030" end="9038" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489" start="9073" end="9088" title="Emperor Gaozong of Song China" label="Emperor Gaozong"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="9168" end="9175" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326831" start="9187" end="9204" title="Jingkang Incident" label="Jingkang Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9268" end="9279" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="9434" end="9441" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="9443" end="9451" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="9453" end="9459" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57906" start="9461" end="9469" title="Yangzhou" label="Yangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="9471" end="9478" title="Ningxia" label="Ningxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="9480" end="9489" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="9491" end="9498" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="9500" end="9508" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="9510" end="9517" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="9519" end="9529" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="9534" end="9541" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="9567" end="9575" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="9634" end="9643" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="9822" end="9829" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="10093" end="10112" title="Kashrut" label="dietary prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q307869" start="10132" end="10145" title="sciatic nerve" label="sciatic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="10158" end="10165" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="10208" end="10215" title="kashrut" label="kashrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="10275" end="10283" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="10293" end="10302" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="10307" end="10315" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="10564" end="10567" title="Hui people" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="10898" end="10907" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="11004" end="11010" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9185889" start="11211" end="11217" title="Xu Xin (Judaic scholar)" label="Xu Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q683580" start="11264" end="11282" title="Nanjing University" label="Nanjing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11519" end="11525" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33367" start="11815" end="11828" title="Judeo-Persian" label="Judeo-Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313061" start="11853" end="11869" title="Marc Aurel Stein" label="Marc Aurel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159394" start="11930" end="11942" title="Dandan Oilik" label="Dandan Uiliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="11972" end="11981" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="12012" end="12024" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q426590" start="12168" end="12192" title="David Samuel Margoliouth" label="David Samuel Margoliouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="12260" end="12267" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q714113" start="12336" end="12346" title="Huang Chao" label="Huang Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="12364" end="12373" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12506" end="12520" title="Radhanite#Text of Ibn Khordadbeh&amp;#x27;s account" label="Radhanite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12533" end="12564" title="Europeans in Medieval China#European merchants in China" label="boys, female slaves from Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590941" start="12603" end="12629" title="Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh)" label="Book of Roads and Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q380004" start="12633" end="12647" title="ibn Khordadbeh" label="ibn Khordadbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159394" start="12652" end="12664" title="Dandan Oilik" label="Dandan Oilik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33367" start="12700" end="12713" title="Judeo-Persian" label="Judeo-Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313061" start="12742" end="12753" title="Aurel Stein" label="Aurel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="12816" end="12823" title="Islam in China" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="12983" end="12989" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="13017" end="13023" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="13096" end="13108" title="Yuan Dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="13269" end="13276" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="13282" end="13289" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="13299" end="13307" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="13317" end="13327" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="13363" end="13375" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q372219" start="13521" end="13541" title="John of Montecorvino" label="John of Montecorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365283" start="13567" end="13604" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Beijing" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="13652" end="13662" title="Ibn Batuta" label="Ibn Batuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="13688" end="13701" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="13738" end="13750" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="13786" end="13792" title="Hui people" label="Huihui"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="13848" end="13854" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="13859" end="13864" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156753" start="13956" end="13967" title="Mongolian cuisine" label="Mongol food"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="14001" end="14013" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="14793" end="14805" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="15096" end="15103" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="15181" end="15187" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="15188" end="15200" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="15204" end="15211" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="15234" end="15246" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q368821" start="15407" end="15419" title="Paul Pelliot" label="Paul Pelliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="15502" end="15514" title="monotheistic" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q926743" start="15590" end="15624" title="Madonna and Child" label="image of Mary with the child Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40520" start="15656" end="15663" title="Rebekah" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q220822" start="15669" end="15673" title="Esau" label="Esau"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="15677" end="15682" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="15697" end="15713" title="Hebrew Scripture" label="Hebrew Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="15776" end="15783" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="16033" end="16042" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188942" start="16212" end="16218" title="Mullah" label="Mullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559488" start="16850" end="16863" title="Gid hanasheh" label="sciatic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="17648" end="17655" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="17904" end="17912" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329025" start="18055" end="18074" title="Elias David Sassoon" label="Elias David Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208486" start="18299" end="18321" title="David Sassoon &amp;amp; Co" label="David Sassoon &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514090" start="18615" end="18634" title="Silas Aaron Hardoon" label="Silas Aaron Hardoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18659" end="18681" title="E. D. Sassoon &amp;amp; Co" label="E. D. Sassoon &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="18971" end="18980" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="19177" end="19186" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="19227" end="19235" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170587" start="19241" end="19265" title="Shanghai International Settlement" label="International Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571993" start="19270" end="19287" title="French Concession" label="French Concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="19294" end="19300" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="19306" end="19328" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="19413" end="19442" title="pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="pogroms in the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19501" end="19532" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="20991" end="21002" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="21012" end="21022" title="Hui Muslim" label="Hui Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="21088" end="21100" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="21409" end="21420" title="Mizrahi Jew" label="Mizrahi Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="21590" end="21601" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="21608" end="21622" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="21641" end="21646" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="21663" end="21679" title="Chabad-Lubavitch" label="Chabad-Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="21828" end="21842" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="21904" end="21909" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418625" start="21910" end="21930" title="Aharon Moshe Kiselev" label="Aharon Moshe Kiselev"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="21941" end="21947" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="21994" end="22020" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="22027" end="22041" title="White émigré" label="White Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="22066" end="22075" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668955" start="22112" end="22127" title="Abraham Kaufman" label="Abraham Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="22224" end="22246" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Israeli Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q93181" start="22247" end="22258" title="Ehud Olmert" label="Ehud Olmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399725" start="22426" end="22443" title="Grigori Voitinsky" label="Grigori Voitinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="22497" end="22520" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="22547" end="22556" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="22563" end="22574" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="22591" end="22608" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="22640" end="22647" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48136" start="22687" end="22706" title="persecution of Jews" label="persecution of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="23261" end="23276" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="23310" end="23319" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="23434" end="23441" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="23443" end="23451" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="23460" end="23488" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="23602" end="23609" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="23611" end="23618" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="23623" end="23629" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="23644" end="23652" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="23701" end="23710" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q694809" start="23834" end="23846" title="Ho Feng Shan" label="Ho Feng Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161381" start="23913" end="23928" title="Chiune Sugihara" label="Chiune Sugihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24013" end="24018" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q661364" start="24217" end="24233" title="Hongkou District" label="Hongkou District"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="24403" end="24412" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="24414" end="24420" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="24422" end="24427" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="24429" end="24440" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="24445" end="24457" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="24535" end="24541" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="24974" end="24998" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q86362" start="25011" end="25026" title="Jakob Rosenfeld" label="Jakob Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599131" start="25028" end="25043" title="Stanisław Flato" label="Stanisław Flato"/>
<link wikidata="Q86798" start="25045" end="25055" title="Ruth Weiss (Austrian-Chinese journalist)" label="Ruth Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933" start="25057" end="25069" title="Eva Sandberg" label="Eva Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531631" start="25113" end="25121" title="Xiao San" label="Xiao San"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033897" start="25128" end="25148" title="Morris Cohen (adventurer)" label="Morris Abraham Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="25168" end="25172" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="25446" end="25452" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523814" start="25699" end="25717" title="Leo Hanin" label="Leo (Ariyeh) Hanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25933" end="25945" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="26020" end="26026" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="26034" end="26038" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26138" end="26169" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813928" start="26198" end="26212" title="Sidney Shapiro" label="Sidney Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q601957" start="26214" end="26228" title="Israel Epstein" label="Israel Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q86798" start="26234" end="26244" title="Ruth Weiss (Austrian-Chinese journalist)" label="Ruth Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="26250" end="26258" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="26264" end="26270" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281991" start="26345" end="26362" title="Sidney Rittenberg" label="Sidney Rittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q113010" start="26417" end="26427" title="Klara Blum" label="Klara Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040481" start="27591" end="27618" title="Institute of Jewish Studies (Nanjing)" label="Institute of Jewish Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q683580" start="27638" end="27656" title="Nanjing University" label="Nanjing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345310" start="27965" end="27973" title="Kadoorie" label="Kadoorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191219" start="28239" end="28272" title="Center of Jewish Studies Shanghai" label="Center of Jewish Studies Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="28302" end="28318" title="Chabad" label="Chabad-Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="28550" end="28563" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q11077044" start="28626" end="28647" title="Ohel Rachel Synagogue" label="Ohel Rachel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="29092" end="29108" title="Chabad-Lubavitch" label="Chabad-Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247868" start="29469" end="29479" title="bet midrash" label="study hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058384" start="29572" end="29578" title="hacham" label="hacham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="29611" end="29617" title="chazan" label="chazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="29697" end="29704" title="kashrut" label="kashrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895647" start="29834" end="29863" title="Kosher certification agency" label="kosher certification agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q978087" start="29916" end="29926" title="Mashgiach" label="mashgichim"/>
<link wikidata="Q358284" start="30013" end="30027" title="Orthodox Union" label="Orthodox Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="30231" end="30238" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="30480" end="30488" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="30493" end="30499" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="30772" end="30778" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898888" start="30852" end="30865" title="Shavei Israel" label="Shavei Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368137" start="31102" end="31127" title="Basic Laws of Israel" label="&amp;quot;Ḥukey HaYesod&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q699424" start="31131" end="31142" title="Song Dandan" label="Song Dandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q444591" start="31218" end="31234" title="Sir Run Run Shaw" label="Sir Run Run Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q311179" start="31386" end="31398" title="Stephen Chow" label="Stephen Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121156" start="31482" end="31495" title="Robert Hotung" label="Robert Hotung"/>
<link wikidata="Q735458" start="31497" end="31507" title="Stanley Ho" label="Stanley Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q735458" start="31528" end="31538" title="Stanley Ho" label="Stanley Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="31564" end="31576" title="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau" label="SJM Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="31608" end="31613" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033099" start="31628" end="31640" title="Grand Lisboa" label="Grand Lisboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44009" start="31733" end="31760" title="government-granted monopoly" label="government-granted monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886337" start="31814" end="31825" title="Lawrence Ho" label="Lawrence Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812076" start="31903" end="31934" title="Melco International Development" label="Melco International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q112966286" start="31936" end="31944" title="Daisy Ho" label="Daisy Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="32042" end="32054" title="SJM Holdings" label="SJM Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q455691" start="32056" end="32064" title="Josie Ho" label="Josie Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965221" start="32152" end="32160" title="Pansy Ho" label="Pansy Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049426" start="32244" end="32261" title="Shun Tak Holdings" label="Shun Tak Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994314" start="32263" end="32277" title="Laurence Tribe" label="Laurence Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364035" start="32356" end="32367" title="Ron Klinger" label="Ron Klinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="32408" end="32414" title="contract bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q726166" start="32468" end="32480" title="Mike Medavoy" label="Mike Medavoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403591" start="32537" end="32551" title="Zhao Yingcheng" label="Zhao Yingcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546985" start="32664" end="32680" title="Yue-Kong Pao" label="Sir Yue-Kong Pao"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="32681" end="32684" title="CBE" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="32685" end="32687" title="Justice of the peace" label="JP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431215" start="32775" end="32801" title="Michael Kadoorie" label="Sir Michael David Kadoorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062083" start="32815" end="32826" title="billionaire" label="billionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q977959" start="32874" end="32883" title="CLP Group" label="CLP Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309177" start="32885" end="32900" title="Harry Triguboff" label="Harry Triguboff"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806126" start="32945" end="32966" title="Antisemitism in China" label="Antisemitism in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037" start="32968" end="32990" title="China–Israel relations" label="China–Israel relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100878" start="32992" end="33016" title="Chinese people in Israel" label="Chinese people in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087686" start="33018" end="33035" title="Israelis in China" label="Israelis in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327740" start="33037" end="33052" title="East Asian Jews" label="East Asian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905389" start="33054" end="33071" title="Jews in Hong Kong" label="Jews in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q712902" start="33073" end="33087" title="Jews in Taiwan" label="Jews in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167231" start="33089" end="33101" title="Kaifeng Jews" label="Kaifeng Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="33103" end="33118" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="Ten Lost Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611319" start="33120" end="33163" title="Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites" label="Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482612" start="33165" end="33182" title="Religion in China" label="Religion in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395087" start="33184" end="33212" title="Freedom of religion in China" label="Freedom of religion in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890523" start="33214" end="33246" title="Antireligious campaigns in China" label="Antireligious campaigns in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q314645" start="33248" end="33263" title="Shanghai Ghetto" label="Shanghai Ghetto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481837" wikidata="Q13423117" url="?curid=481837" title="List of state and territorial universities in the United States">
<text>In the United States, a state college or state university is one of the public colleges or universities funded by or associated with the state government. In some cases, these institutions of higher learning are part of a state university system, while in other cases they are not. Several U.S. territories also administer public colleges and universities.

Although most of these institutions are associated with state governments, a small number of public institutions are directly funded and governed by the U.S. federal government, including the service academies, the Community College of the Air Force, the Naval Postgraduate School, the Air Force Institute of Technology, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, military War colleges and staff colleges, and Haskell Indian Nations University. A few universities - George Washington University, Georgetown University, Gallaudet University, Howard University, and American University - are private universities in the District of Columbia that are federally chartered by the United States Government.

Most state universities receive at least part of their funding from the state, although many have substantial income from tuition and fees, endowment proceeds, donations (such as from alumni or philanthropists), and revenue from royalties. State universities usually offer lower tuition costs to in-state residents. Substantial financial support is also provided by the federal government, particularly through federal financial aid.

In some states, there is a campus designated as the &quot;flagship&quot; campus in the state&#x27;s university system. The flagship campus is the most prestigious or the one with the largest student population, e.g. the University of Maryland, College Park campus in the University System of Maryland, the Indiana University Bloomington campus in the Indiana University System, and the University of Tennessee, Knoxville campus in the University of Tennessee System.

There are a number of states that have more than one university system, e.g. California with 2; Colorado with 2; Indiana with 2; New York with 2; Tennessee with 2; and Texas with 7 (the most).

Notes:
*The list includes schools that grant first-professional doctorates only (e.g., medical schools, law schools, or veterinary schools) that are independent of any other school in a state system.
*Satellite campuses that do not have accreditation separate from the mother institution are not included in the list, e.g. University of Washington Tacoma remains an integral part of the University of Washington, which is based in Seattle. On the other hand, institutions like University of Houston–Downtown and University of California, Santa Cruz are provided separate entries as they are considered independent, autonomous institutions. 
*To see a list of community colleges and technical centers in the United States that offer only associate&#x27;s degrees, visit the community colleges list.
*To see a list of tribal colleges and universities in the United States, visit the tribal colleges and universities list.
*Non-bachelor&#x27;s degree-granting institutions, such as graduate schools, are listed in &quot;italics&quot;.

==Alabama==
*Alabama A&amp;M University 
*Alabama State University 
*Athens State University
*Auburn University system
**Auburn University 
**Auburn University at Montgomery
*Jacksonville State University
*Troy University
*University of Alabama System
**University of Alabama (Alabama) (Tuscaloosa – flagship/main campus)
**University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB)
**University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH)
*University of Montevallo
*University of North Alabama (UNA)
*University of South Alabama (USA)
*University of West Alabama (UWA)

==Alaska==
*University of Alaska System
**University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) (Fairbanks – flagship/main campus)
**University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA)
**University of Alaska Southeast (UAS)

==Arizona==
*Arizona Board of Regents
**Arizona State University (ASU)
**Northern Arizona University (NAU)
**University of Arizona (UofA)

==Arkansas==
*University of Arkansas System
**University of Arkansas (Arkansas) (Fayetteville – flagship/main campus)
**University of Arkansas–Fort Smith
**University of Arkansas at Little Rock
**&quot;University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences&quot;
**University of Arkansas at Monticello
**University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
**University of Arkansas Grantham
*Arkansas State University System
**Arkansas State University
**Henderson State University
*Arkansas Tech University
*University of Central Arkansas (UCA, Central Arkansas)
*Southern Arkansas University (SAU)

==California==
*University of California system
**University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley, Cal, UCB) 
**University of California, Davis (UC Davis, UCD)
**University of California, Irvine (UC Irvine, UCI)
**University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
**University of California, Merced (UC Merced, UCM)
**University of California, Riverside (UC Riverside, UCR)
**University of California, San Diego (UC San Diego, UCSD)
**University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)
**University of California, Santa Barbara (UC Santa Barbara, UCSB)
**University of California, Santa Cruz (UC Santa Cruz, UCSC)
**&quot;University of California College of the Law, San Francisco&quot; (UC Law SF) (law school; administered separately from the other UC campuses)
*California State University system
**California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB)
**California State University, Channel Islands (CSUCI)
**California State University, Chico (Chico State)
**California State University, Dominguez Hills (CSUDH)
**California State University, East Bay (CSUEB)
**California State University, Fresno (Fresno State)
**California State University, Fullerton (CSUF, Cal State Fullerton)
**California State Polytechnic University, Humboldt (Cal Poly Humboldt)
**California State University, Long Beach (Long Beach State, LBSU, Cal State Long Beach, CSULB)
**California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA, Cal State LA)
**California Maritime Academy (Cal Maritime, The Academy)
**California State University, Monterey Bay (CSUMB)
**California State University, Northridge (CSUN)
**California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona, CPP)
**California State University, Sacramento (Sacramento State, Sac State)
**California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB)
**San Diego State University (SDSU, San Diego State)
**San Francisco State University (SFSU)
**San Jose State University (SJSU, San Jose State)
**California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, Cal Poly SLO)
**California State University San Marcos (CSUSM)
**Sonoma State University (SSU)
**California State University, Stanislaus (Stan State)

==Colorado==
*Adams State University
*University of Colorado system
**University of Colorado Boulder (Colorado or CU) (Boulder – flagship/main campus)
**University of Colorado Colorado Springs (UCCS)
**University of Colorado Denver (CU-Denver)
**Anschutz Medical Campus
*Colorado Mesa University
*Colorado School of Mines
*Colorado State University System
**Colorado State University (Colorado State) (Fort Collins – flagship/main campus)
**Colorado State University Pueblo (CSU-Pueblo)
**Colorado State University–Global Campus (CSU–Global) – online only
*Fort Lewis College
*Metropolitan State University of Denver
*University of Northern Colorado
*Western Colorado University (Western)

==Connecticut==
*Charter Oak State College (COSC)
*Connecticut State University System
**Central Connecticut State University (CCSU)
**Eastern Connecticut State University (ECSU)
**Southern Connecticut State University (SCSU)
**Western Connecticut State University (WCSU)
*University of Connecticut (UConn)

==Delaware==
*University of Delaware (UD)
*Delaware State University

==District of Columbia==
*University of the District of Columbia (UDC)

Universities chartered by Congress (Congressional Charter) are not public state or territorial universities; they are private non-profit universities that do not grant in-state tuition discounts to District of Columbia residents unlike other government-funded state or territorial universities. The United States Federal Government provides tuition grants to District of Columbia residents through the DC Tuition Assistance Grant (DC TAG) towards the difference in price between in-state and out-of-state tuition at public four-year colleges/universities and private Historically Black Colleges and Universities throughout the U.S., Guam, and Puerto Rico. Small amounts of the grant can be used for Washington Metropolitan Area private universities within close proximate of the District.

==Florida==
*State University System of Florida
**Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU)
**Florida Atlantic University (FAU)
**Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU)
**Florida International University (FIU) 
**Florida Polytechnic University (Florida Poly or FPU)
**Florida State University (FSU)
**New College of Florida (New College or NCF)
**University of Central Florida (UCF)
**University of Florida (UF) 
**University of North Florida (UNF)
**University of South Florida System
***University of South Florida (USF)
***University of South Florida Sarasota–Manatee (USFSM)
***University of South Florida St. Petersburg (USFSP)
**University of West Florida (UWF)
*Florida College System (community college system which offers bachelor&#x27;s degrees at most of its institutions)
**Broward College
**Chipola College
**College of Central Florida
**Daytona State College
**Eastern Florida State College
**Florida Gateway College
**Florida SouthWestern State College
**Florida State College at Jacksonville
**Gulf Coast State College
**Indian River State College
**Lake–Sumter State College
**Miami Dade College
**Northwest Florida State College
**Palm Beach State College
**Pasco–Hernando State College
**Pensacola State College
**Polk State College
**Santa Fe College
**Seminole State College of Florida
**South Florida State College
**St. Johns River State College
**St. Petersburg College
**State College of Florida, Manatee–Sarasota
**Tallahassee State College
**Valencia College

==Georgia==

*University System of Georgia
**Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College (Abraham Baldwin)
**Albany State University
**Atlanta Metropolitan State College
**Augusta University (Augusta)
**Clayton State University
**College of Coastal Georgia (Coastal)
**Columbus State University
**Dalton State College
**East Georgia State College
**Fort Valley State University (Fort Valley)
**Georgia Archives
**Georgia College &amp; State University (Georgia College)
**Georgia Gwinnett College
**Georgia Highlands College (Highlands)
**Georgia Public Library Service
**Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech)
**Georgia Southern University
**Georgia Southwestern State University (GSW)
**Georgia State University (GSU)
**Gordon State College
**Kennesaw State University (KSU)
**Middle Georgia State University
**Savannah State University
**South Georgia State College (SGSC)
**University of Georgia (UGA)
**University of North Georgia (UNG)
**University of West Georgia (UWG)
**Valdosta State University (VSU)

==Guam==
*University of Guam

==Hawaii==

*University of Hawaiʻi System
**University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa (Hawaii or UH) (Honolulu – flagship/main campus)
**University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo (UH Hilo)
**University of Hawaiʻi – West Oʻahu (UHWO, pronounced &quot;UH WO&quot;)

==Idaho==
*Boise State University (Boise State or BSU)
*University of Idaho (U of I or UI)
*Idaho State University (Idaho State or ISU)
*Lewis–Clark State College

==Illinois==
*Chicago State University (Chicago State)
*Eastern Illinois University (Eastern Illinois, EIU)
*Governors State University
*Illinois State University (Illinois State, ISU)
*University of Illinois System
**University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (Illinois, U of I, UIUC) (Urbana and Champaign – flagship/main campus)
**University of Illinois Chicago (UIC)
**University of Illinois Springfield (UIS)
*Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU)
*Northern Illinois University (Northern Illinois, NIU)
*Southern Illinois University system
**Southern Illinois University Carbondale (Southern Illinois, SIU) (Carbondale – flagship/main campus)
**Southern Illinois University Edwardsville (SIUE)
*Western Illinois University (Western Illinois, WIU)

==Indiana==
*Ball State University
*Indiana University system 
**Indiana University Bloomington (Indiana or IU) (Bloomington – flagship/main campus)
**Indiana University Columbus (IUC)
**Indiana University East
**Indiana University Fort Wayne
**Indiana University Indianapolis (IUI)
**Indiana University Kokomo (IUK)
**Indiana University Northwest
**Indiana University South Bend (IUSB)
**Indiana University Southeast
*Indiana State University
*Purdue University system
**Purdue University (West Lafayette – flagship/main campus)
**Purdue University Fort Wayne (PFW)
**Purdue University Global
**Purdue University in Indianapolis
**Purdue University Northwest – (2016 Merger of Purdue University Calumet and Purdue University North Central)
**Purdue University Online
*University of Southern Indiana (USI)
*Vincennes University (VU)

==Iowa==
*University of Iowa (Iowa)
*Iowa State University (ISU)
*University of Northern Iowa (UNI)

==Kansas==
*Emporia State University (Emporia State or ESU)
*Fort Hays State University (FHSU)
*University of Kansas (Kansas or KU)
*Kansas State University (K-State or KSU)
*Pittsburg State University
*Wichita State University

Note: Washburn University in Topeka is a municipally-chartered, state-coordinated university. Some funds are sourced from municipal and county taxes, while some financial support is also received from the state of Kansas.

==Kentucky==
*Eastern Kentucky University (EKU)
*University of Kentucky (Kentucky or UK)
*Kentucky State University 
*University of Louisville (Louisville, U of L, or UL)
*Morehead State University
*Murray State University
*Northern Kentucky University (NKU)
*Western Kentucky University (WKU)

==Louisiana==
*Louisiana State University System
**Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College (LSU) (Baton Rouge – flagship/main campus)
**&quot;Louisiana State University Agricultural Center&quot;
**Louisiana State University at Eunice (LSU-Eunice)
**Louisiana State University of Alexandria (LSU-Alexandria)
**Louisiana State University Shreveport (LSU-Shreveport)
**&quot;LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans&quot;
**&quot;LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport&quot;
**&quot;Paul M. Hebert Law Center&quot; (law school on the main Baton Rouge campus, separate institution)
**&quot;Pennington Biomedical Research Center&quot;
*University of Louisiana System
**Grambling State University (GSU)
**Louisiana Tech University (Louisiana Tech or La Tech)
**McNeese State University (MSU)
**Nicholls State University
**Northwestern State University (NSULA)
**Southeastern Louisiana University (SELU)
**University of Louisiana at Lafayette (UL Lafayette)
**University of Louisiana at Monroe (ULM)
**University of New Orleans (UNO)
*Southern University System
**Southern University (Baton Rouge – flagship/main campus)
**Southern University at New Orleans (SUNO)
**Southern University at Shreveport (SUSLA)
**Southern University Law Center (SULC)
**Southern University Agricultural Research and Extension Center

==Maine==
*Maine Maritime Academy
*University of Maine System
**University of Maine (UMaine or Maine) (Orono – flagship university)
**&quot;University of Maine School of Law&quot; (Maine Law)
**University of Maine at Augusta (UMaine Augusta, UM-Augusta, or UMA)
**University of Maine at Farmington (UMaine Farmington, UM-Farmington, or UMF)
**University of Maine at Fort Kent (UMaine Fort Kent, UM-Fort Kent, or UMFK)
**University of Maine at Machias (UMaine Machias, UM-Machias, or UMM, pronounced &quot;UM M&quot;) 
**University of Maine at Presque Isle (UMaine Presque Isle, UM-Presque Isle, or UMPI, pronounced &quot;UM PI&quot;)
**University of Southern Maine (Southern Maine or USM)

==Maryland==
*Morgan State University
*St. Mary&#x27;s College of Maryland
*University System of Maryland
**University of Maryland, College Park (Maryland or UMD) (College Park – flagship/main campus)
**Bowie State University
**Coppin State University
**Frostburg State University
**Salisbury University 
**Towson University (Towson)
**University of Baltimore (UB)
**University of Maryland, Baltimore (UM Baltimore or UMB)
**University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC)
**University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES)
**University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC)
**&quot;Universities at Shady Grove&quot;
**&quot;University System of Maryland at Hagerstown&quot;
**&quot;University System of Maryland at Southern Maryland&quot;
**&quot;University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science&quot;

==Massachusetts==
*University of Massachusetts system
**University of Massachusetts Amherst (Massachusetts, UMass, UMass Amherst) (Amherst – flagship/main campus)
**University of Massachusetts Boston (UMass Boston)
**University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMass Dartmouth)
**University of Massachusetts School of Law (UMass Law)
**University of Massachusetts Lowell (UMass Lowell)
**University of Massachusetts Global (UMass Global)
**&quot;University of Massachusetts Medical School&quot;
*State University system
**Bridgewater State University
**Fitchburg State University
**Framingham State University
**Salem State University
**Westfield State University
**Worcester State University
**Massachusetts College of Art and Design (MassArt)
**Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
**Massachusetts Maritime Academy

==Michigan==
*Central Michigan University
*Eastern Michigan University
*Ferris State University
*Grand Valley State University
*Lake Superior State University
*University of Michigan
*University of Michigan–Dearborn
*University of Michigan–Flint
*Michigan State University
*Michigan Technological University
*Northern Michigan University
*Oakland University
*Saginaw Valley State University
*Wayne State University
*Western Michigan University

==Minnesota==
*Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system (Listed below are the state universities. The Minnesota State system also includes the state&#x27;s community and technical colleges.)
**Bemidji State University
**Minnesota State University, Mankato (Mankato- flagship campus)
**Minnesota State University Moorhead
**Metropolitan State University
**Southwest Minnesota State University
**St. Cloud State University
**Winona State University
*University of Minnesota system
**University of Minnesota, Twin Cities (U of M or Minnesota) (Minneapolis – flagship/main campus)
**University of Minnesota Crookston
**University of Minnesota Duluth
**University of Minnesota Morris
**University of Minnesota Rochester

==Mississippi==
*Alcorn State University (Alcorn)
*Delta State University (Delta State)
*Jackson State University (Jackson State or JSU)
*Mississippi State University (Mississippi State or MSU)
*Mississippi University for Women (MUW)
*Mississippi Valley State University
*University of Mississippi (Ole Miss)
*University of Southern Mississippi (Southern Miss or USM)

==Missouri==
*University of Central Missouri (UCM)
*Harris–Stowe State University
*Lincoln University of Missouri
*University of Missouri System
**University of Missouri (Missouri or Mizzou) (Columbia – flagship/main campus)
**University of Missouri–Kansas City (UMKC)
**Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&amp;T)
**University of Missouri–St. Louis (UMSL)
*Missouri Southern State University
*Missouri State University (formerly Southwest Missouri State University)
*Missouri Western State University
*Northwest Missouri State University
*Southeast Missouri State University
*Truman State University (formerly Northeast Missouri State University)

==Montana==
*Montana University System (Listed below are the state universities. The MUS also includes the state&#x27;s community, technical, and tribal colleges.)
**Montana State University System
***Montana State University (Montana State) (Bozeman – flagship/main campus)
***Montana State University Billings (Billings)
***Montana State University–Northern (Havre)
***Great Falls College (Great Falls)
**University of Montana System
***University of Montana (Montana) (Missoula – flagship/main campus)
***Helena College (in Helena)
***University of Montana Western (Dillon)
***Montana Technological University (Montana Tech)

==Nebraska==
* Nebraska State College System
** Chadron State College
** Peru State College
** Wayne State College
* University of Nebraska system
** University of Nebraska–Lincoln (Nebraska or UNL) (Lincoln – flagship/main campus)
** University of Nebraska at Kearney (UNK)
** University of Nebraska Omaha (UNO)
** &quot;University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC)&quot;

==Nevada==
*Nevada System of Higher Education
**University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) (Reno – flagship/main campus)
**College of Southern Nevada (community college; in addition to associate&#x27;s degrees, offers a bachelor&#x27;s degree program)
**Great Basin College (community college; in addition to associate degrees, offers a few bachelor&#x27;s degrees)
**Nevada State University
**University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV)
**Western Nevada College (community college; in addition to associate degrees, offers a bachelor&#x27;s degree program)
**Truckee Meadows Community College (Community college located in Northern Reno. Offers a variety of associate degree programs, as well as bachelor&#x27;s degrees, which are provided through a partnership with Sierra Nevada College)

==New Hampshire==
*University System of New Hampshire
**Keene State College
**Plymouth State University
**University of New Hampshire (UNH) (Durham- flagship/main campus)

==New Jersey==
*The College of New Jersey
*Kean University
*Montclair State University
*New Jersey City University
*New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
*Ramapo College
*Rowan University
*Rutgers University system
**Rutgers University–New Brunswick (Rutgers) (New Brunswick and Piscataway – flagship/main campus)
**Rutgers University–Newark
**Rutgers University–Camden
**Rutgers Health
*Stockton University
*Thomas Edison State University
*William Paterson University of New Jersey

==New Mexico==
*Eastern New Mexico University (ENMU)
*University of New Mexico (New Mexico or UNM)
*New Mexico Highlands University
*New Mexico State University (NMSU)
*New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology (New Mexico Tech)
*Northern New Mexico College
*Western New Mexico University (WNMU)

==New York==
*State University of New York (SUNY) system
**University centers
*** The State University of New York at Buffalo (University at Buffalo, UBuffalo) 
*** University at Albany (Albany, UAlbany)
*** Binghamton University (Binghamton)
*** Stony Brook University (Stony Brook)
**Other doctoral-granting institutions
*** State University of New York Downstate Health Sciences University 
*** State University of New York Upstate Medical University 
*** State University of New York Polytechnic Institute (SUNY Poly)
*** New York State College of Ceramics (contract college at Alfred University) 
*** College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (contract college at Cornell University)
*** College of Human Ecology (contract college at Cornell University)
*** &quot;College of Veterinary Medicine&quot; (contract college at Cornell University)
*** School of Industrial and Labor Relations (contract college at Cornell University)
*** State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry
*** &quot;State University of New York College of Optometry&quot;
**Community colleges
***SUNY Adirondack
***SUNY Broome Community College
***Cayuga Community College
***Clinton Community College
***Columbia–Greene Community College
***Corning Community College
***Dutchess Community College
***SUNY Erie
***Finger Lakes Community College
***Fulton–Montgomery Community College
***Genesee Community College
***Herkimer County Community College
***Hudson Valley Community College
***Jamestown Community College
***Jefferson Community College
***Mohawk Valley Community College
***Monroe Community College
***Nassau Community College
***SUNY Niagara
***North Country Community College
***Onondaga Community College
***SUNY Orange
***Rockland Community College
***Schenectady County Community College
***Suffolk County Community College
***SUNY Sullivan
***Tompkins Cortland Community College
***SUNY Ulster
***Westchester Community College
**Comprehensive colleges
***Buffalo State University
***Empire State University
***State University of New York Brockport (SUNY Brockport)
***State University of New York at Cortland (SUNY Cortland)
***State University of New York at Fredonia (SUNY Fredonia)
***State University of New York at Geneseo (SUNY Geneseo)
***State University of New York at New Paltz (SUNY New Paltz)
***State University of New York at Old Westbury (SUNY Old Westbury)
***State University of New York at Oneonta (SUNY Oneonta)
***State University of New York at Oswego (SUNY Oswego)
***State University of New York at Plattsburgh (SUNY Plattsburgh)
***State University of New York at Potsdam (SUNY Potsdam)
***State University of New York at Purchase (SUNY Purchase)
**Technology colleges
***Alfred State College
***Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) (a SUNY community college; in addition to associate&#x27;s degrees, also offers bachelor&#x27;s and master&#x27;s degrees)
***State University of New York at Canton (SUNY Canton)
***State University of New York at Cobleskill (SUNY Cobleskill)
***State University of New York at Delhi (SUNY Delhi)
***State University of New York at Farmingdale (SUNY Farmingdale)
***State University of New York Maritime College (SUNY Maritime)
***State University of New York at Morrisville (SUNY Morrisville)
*City University of New York (CUNY) system
**Colleges
***Baruch College
***Brooklyn College
***City College of New York
***College of Staten Island
***Hunter College
***John Jay College of Criminal Justice
***Lehman College
***Medgar Evers College
***New York City College of Technology
***Queens College
***York College
**Community Colleges
***Bronx Community College
***Borough of Manhattan Community College
***Guttman Community College
***Hostos Community College
***Kingsborough Community College
***LaGuardia Community College
***Queensborough Community College
**Graduate and professional schools
***&quot;CUNY Graduate Center&quot;
***&quot;CUNY Graduate School of Journalism&quot;
***&quot;CUNY School of Law&quot;
***&quot;CUNY School of Labor and Urban Studies&quot;
***&quot;CUNY School of Professional Studies&quot;
***&quot;CUNY School of Public Health and Health Policy&quot;
***William E. Macaulay Honors College

==North Carolina==
*University of North Carolina system
**Appalachian State University (Appalachian State or App State)
**East Carolina University (ECU)
**Elizabeth City State University (ECSU)
**Fayetteville State University (FSU)
**North Carolina A&amp;T State University (North Carolina A&amp;T)
**North Carolina Central University (North Carolina Central or NCCU)
**North Carolina State University (North Carolina State, NC State, NCSU)
**University of North Carolina at Asheville (UNC Asheville or UNCA)
**University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC Chapel Hill or UNC—flagship/main campus)
**University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC Charlotte or Charlotte)
**University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNC Greensboro or UNCG)
**University of North Carolina at Pembroke (UNC Pembroke)
**University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNC Wilmington or UNCW)
**University of North Carolina School of the Arts (UNC School of the Arts)
**Western Carolina University (WCU)
**Winston-Salem State University (WSSU)
**&quot;University of North Carolina Press&quot; (UNC Press)
**&quot;PBS North Carolina&quot;
**&quot;North Carolina Arboretum&quot;

==North Dakota==
*North Dakota University System
**Universities
***Dickinson State University
***Mayville State University
***Minot State University
***University of North Dakota (UND) (Grand Forks) 
***North Dakota State University (North Dakota State or NDSU)
***Valley City State University
**Community Colleges
***Bismarck State College
***Dakota College at Bottineau
***Lake Region State College
***North Dakota State College of Science
***Williston State College

==Northern Mariana Islands==
*Northern Marianas College (community college; offers associate and Bachelor of Science degrees)

==Ohio==
*University System of Ohio
**Universities
***University of Akron (Akron)
***Bowling Green State University (BGSU)
***Central State University
***University of Cincinnati
***Cleveland State University
***Kent State University 
***Miami University
***&quot;Northeast Ohio Medical University&quot;
***Ohio State University
***Ohio University 
***Shawnee State University
***University of Toledo
***Wright State University
***Youngstown State University
**Community Colleges
***Belmont College
***Central Ohio Technical College
***Cincinnati State Technical and Community College
***Clark State College
***Columbus State Community College
***Cuyahoga Community College
***Edison State Community College
***Hocking College
***Lakeland Community College
***Lorain County Community College
***Marion Technical College
***North Central State College
***Northwest State Community College
***Owens Community College
***Rhodes State College
***University of Rio Grande
***Sinclair Community College
***Southern State Community College
***Stark State College
***Terra State Community College
***Washington State College of Ohio
***Zane State College

==Oklahoma==
*Cameron University
*East Central University
*Langston University
*Northeastern State University
*Northwestern Oklahoma State University
*University of Oklahoma system 
**University of Oklahoma (Oklahoma) (Norman – flagship/main campus)
**University of Oklahoma-Tulsa Schusterman Center
**&quot;University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center&quot;
*Oklahoma Panhandle State University
*Oklahoma State University System 
**Oklahoma State University–Stillwater (Oklahoma State) (Stillwater – flagship/main campus)
**&quot;Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences&quot;
**Oklahoma State University Institute of Technology
**Oklahoma State University–Oklahoma City
**Oklahoma State University–Tulsa
*Rogers State University
*University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma
*Southeastern Oklahoma State University
*Southwestern Oklahoma State University
*University of Central Oklahoma

==Oregon==
*Eastern Oregon University (EOU)
*Oregon Health &amp; Science University (OHSU)
*Oregon Institute of Technology (Oregon Tech or OIT)
*Oregon State University (Oregon State or OSU)
**Oregon State University–Cascades (OSU Cascades)
*Portland State University (Portland State or PSU)
*Southern Oregon University (SOU)
*University of Oregon (Oregon or UO)
*Western Oregon University (WOU)

==Pennsylvania==
Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PaSSHE)

The 14 universities in PaSSHE are state-owned. They are directly governed by gubernatorial appointees sitting on the PaSSHE Board of Governors. Each university also has an independent Council of Trustees appointed by the Commonwealth&#x27;s governor.
* State-owned universities:
** Commonwealth University of Pennsylvania
*** Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania
*** Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania
*** Mansfield University of Pennsylvania
** Pennsylvania Western University
*** Pennsylvania Western University, California
*** Penn West Clarion
*** Pennsylvania Western University, Edinboro
** Cheyney University of Pennsylvania
** East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania
** Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP)
** Kutztown University of Pennsylvania
** Millersville University of Pennsylvania
** Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
** Slippery Rock University
** West Chester University

Commonwealth System of Higher Education

Universities of the Commonwealth System of Higher Education receive public funds and reduce tuition for residents of Pennsylvania. Gubernatorial appointees are always a minority of their respective governing boards. Each university is a multi-campus institution throughout the state.
* State-related institutions:
** Lincoln University
** Pennsylvania State University
*** Penn State University Park (PSU-University Park, administrative hub)
*** Penn State Abington (PSU-Abington)
*** Penn State Altoona (PSU-Altoona)
*** Penn State Berks (PSU-Berks)
*** Penn State Beaver (PSU-Beaver)
*** Penn State Brandywine (PSU-Brandywine)
*** Penn State College of Medicine
*** Penn State Dickinson Law
*** Penn State DuBois (PSU-DuBois)
*** Penn State Erie, The Behrend College (PSU-Erie or Behrend)
*** Penn State Fayette (PSU-Fayette)
*** &quot;Penn State Great Valley&quot; (PSU-Great Valley)
*** Penn State Greater Allegheny (PSU-Greater Allegheny)
*** Penn State Harrisburg (PSU-Harrisburg)
*** Penn State Hazleton (PSU-Hazleton)
*** Penn State Lehigh Valley (PSU-Lehigh Valley)
*** Penn State Mont Alto (PSU-Mont Alto)
*** Penn State New Kensington (PSU-New Kensington)
*** Penn State Schuylkill (PSU-Schuylkill)
*** Penn State Scranton (PSU-Scranton)
*** Penn State Shenango (PSU-Shenango)
*** Penn State Wilkes-Barre (PSU-Wilkes-Barre)
*** Penn State Williamsport
*** Penn State World Campus
*** Penn State York (PSU-York)
** Temple University
*** Temple University (Temple or TU)
*** Temple University Ambler (TU-Ambler)
*** Temple University, Japan Campus (TUJ)
*** Temple University Rome (Temple Rome)
*** Temple University Health Sciences Campus 
*** Temple University Podiatric Medicine Campus
*** Temple University Center City Campus
*** Temple University Harrisburg
** University of Pittsburgh 
*** University of Pittsburgh (Pittsburgh or Pitt)
*** University of Pittsburgh at Bradford
*** University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg
*** University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown
*** University of Pittsburgh at Titusville

==Puerto Rico==
*University of Puerto Rico system 
**University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus (UPR-RP) (Rio Piedras – flagship/main campus)
**University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez (UPRM)
**University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo (UPRA)
**University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón (UPRB)
**University of Puerto Rico at Carolina (UPRC)
**University of Puerto Rico at Cayey (UPR-Cayey)
**University of Puerto Rico at Humacao (UPRH)
**University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla (UPRAG)
**University of Puerto Rico at Ponce (UPRP)
**University of Puerto Rico at Utuado (UPRU)
**University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus (UPR-CM)
*Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de Puerto Rico
*Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico

==Rhode Island==
*Rhode Island College (RIC)
*University of Rhode Island

==South Carolina==
*The Citadel 
*Clemson University
*Coastal Carolina University (Coastal Carolina or CCU)
*College of Charleston (Charleston or CofC)
*Francis Marion University
*Lander University
*Medical University of South Carolina
*University of South Carolina System
**University of South Carolina (Carolina, USC, or SCar) (Columbia – flagship/main campus) 
**University of South Carolina Aiken (USC-Aiken)
**University of South Carolina Beaufort (USC-Beaufort)
***Palmetto College
****University of South Carolina Lancaster (USC-Lancaster)
****University of South Carolina Salkehatchie (USC-Salkehatchie)
****University of South Carolina Sumter (USC-Sumter)
****University of South Carolina Union (USC-Union)
**University of South Carolina Upstate (USC-Upstate or Upstate)
*South Carolina State University (SCSU)
*Winthrop University (WU)

==South Dakota==
*Black Hills State University
*Dakota State University
*Northern State University

*University of South Dakota (South Dakota or USD)
*South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (South Dakota School of Mines, South Dakota Tech, or SDSM&amp;T, pronounced &quot;SDSM and T&quot;)
*South Dakota State University (South Dakota State or SDSU)

==Tennessee==
*Austin Peay State University (Austin Peay or APSU)
*East Tennessee State University (ETSU)
*Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU)
*Tennessee State University (TSU)
*Tennessee Technological University (Tennessee Tech or TTU)
*University of Memphis (U of M) (Memphis – flagship/main campus)
*University of Tennessee system (UT, UTC, and UT Martin are primary campuses of the UT System, whereas the UTHSC, UT Southern, and the Space Institute are three other educational campuses.)
**University of Tennessee at Knoxville (UT Knoxville, UTK, or UT) (Knoxville – flagship/main campus)
**University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UT Chattanooga or UTC)
**University of Tennessee at Martin (UT Martin or UTM)
**&quot;University of Tennessee Health Science Center&quot; (UTHSC or UT Medical School) (Memphis)
**&quot;University of Tennessee Southern&quot; (formerly Martin Methodist College) (Pulaski)
**&quot;University of Tennessee Space Institute&quot; (UT Space Institute) (Tullahoma)

==Texas==
*University of Houston System
**University of Houston (Houston- flagship/main campus)
**University of Houston–Clear Lake 
**University of Houston–Downtown 
**University of Houston–Victoria 
*University of North Texas System
**University of North Texas (Denton- flagship/main campus) 
**University of North Texas at Dallas 
**&quot;University of North Texas Health Science Center&quot;
*The University of Texas System 
** Academic institutions
*** The University of Texas at Arlington 
*** The University of Texas at Austin (Austin- flagship/main campus) 
*** The University of Texas at Dallas 
*** The University of Texas at El Paso
*** The University of Texas Permian Basin
*** The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
*** The University of Texas at San Antonio 
*** The University of Texas at Tyler
***Stephen F. Austin State University
** Health institutions
*** &quot;MD Anderson Cancer Center&quot;
*** &quot;University of Texas Medical Branch&quot;
*** &quot;University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center&quot;
*** University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth)
*** University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
*Texas A&amp;M University System
** Texas A&amp;M University (Texas A&amp;M or A&amp;M) (College Station, Galveston, Doha- flagship/main campus)
** East Texas A&amp;M University 
** Prairie View A&amp;M University
** Tarleton State University
** Texas A&amp;M International University
** Texas A&amp;M University–Central Texas 
** Texas A&amp;M University–Corpus Christi 
** Texas A&amp;M University–Kingsville 
** Texas A&amp;M University–San Antonio 
** Texas A&amp;M University–Texarkana
** West Texas A&amp;M University
** Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Research
** Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Extension Service
** Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station
** Texas A&amp;M Engineering Extension Service
** Texas A&amp;M Forest Service
** Texas A&amp;M Transportation Institute
** Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
** Texas Division of Emergency Management
*Texas Southern University 
*Texas State University System
** Lamar University
** Sam Houston State University 
** Sul Ross State University
** Texas State University
** Lamar Institute of Technology
** Lamar State College–Orange
** Lamar State College–Port Arthur
*Texas Tech University System
** Academic institutions
***Angelo State University
***Midwestern State University
***Texas Tech University (Texas Tech) (Lubbock- flagship/main campus) 
** Health institutions
***&quot;Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center&quot;
***&quot;Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso&quot;
*Texas Woman&#x27;s University System (https://twu.edu/news/2021/bill-establishing-twu-system-becomes-law/) -The system was created in 2021. Texas Woman&#x27;s University in Denton is currently the only system component; however, the establishing legislation anticipates the university&#x27;s branch campuses becoming standalone institutions within the system.
**Texas Woman&#x27;s University
***Dallas branch
***Houston branch

==Utah==
*Utah System of Higher Education
**Snow College (community college; in addition to associate degrees, offers a few bachelor&#x27;s degrees)
**Southern Utah University (Southern Utah or SUU)
**University of Utah (Utah, U of U, or UU)
**Utah State University (Utah State or USU)
***Utah State University Eastern (USUE)
**Utah Tech University (Utah Tech or UT)
**Utah Valley University (Utah Valley or UVU)
**Weber State University (Weber State)

==Vermont==
*Vermont State Colleges (Listed below are the state universities.
**Vermont State University Castleton, Johnson, Lyndon, and Randolph
**Community College of Vermont
*University of Vermont (UVM)

==Virginia==
*Christopher Newport University (CNU)
*&quot;Virginia Health Sciences&quot; (EVMS)
*George Mason University (George Mason, GMU, or Mason)
*James Madison University (JMU or James Madison)
*Longwood University
*University of Mary Washington (Mary Washington, Mary Wash, or UMW)
*Norfolk State University
*Old Dominion University (Old Dominion or ODU)
*Radford University
*University of Virginia (UVA)
*University of Virginia&#x27;s College at Wise (UVA at Wise or UVA-Wise)
*Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU)
*Virginia Military Institute (VMI)
*Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech or VT)
*Virginia State University (VSU)
*The College of William &amp; Mary (William and Mary, W&amp;M)

==Virgin Islands==
*University of the Virgin Islands system
**University of the Virgin Islands – St. Croix campus (UVI-St. Croix)
**University of the Virgin Islands – St. Thomas campus (UVI-St. Thomas)

==Washington==
*Central Washington University (CWU)
*Eastern Washington University (EWU)
*Evergreen State College
*University of Washington (campuses in Seattle, Bothell, and Tacoma)
*Washington State University System
**Washington State University (Pullman – flagship/main campus)
**Washington State University Everett
**Washington State University Spokane
**Washington State University Tri-Cities
**Washington State University Vancouver
**Washington State University Global Campus
*Western Washington University (WWU)

==West Virginia==
*Bluefield State University
*Concord University
*Fairmont State University
*Glenville State University
*Marshall University 
*Shepherd University
*West Liberty University
*West Virginia University at Parkersburg
*West Virginia University system
**West Virginia University (WVU) (Morgantown – flagship/main campus)
**Potomac State College of West Virginia University (Potomac State College or Potomac State) (community college; in addition to associate&#x27;s degrees, offers a bachelor&#x27;s degree program)
**West Virginia University Institute of Technology (WVU Tech or West Virginia Tech)
*&quot;West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine&quot;
*West Virginia State University (WVSU)

==Wisconsin==
*University of Wisconsin System
**University of Wisconsin–Madison (Wisconsin) (Madison – flagship/main campus)
**University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire 
**University of Wisconsin–Green Bay 
**University of Wisconsin–La Crosse 
**University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee 
**University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh 
**University of Wisconsin–Parkside 
**University of Wisconsin–Platteville 
**University of Wisconsin–River Falls 
**University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point
**University of Wisconsin–Stout 
**University of Wisconsin–Superior
**University of Wisconsin–Whitewater

==Wyoming==
*University of Wyoming

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="72" end="78" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846117" start="79" end="103" title="List of colleges and universities" label="colleges or universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603694" start="137" end="153" title="State governments of the United States" label="state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="192" end="207" title="higher education" label="higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="222" end="238" title="state university" label="state university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="290" end="306" title="Territories of the United States" label="U.S. territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="511" end="534" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="550" end="567" title="United States Service academies" label="service academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154695" start="573" end="607" title="Community College of the Air Force" label="Community College of the Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="613" end="638" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697913" start="644" end="677" title="Air Force Institute of Technology" label="Air Force Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114428" start="683" end="735" title="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences" label="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968393" start="746" end="757" title="War college" label="War college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522839" start="763" end="776" title="staff college" label="staff college"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="783" end="816" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Indian Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="839" end="867" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="869" end="890" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056373" start="892" end="912" title="Gallaudet University" label="Gallaudet University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="914" end="931" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="937" end="956" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1021" end="1040" title="University charter#Federal" label="federally chartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q538104" start="1197" end="1204" title="Tuition payments" label="tuition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="1215" end="1224" title="Financial endowment" label="endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="1304" end="1313" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627832" start="1494" end="1507" title="Student financial aid (United States)" label="financial aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="1730" end="1766" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="1781" end="1810" title="University System of Maryland" label="University System of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="1816" end="1846" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="1861" end="1886" title="Indiana University (system)" label="Indiana University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="1896" end="1930" title="University of Tennessee, Knoxville" label="University of Tennessee, Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495917" start="1945" end="1975" title="University of Tennessee System" label="University of Tennessee System"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2055" end="2065" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2074" end="2082" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="2091" end="2098" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2107" end="2115" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="2124" end="2133" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="2146" end="2151" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="2259" end="2273" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321960" start="2276" end="2286" title="law school" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637929" start="2292" end="2310" title="Schools of veterinary medicine" label="veterinary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896583" start="2495" end="2526" title="University of Washington Tacoma" label="University of Washington Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="2559" end="2583" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895509" start="2649" end="2679" title="University of Houston–Downtown" label="University of Houston–Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="2684" end="2720" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="University of California, Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="2909" end="2933" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degrees" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612183" start="2945" end="2968" title="List of community colleges" label="community colleges list"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146954" start="3053" end="3090" title="List of tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal colleges and universities list"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="3097" end="3119" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="3151" end="3166" title="graduate school" label="graduate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551044" start="3218" end="3244" title="Alabama A&amp;amp;M University" label="Alabama A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941524" start="3247" end="3271" title="Alabama State University" label="Alabama State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813523" start="3274" end="3297" title="Athens State University" label="Athens State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="3326" end="3343" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q758560" start="3347" end="3378" title="Auburn University at Montgomery" label="Auburn University at Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q957995" start="3380" end="3409" title="Jacksonville State University" label="Jacksonville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817686" start="3411" end="3426" title="Troy University" label="Troy University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593069" start="3428" end="3456" title="University of Alabama System" label="University of Alabama System"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="3459" end="3480" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="3492" end="3502" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472663" start="3529" end="3564" title="University of Alabama at Birmingham" label="University of Alabama at Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783148" start="3573" end="3608" title="University of Alabama in Huntsville" label="University of Alabama in Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698206" start="3616" end="3640" title="University of Montevallo" label="University of Montevallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273836" start="3642" end="3669" title="University of North Alabama" label="University of North Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13572981" start="3677" end="3704" title="University of South Alabama" label="University of South Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q637346" start="3712" end="3738" title="University of West Alabama" label="University of West Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002043" start="3758" end="3785" title="University of Alaska System" label="University of Alaska System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="3788" end="3818" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="3826" end="3835" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285252" start="3862" end="3892" title="University of Alaska Anchorage" label="University of Alaska Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="3901" end="3931" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791254" start="3952" end="3976" title="Arizona Board of Regents" label="Arizona Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="3979" end="4003" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="4012" end="4039" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="4048" end="4069" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495814" start="4092" end="4121" title="University of Arkansas System" label="University of Arkansas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="4124" end="4146" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219526" start="4159" end="4171" title="Fayetteville, Arkansas" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495828" start="4198" end="4231" title="University of Arkansas–Fort Smith" label="University of Arkansas–Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q500154" start="4234" end="4271" title="University of Arkansas at Little Rock" label="University of Arkansas at Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q941298" start="4280" end="4323" title="University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences" label="University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571390" start="4332" end="4368" title="University of Arkansas at Monticello" label="University of Arkansas at Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495825" start="4371" end="4407" title="University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff" label="University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596645" start="4410" end="4441" title="University of Arkansas Grantham" label="University of Arkansas Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q673105" start="4443" end="4475" title="Arkansas State University System" label="Arkansas State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q500131" start="4478" end="4503" title="Arkansas State University" label="Arkansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604967" start="4506" end="4532" title="Henderson State University" label="Henderson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q673111" start="4534" end="4558" title="Arkansas Tech University" label="Arkansas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782724" start="4560" end="4590" title="University of Central Arkansas" label="University of Central Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724577" start="4616" end="4644" title="Southern Arkansas University" label="Southern Arkansas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="4668" end="4692" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4702" end="4736" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="4764" end="4795" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="4814" end="4846" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California, Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="4866" end="4903" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728622" start="4913" end="4945" title="University of California, Merced" label="University of California, Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075148" start="4965" end="5000" title="University of California, Riverside" label="University of California, Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="5023" end="5058" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061104" start="5082" end="5121" title="University of California, San Francisco" label="University of California, San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="5131" end="5170" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="5198" end="5234" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="University of California, Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577853" start="5265" end="5323" title="University of California College of the Law, San Francisco" label="University of California College of the Law, San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5355" end="5378" title="University of California College of the Law, San Francisco#History" label="administered separately"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="5408" end="5435" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026902" start="5445" end="5485" title="California State University, Bakersfield" label="California State University, Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026905" start="5495" end="5539" title="California State University, Channel Islands" label="California State University, Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026912" start="5550" end="5584" title="California State University, Chico" label="California State University, Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026909" start="5601" end="5645" title="California State University, Dominguez Hills" label="California State University, Dominguez Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026916" start="5656" end="5693" title="California State University, East Bay" label="California State University, East Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026919" start="5704" end="5739" title="California State University, Fresno" label="California State University, Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="5757" end="5795" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="California State University, Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q624560" start="5826" end="5875" title="California State Polytechnic University, Humboldt" label="California State Polytechnic University, Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026926" start="5898" end="5937" title="California State University, Long Beach" label="California State University, Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026932" start="5994" end="6034" title="California State University, Los Angeles" label="California State University, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026832" start="6059" end="6086" title="California Maritime Academy" label="California Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624686" start="6117" end="6158" title="California State University, Monterey Bay" label="California State University, Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026939" start="6169" end="6208" title="California State University, Northridge" label="California State University, Northridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026868" start="6218" end="6265" title="Cal Poly Pomona" label="California State Polytechnic University, Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026941" start="6291" end="6330" title="California State University, Sacramento" label="California State University, Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026944" start="6363" end="6406" title="California State University, San Bernardino" label="California State University, San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q913861" start="6417" end="6443" title="San Diego State University" label="San Diego State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="6470" end="6500" title="San Francisco State University" label="San Francisco State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="6510" end="6535" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="6561" end="6617" title="California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo" label="California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q624691" start="6671" end="6709" title="California State University San Marcos" label="California State University San Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q624571" start="6720" end="6743" title="Sonoma State University" label="Sonoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624564" start="6752" end="6791" title="California State University, Stanislaus" label="California State University, Stanislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q351971" start="6820" end="6842" title="Adams State University" label="Adams State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="6844" end="6866" title="University of Colorado" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="6876" end="6906" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="6925" end="6932" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495841" start="6959" end="6998" title="University of Colorado Colorado Springs" label="University of Colorado Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468161" start="7008" end="7037" title="University of Colorado Denver" label="University of Colorado Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770537" start="7052" end="7075" title="Anschutz Medical Campus" label="Anschutz Medical Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507218" start="7077" end="7101" title="Colorado Mesa University" label="Colorado Mesa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="7103" end="7127" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Colorado School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="7164" end="7189" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="7208" end="7220" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111515" start="7247" end="7279" title="Colorado State University Pueblo" label="Colorado State University Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014426" start="7295" end="7334" title="Colorado State University–Global Campus" label="Colorado State University–Global Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438597" start="7363" end="7381" title="Fort Lewis College" label="Fort Lewis College"/>
<link wikidata="Q613736" start="7383" end="7422" title="Metropolitan State University of Denver" label="Metropolitan State University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="7424" end="7455" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="University of Northern Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564975" start="7457" end="7484" title="Western Colorado University" label="Western Colorado University"/>
<link wikidata="Q32287" start="7513" end="7538" title="Charter Oak State College" label="Charter Oak State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126210" start="7547" end="7582" title="Connecticut State University System" label="Connecticut State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053764" start="7585" end="7621" title="Central Connecticut State University" label="Central Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278152" start="7631" end="7667" title="Eastern Connecticut State University" label="Eastern Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253123" start="7677" end="7714" title="Southern Connecticut State University" label="Southern Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552113" start="7724" end="7760" title="Western Connecticut State University" label="Western Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="7769" end="7794" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="7818" end="7840" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183967" start="7847" end="7872" title="Delaware State University" label="Delaware State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551751" start="7900" end="7938" title="University of the District of Columbia" label="University of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160964" start="7959" end="8004" title="Congressional charter" label="chartered by Congress (Congressional Charter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="8245" end="8277" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8305" end="8325" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="8513" end="8557" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="Historically Black Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="8645" end="8673" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382998" start="8749" end="8783" title="State University System of Florida" label="State University System of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430048" start="8786" end="8812" title="Florida A&amp;amp;M University" label="Florida A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="8822" end="8849" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430054" start="8858" end="8887" title="Florida Gulf Coast University" label="Florida Gulf Coast University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="8897" end="8929" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461548" start="8939" end="8969" title="Florida Polytechnic University" label="Florida Polytechnic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="8994" end="9018" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982482" start="9027" end="9049" title="New College of Florida" label="New College of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="9073" end="9102" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="9111" end="9132" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473796" start="9141" end="9168" title="University of North Florida" label="University of North Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q500606" start="9215" end="9242" title="University of South Florida" label="University of South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896335" start="9252" end="9296" title="University of South Florida Sarasota–Manatee" label="University of South Florida Sarasota–Manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896336" start="9308" end="9350" title="University of South Florida St. Petersburg" label="University of South Florida St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q659255" start="9361" end="9387" title="University of West Florida" label="University of West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461287" start="9395" end="9417" title="Florida College System" label="Florida College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q556733" start="9512" end="9527" title="Broward College" label="Broward College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101627" start="9530" end="9545" title="Chipola College" label="Chipola College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146660" start="9548" end="9574" title="College of Central Florida" label="College of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243619" start="9577" end="9598" title="Daytona State College" label="Daytona State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685856" start="9601" end="9630" title="Eastern Florida State College" label="Eastern Florida State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461388" start="9633" end="9656" title="Florida Gateway College" label="Florida Gateway College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338425" start="9659" end="9693" title="Florida SouthWestern State College" label="Florida SouthWestern State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461608" start="9696" end="9733" title="Florida State College at Jacksonville" label="Florida State College at Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617466" start="9736" end="9760" title="Gulf Coast State College" label="Gulf Coast State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021484" start="9763" end="9789" title="Indian River State College" label="Indian River State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479473" start="9792" end="9817" title="Lake–Sumter State College" label="Lake–Sumter State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="9820" end="9838" title="Miami Dade College" label="Miami Dade College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060041" start="9841" end="9872" title="Northwest Florida State College" label="Northwest Florida State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128010" start="9875" end="9899" title="Palm Beach State College" label="Palm Beach State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141850" start="9902" end="9930" title="Pasco–Hernando State College" label="Pasco–Hernando State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164705" start="9933" end="9956" title="Pensacola State College" label="Pensacola State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225469" start="9959" end="9977" title="Polk State College" label="Polk State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419511" start="9980" end="9996" title="Santa Fe College" label="Santa Fe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449539" start="9999" end="10032" title="Seminole State College of Florida" label="Seminole State College of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567248" start="10035" end="10062" title="South Florida State College" label="South Florida State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257876" start="10065" end="10094" title="St. Johns River State College" label="St. Johns River State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591484" start="10097" end="10119" title="St. Petersburg College" label="St. Petersburg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063212" start="10122" end="10164" title="State College of Florida, Manatee–Sarasota" label="State College of Florida, Manatee–Sarasota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454789" start="10167" end="10192" title="Tallahassee State College" label="Tallahassee State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910651" start="10195" end="10211" title="Valencia College" label="Valencia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495809" start="10227" end="10255" title="University System of Georgia" label="University System of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668762" start="10258" end="10294" title="Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College" label="Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709390" start="10315" end="10338" title="Albany State University" label="Albany State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816111" start="10341" end="10375" title="Atlanta Metropolitan State College" label="Atlanta Metropolitan State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547686" start="10378" end="10396" title="Augusta University" label="Augusta University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130334" start="10409" end="10433" title="Clayton State University" label="Clayton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146666" start="10436" end="10462" title="College of Coastal Georgia" label="College of Coastal Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150130" start="10475" end="10500" title="Columbus State University" label="Columbus State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211714" start="10503" end="10523" title="Dalton State College" label="Dalton State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328416" start="10526" end="10552" title="East Georgia State College" label="East Georgia State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472214" start="10555" end="10583" title="Fort Valley State University" label="Fort Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994033" start="10600" end="10616" title="Georgia Archives" label="Georgia Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547419" start="10619" end="10657" title="Georgia College &amp;amp; State University" label="Georgia College &amp;amp; State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547517" start="10678" end="10702" title="Georgia Gwinnett College" label="Georgia Gwinnett College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994039" start="10705" end="10730" title="Georgia Highlands College" label="Georgia Highlands College"/>
<link wikidata="Q30268112" start="10745" end="10775" title="Georgia Public Library Service" label="Georgia Public Library Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="10778" end="10809" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q624959" start="10827" end="10854" title="Georgia Southern University" label="Georgia Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547746" start="10857" end="10894" title="Georgia Southwestern State University" label="Georgia Southwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509333" start="10903" end="10927" title="Georgia State University" label="Georgia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585003" start="10936" end="10956" title="Gordon State College" label="Gordon State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532470" start="10959" end="10984" title="Kennesaw State University" label="Kennesaw State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841434" start="10993" end="11024" title="Middle Georgia State University" label="Middle Georgia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474474" start="11027" end="11052" title="Savannah State University" label="Savannah State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567341" start="11055" end="11082" title="South Georgia State College" label="South Georgia State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="11092" end="11113" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895970" start="11122" end="11149" title="University of North Georgia" label="University of North Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495945" start="11158" end="11184" title="University of West Georgia" label="University of West Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508061" start="11193" end="11218" title="Valdosta State University" label="Valdosta State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248737" start="11236" end="11254" title="University of Guam" label="University of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="11269" end="11297" title="University of Hawaiʻi" label="University of Hawaiʻi System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="11300" end="11330" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="11347" end="11355" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150914" start="11382" end="11411" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171185" start="11424" end="11458" title="University of Hawaiʻi – West Oʻahu" label="University of Hawaiʻi – West Oʻahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="11508" end="11530" title="Boise State University" label="Boise State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854488" start="11553" end="11572" title="University of Idaho" label="University of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656608" start="11589" end="11611" title="Idaho State University" label="Idaho State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822063" start="11634" end="11659" title="Lewis–Clark State College" label="Lewis–Clark State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q915866" start="11675" end="11699" title="Chicago State University" label="Chicago State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624985" start="11717" end="11744" title="Eastern Illinois University" label="Eastern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540471" start="11770" end="11796" title="Governors State University" label="Governors State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q558922" start="11798" end="11823" title="Illinois State University" label="Illinois State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145814" start="11847" end="11876" title="University of Illinois System" label="University of Illinois System"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="11879" end="11918" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q462184" start="11945" end="11951" title="Urbana, Illinois" label="Urbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q577964" start="11956" end="11965" title="Champaign, Illinois" label="Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="11992" end="12022" title="University of Illinois Chicago" label="University of Illinois Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q941855" start="12031" end="12065" title="University of Illinois Springfield" label="University of Illinois Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000943" start="12073" end="12105" title="Northeastern Illinois University" label="Northeastern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="12114" end="12142" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472474" start="12169" end="12197" title="Southern Illinois University" label="Southern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472347" start="12207" end="12246" title="Southern Illinois University Carbondale" label="Southern Illinois University Carbondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q577511" start="12273" end="12283" title="Carbondale, Illinois" label="Carbondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q519349" start="12310" end="12351" title="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville" label="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474005" start="12360" end="12387" title="Western Illinois University" label="Western Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q805122" start="12426" end="12447" title="Ball State University" label="Ball State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="12449" end="12474" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="12478" end="12508" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="12526" end="12537" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023671" start="12564" end="12591" title="Indiana University–Purdue University Columbus" label="Indiana University Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023582" start="12600" end="12623" title="Indiana University East" label="Indiana University East"/>
<link wikidata="Q55593285" start="12626" end="12655" title="Indiana University Fort Wayne" label="Indiana University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q123207578" start="12658" end="12689" title="Indiana University Indianapolis" label="Indiana University Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287623" start="12698" end="12723" title="Indiana University Kokomo" label="Indiana University Kokomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023619" start="12732" end="12760" title="Indiana University Northwest" label="Indiana University Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023665" start="12763" end="12792" title="Indiana University South Bend" label="Indiana University South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023656" start="12802" end="12830" title="Indiana University Southeast" label="Indiana University Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q666128" start="12832" end="12856" title="Indiana State University" label="Indiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q929715" start="12858" end="12882" title="Purdue University system" label="Purdue University system"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="12885" end="12902" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166481" start="12904" end="12918" title="West Lafayette, Indiana" label="West Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q55456518" start="12945" end="12973" title="Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="Purdue University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074849" start="12982" end="13006" title="Purdue University Global" label="Purdue University Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q123207573" start="13009" end="13042" title="Purdue University in Indianapolis" label="Purdue University in Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709782" start="13045" end="13072" title="Purdue University Northwest" label="Purdue University Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709782" start="13091" end="13116" title="Purdue University Calumet" label="Purdue University Calumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709782" start="13121" end="13152" title="Purdue University North Central" label="Purdue University North Central"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13156" end="13180" title="Purdue University system#Purdue Online" label="Purdue University Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q940289" start="13182" end="13212" title="University of Southern Indiana" label="University of Southern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526468" start="13220" end="13240" title="Vincennes University" label="Vincennes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="13257" end="13275" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="13284" end="13305" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781094" start="13313" end="13340" title="University of Northern Iowa" label="University of Northern Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="13360" end="13384" title="Emporia State University" label="Emporia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q591426" start="13409" end="13435" title="Fort Hays State University" label="Fort Hays State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="13444" end="13464" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="13481" end="13504" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097334" start="13523" end="13549" title="Pittsburg State University" label="Pittsburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="13551" end="13575" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941551" start="13583" end="13602" title="Washburn University" label="Washburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="13606" end="13612" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278206" start="13814" end="13841" title="Eastern Kentucky University" label="Eastern Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="13849" end="13871" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187623" start="13890" end="13915" title="Kentucky State University" label="Kentucky State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="13918" end="13942" title="University of Louisville" label="University of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q633040" start="13972" end="13997" title="Morehead State University" label="Morehead State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q574586" start="13999" end="14022" title="Murray State University" label="Murray State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001033" start="14024" end="14052" title="Northern Kentucky University" label="Northern Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474105" start="14060" end="14087" title="Western Kentucky University" label="Western Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872233" start="14110" end="14143" title="Louisiana State University System" label="Louisiana State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="14146" end="14212" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="14220" end="14231" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689301" start="14264" end="14310" title="Louisiana State University Agricultural Center" label="Louisiana State University Agricultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689310" start="14319" end="14355" title="Louisiana State University at Eunice" label="Louisiana State University at Eunice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634567" start="14371" end="14411" title="Louisiana State University of Alexandria" label="Louisiana State University of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689312" start="14431" end="14468" title="Louisiana State University Shreveport" label="Louisiana State University Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460011" start="14494" end="14532" title="LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans" label="LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689304" start="14547" end="14584" title="LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport" label="LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152118" start="14599" end="14624" title="Paul M. Hebert Law Center" label="Paul M. Hebert Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163465" start="14705" end="14742" title="Pennington Biomedical Research Center" label="Pennington Biomedical Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495858" start="14750" end="14780" title="University of Louisiana System" label="University of Louisiana System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593620" start="14783" end="14809" title="Grambling State University" label="Grambling State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872239" start="14818" end="14843" title="Louisiana Tech University" label="Louisiana Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q634396" start="14874" end="14898" title="McNeese State University" label="McNeese State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884307" start="14907" end="14932" title="Nicholls State University" label="Nicholls State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001231" start="14935" end="14964" title="Northwestern State University" label="Northwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q615998" start="14975" end="15008" title="Southeastern Louisiana University" label="Southeastern Louisiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q116485" start="15018" end="15054" title="University of Louisiana at Lafayette" label="University of Louisiana at Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552010" start="15072" end="15105" title="University of Louisiana at Monroe" label="University of Louisiana at Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474157" start="15114" end="15139" title="University of New Orleans" label="University of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570575" start="15147" end="15173" title="Southern University System" label="Southern University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q627271" start="15176" end="15195" title="Southern University" label="Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="15197" end="15208" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002144" start="15235" end="15269" title="Southern University at New Orleans" label="Southern University at New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570578" start="15279" end="15312" title="Southern University at Shreveport" label="Southern University at Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570576" start="15323" end="15353" title="Southern University Law Center" label="Southern University Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978689" start="15438" end="15460" title="Maine Maritime Academy" label="Maine Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495861" start="15462" end="15488" title="University of Maine System" label="University of Maine System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="15491" end="15510" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736049" start="15530" end="15535" title="Orono, Maine" label="Orono"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895653" start="15567" end="15600" title="University of Maine School of Law" label="University of Maine School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895654" start="15621" end="15651" title="University of Maine at Augusta" label="University of Maine at Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895656" start="15691" end="15724" title="University of Maine at Farmington" label="University of Maine at Farmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895655" start="15770" end="15802" title="University of Maine at Fort Kent" label="University of Maine at Fort Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895657" start="15847" end="15877" title="University of Maine at Machias" label="University of Maine at Machias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895658" start="15947" end="15982" title="University of Maine at Presque Isle" label="University of Maine at Presque Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244049" start="16063" end="16091" title="University of Southern Maine" label="University of Southern Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054905" start="16131" end="16154" title="Morgan State University" label="Morgan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590249" start="16156" end="16191" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College of Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="16193" end="16222" title="University System of Maryland" label="University System of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="16225" end="16261" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q668676" start="16281" end="16293" title="College Park, Maryland" label="College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q895439" start="16320" end="16342" title="Bowie State University" label="Bowie State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168881" start="16345" end="16368" title="Coppin State University" label="Coppin State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470544" start="16371" end="16397" title="Frostburg State University" label="Frostburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404818" start="16400" end="16420" title="Salisbury University" label="Salisbury University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474129" start="16424" end="16441" title="Towson University" label="Towson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895109" start="16453" end="16476" title="University of Baltimore" label="University of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119470" start="16484" end="16517" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="16542" end="16582" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49089" start="16592" end="16628" title="University of Maryland Eastern Shore" label="University of Maryland Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692455" start="16638" end="16674" title="University of Maryland Global Campus" label="University of Maryland Global Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894466" start="16690" end="16717" title="Universities at Shady Grove" label="Universities at Shady Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894950" start="16732" end="16775" title="University System of Maryland at Hagerstown" label="University System of Maryland at Hagerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895680" start="16855" end="16910" title="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science" label="University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="16937" end="16964" title="University of Massachusetts" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="16974" end="17009" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="17049" end="17056" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144" start="17083" end="17117" title="University of Massachusetts Boston" label="University of Massachusetts Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118040" start="17135" end="17172" title="University of Massachusetts Dartmouth" label="University of Massachusetts Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895717" start="17193" end="17234" title="University of Massachusetts School of Law" label="University of Massachusetts School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15143" start="17249" end="17283" title="University of Massachusetts Lowell" label="University of Massachusetts Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q119993821" start="17301" end="17335" title="University of Massachusetts Global" label="University of Massachusetts Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q108899288" start="17359" end="17401" title="UMass Chan Medical School" label="University of Massachusetts Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446076" start="17435" end="17463" title="Bridgewater State University" label="Bridgewater State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982087" start="17466" end="17492" title="Fitchburg State University" label="Fitchburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982077" start="17495" end="17522" title="Framingham State University" label="Framingham State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695750" start="17525" end="17547" title="Salem State University" label="Salem State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="17550" end="17576" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446068" start="17579" end="17605" title="Worcester State University" label="Worcester State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381563" start="17608" end="17647" title="Massachusetts College of Art and Design" label="Massachusetts College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784220" start="17660" end="17697" title="Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts" label="Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784318" start="17700" end="17730" title="Massachusetts Maritime Academy" label="Massachusetts Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q250205" start="17746" end="17773" title="Central Michigan University" label="Central Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278221" start="17775" end="17802" title="Eastern Michigan University" label="Eastern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407897" start="17804" end="17827" title="Ferris State University" label="Ferris State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472315" start="17829" end="17858" title="Grand Valley State University" label="Grand Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591654" start="17860" end="17890" title="Lake Superior State University" label="Lake Superior State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="17892" end="17914" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895782" start="17916" end="17947" title="University of Michigan–Dearborn" label="University of Michigan–Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895785" start="17949" end="17977" title="University of Michigan–Flint" label="University of Michigan–Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="17979" end="18004" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="18006" end="18039" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624970" start="18041" end="18069" title="Northern Michigan University" label="Northern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q782116" start="18071" end="18089" title="Oakland University" label="Oakland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399281" start="18091" end="18122" title="Saginaw Valley State University" label="Saginaw Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="18124" end="18146" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="18148" end="18175" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937364" start="18192" end="18240" title="Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system" label="Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system"/>
<link wikidata="Q816377" start="18378" end="18402" title="Bemidji State University" label="Bemidji State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937387" start="18405" end="18440" title="Minnesota State University, Mankato" label="Minnesota State University, Mankato"/>
<link wikidata="Q913243" start="18442" end="18449" title="Mankato, Minnesota" label="Mankato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868559" start="18470" end="18505" title="Minnesota State University Moorhead" label="Minnesota State University Moorhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825262" start="18508" end="18537" title="Metropolitan State University" label="Metropolitan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571324" start="18540" end="18576" title="Southwest Minnesota State University" label="Southwest Minnesota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136874" start="18579" end="18605" title="St. Cloud State University" label="St. Cloud State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233786" start="18608" end="18631" title="Winona State University" label="Winona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552696" start="18633" end="18663" title="University of Minnesota system" label="University of Minnesota system"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="18666" end="18702" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota, Twin Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="18726" end="18737" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895797" start="18764" end="18797" title="University of Minnesota Crookston" label="University of Minnesota Crookston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495874" start="18800" end="18830" title="University of Minnesota Duluth" label="University of Minnesota Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551758" start="18833" end="18863" title="University of Minnesota Morris" label="University of Minnesota Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895805" start="18866" end="18899" title="University of Minnesota Rochester" label="University of Minnesota Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805243" start="18918" end="18941" title="Alcorn State University" label="Alcorn State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887993" start="18952" end="18974" title="Delta State University" label="Delta State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747601" start="18990" end="19014" title="Jackson State University" label="Jackson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="19039" end="19067" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468084" start="19096" end="19128" title="Mississippi University for Women" label="Mississippi University for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316928" start="19136" end="19171" title="Mississippi Valley State University" label="Mississippi Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="19173" end="19198" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624090" start="19211" end="19245" title="University of Southern Mississippi" label="University of Southern Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895252" start="19284" end="19314" title="University of Central Missouri" label="University of Central Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666316" start="19322" end="19351" title="Harris–Stowe State University" label="Harris–Stowe State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126179" start="19353" end="19383" title="Lincoln University (Missouri)" label="Lincoln University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713662" start="19385" end="19414" title="University of Missouri System" label="University of Missouri System"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="19417" end="19439" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="19462" end="19470" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q940690" start="19497" end="19531" title="University of Missouri–Kansas City" label="University of Missouri–Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380853" start="19541" end="19586" title="Missouri University of Science and Technology" label="Missouri University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q625103" start="19608" end="19640" title="University of Missouri–St. Louis" label="University of Missouri–St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879708" start="19649" end="19683" title="Missouri Southern State University" label="Missouri Southern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="19685" end="19710" title="Missouri State University" label="Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939221" start="19759" end="19792" title="Missouri Western State University" label="Missouri Western State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060123" start="19794" end="19829" title="Northwest Missouri State University" label="Northwest Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q635118" start="19831" end="19866" title="Southeast Missouri State University" label="Southeast Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847734" start="19868" end="19891" title="Truman State University" label="Truman State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495887" start="19953" end="19978" title="Montana University System" label="Montana University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="20141" end="20165" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="20183" end="20190" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904332" start="20218" end="20251" title="Montana State University Billings" label="Montana State University Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904331" start="20266" end="20299" title="Montana State University–Northern" label="Montana State University–Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599153" start="20311" end="20330" title="Great Falls College Montana State University" label="Great Falls College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="20379" end="20400" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="20412" end="20420" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704552" start="20448" end="20462" title="Helena College University of Montana" label="Helena College"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="20467" end="20473" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551358" start="20478" end="20507" title="University of Montana Western" label="University of Montana Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="20520" end="20552" title="Montana Technological University" label="Montana Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984782" start="20584" end="20613" title="Nebraska State College System" label="Nebraska State College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066497" start="20617" end="20638" title="Chadron State College" label="Chadron State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170975" start="20642" end="20660" title="Peru State College" label="Peru State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976637" start="20664" end="20683" title="Wayne State College" label="Wayne State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202716" start="20686" end="20715" title="University of Nebraska system" label="University of Nebraska system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="20719" end="20749" title="University of Nebraska–Lincoln" label="University of Nebraska–Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q28260" start="20769" end="20776" title="Lincoln, Nebraska" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895890" start="20804" end="20837" title="University of Nebraska at Kearney" label="University of Nebraska at Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495890" start="20847" end="20875" title="University of Nebraska Omaha" label="University of Nebraska Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895888" start="20891" end="20928" title="University of Nebraska Medical Center" label="University of Nebraska Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003622" start="20955" end="20988" title="Nevada System of Higher Education" label="Nevada System of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185955" start="20991" end="21017" title="University of Nevada, Reno" label="University of Nevada, Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="21025" end="21029" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146840" start="21056" end="21082" title="College of Southern Nevada" label="College of Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="21084" end="21101" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="21118" end="21141" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="21153" end="21175" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598715" start="21187" end="21206" title="Great Basin College" label="Great Basin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658675" start="21301" end="21324" title="Nevada State University" label="Nevada State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302311" start="21327" end="21358" title="University of Nevada, Las Vegas" label="University of Nevada, Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988100" start="21368" end="21390" title="Western Nevada College" label="Western Nevada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847197" start="21488" end="21521" title="Truckee Meadows Community College" label="Truckee Meadows Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894951" start="21739" end="21773" title="University System of New Hampshire" label="University System of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382897" start="21776" end="21795" title="Keene State College" label="Keene State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205857" start="21798" end="21823" title="Plymouth State University" label="Plymouth State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="21826" end="21853" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003309" start="21861" end="21867" title="Durham, New Hampshire" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726772" start="21908" end="21933" title="The College of New Jersey" label="The College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382148" start="21935" end="21950" title="Kean University" label="Kean University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018694" start="21952" end="21978" title="Montclair State University" label="Montclair State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991254" start="21980" end="22006" title="New Jersey City University" label="New Jersey City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272013" start="22008" end="22042" title="New Jersey Institute of Technology" label="New Jersey Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289009" start="22051" end="22065" title="Ramapo College" label="Ramapo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799872" start="22067" end="22083" title="Rowan University" label="Rowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="22085" end="22103" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382826" start="22113" end="22145" title="Rutgers University–New Brunswick" label="Rutgers University–New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="22157" end="22170" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428659" start="22175" end="22185" title="Piscataway, New Jersey" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="22212" end="22237" title="Rutgers University–Newark" label="Rutgers University–Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="22240" end="22265" title="Rutgers University–Camden" label="Rutgers University–Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980474" start="22268" end="22282" title="Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences" label="Rutgers Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329259" start="22284" end="22303" title="Stockton University" label="Stockton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789245" start="22305" end="22335" title="Thomas Edison State University" label="Thomas Edison State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444527" start="22337" end="22378" title="William Paterson University of New Jersey" label="William Paterson University of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854154" start="22396" end="22425" title="Eastern New Mexico University" label="Eastern New Mexico University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="22434" end="22458" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010189" start="22480" end="22511" title="New Mexico Highlands University" label="New Mexico Highlands University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="22513" end="22540" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052208" start="22549" end="22594" title="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology" label="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058785" start="22614" end="22641" title="Northern New Mexico College" label="Northern New Mexico College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988105" start="22643" end="22672" title="Western New Mexico University" label="Western New Mexico University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="22695" end="22723" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="22763" end="22806" title="University at Buffalo" label="The State University of New York at Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780816" start="22846" end="22866" title="University at Albany, SUNY" label="University at Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q863813" start="22889" end="22910" title="Binghamton University" label="Binghamton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="22928" end="22950" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881987" start="23008" end="23073" title="SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University" label="State University of New York Downstate Health Sciences University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297997" start="23079" end="23134" title="State University of New York Upstate Medical University" label="State University of New York Upstate Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155496" start="23140" end="23190" title="State University of New York Polytechnic Institute" label="State University of New York Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014056" start="23207" end="23241" title="New York State College of Ceramics at Alfred University" label="New York State College of Ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604700" start="23243" end="23259" title="statutory college" label="contract college"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446091" start="23263" end="23280" title="Alfred University" label="Alfred University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171560" start="23287" end="23327" title="New York State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell University" label="College of Agriculture and Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604700" start="23329" end="23345" title="statutory college" label="contract college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="23349" end="23367" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171563" start="23373" end="23397" title="New York State College of Human Ecology at Cornell University" label="College of Human Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604700" start="23399" end="23415" title="statutory college" label="contract college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="23419" end="23437" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171565" start="23449" end="23479" title="New York State College of Veterinary Medicine at Cornell University" label="College of Veterinary Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604700" start="23487" end="23503" title="statutory college" label="contract college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="23507" end="23525" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171574" start="23531" end="23571" title="New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell University" label="School of Industrial and Labor Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604700" start="23573" end="23589" title="statutory college" label="contract college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="23593" end="23611" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603610" start="23617" end="23691" title="State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry" label="State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707354" start="23702" end="23751" title="State University of New York College of Optometry" label="State University of New York College of Optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395009" start="23782" end="23797" title="SUNY Adirondack" label="SUNY Adirondack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975271" start="23801" end="23830" title="SUNY Broome Community College" label="SUNY Broome Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055461" start="23834" end="23858" title="Cayuga Community College" label="Cayuga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134090" start="23862" end="23887" title="Clinton Community College (New York)" label="Clinton Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149957" start="23891" end="23924" title="Columbia–Greene Community College" label="Columbia–Greene Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171775" start="23928" end="23953" title="Corning Community College" label="Corning Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317480" start="23957" end="23983" title="Dutchess Community College" label="Dutchess Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388284" start="23987" end="23996" title="SUNY Erie" label="SUNY Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450199" start="24000" end="24030" title="Finger Lakes Community College" label="Finger Lakes Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508483" start="24034" end="24069" title="Fulton–Montgomery Community College" label="Fulton–Montgomery Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532715" start="24073" end="24098" title="Genesee Community College" label="Genesee Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739244" start="24102" end="24135" title="Herkimer County Community College" label="Herkimer County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928989" start="24139" end="24170" title="Hudson Valley Community College" label="Hudson Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146214" start="24174" end="24201" title="Jamestown Community College" label="Jamestown Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175407" start="24205" end="24232" title="Jefferson Community College (New York)" label="Jefferson Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893825" start="24236" end="24267" title="Mohawk Valley Community College" label="Mohawk Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902141" start="24271" end="24295" title="Monroe Community College" label="Monroe Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967558" start="24299" end="24323" title="Nassau Community College" label="Nassau Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023609" start="24327" end="24339" title="Niagara County Community College" label="SUNY Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054934" start="24343" end="24374" title="North Country Community College" label="North Country Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094484" start="24378" end="24404" title="Onondaga Community College" label="Onondaga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099552" start="24408" end="24419" title="SUNY Orange" label="SUNY Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355439" start="24423" end="24449" title="Rockland Community College" label="Rockland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431152" start="24453" end="24489" title="Schenectady County Community College" label="Schenectady County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634547" start="24493" end="24525" title="Suffolk County Community College" label="Suffolk County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636401" start="24529" end="24542" title="SUNY Sullivan" label="SUNY Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820362" start="24546" end="24581" title="Tompkins Cortland Community College" label="Tompkins Cortland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395016" start="24585" end="24596" title="SUNY Ulster" label="SUNY Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987232" start="24600" end="24629" title="Westchester Community College" label="Westchester Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570064" start="24658" end="24682" title="Buffalo State University" label="Buffalo State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374138" start="24686" end="24709" title="Empire State University" label="Empire State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603617" start="24713" end="24751" title="SUNY Brockport" label="State University of New York Brockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603623" start="24772" end="24812" title="State University of New York at Cortland" label="State University of New York at Cortland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487738" start="24832" end="24872" title="State University of New York at Fredonia" label="State University of New York at Fredonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149540" start="24892" end="24931" title="State University of New York at Geneseo" label="State University of New York at Geneseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603625" start="24950" end="24991" title="State University of New York at New Paltz" label="State University of New York at New Paltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603624" start="25012" end="25056" title="State University of New York at Old Westbury" label="State University of New York at Old Westbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146980" start="25080" end="25119" title="State University of New York at Oneonta" label="State University of New York at Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603627" start="25138" end="25176" title="State University of New York at Oswego" label="State University of New York at Oswego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603626" start="25194" end="25237" title="State University of New York at Plattsburgh" label="State University of New York at Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603628" start="25260" end="25299" title="State University of New York at Potsdam" label="State University of New York at Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359408" start="25318" end="25358" title="State University of New York at Purchase" label="State University of New York at Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723471" start="25400" end="25420" title="Alfred State College" label="Alfred State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q844999" start="25424" end="25455" title="Fashion Institute of Technology" label="Fashion Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="25470" end="25487" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="25504" end="25527" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="25542" end="25557" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="25562" end="25582" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603620" start="25588" end="25626" title="State University of New York at Canton" label="State University of New York at Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603621" start="25644" end="25686" title="State University of New York at Cobleskill" label="State University of New York at Cobleskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603622" start="25708" end="25745" title="State University of New York at Delhi" label="State University of New York at Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435862" start="25762" end="25805" title="Farmingdale State College" label="State University of New York at Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603615" start="25828" end="25873" title="State University of New York Maritime College" label="State University of New York Maritime College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914146" start="25893" end="25936" title="State University of New York at Morrisville" label="State University of New York at Morrisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="25957" end="25984" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q809633" start="26013" end="26027" title="Baruch College" label="Baruch College"/>
<link wikidata="Q371625" start="26031" end="26047" title="Brooklyn College" label="Brooklyn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="26051" end="26075" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146845" start="26079" end="26103" title="College of Staten Island" label="College of Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446181" start="26107" end="26121" title="Hunter College" label="Hunter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700617" start="26125" end="26161" title="John Jay College of Criminal Justice" label="John Jay College of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128593" start="26165" end="26179" title="Lehman College" label="Lehman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805332" start="26183" end="26203" title="Medgar Evers College" label="Medgar Evers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678632" start="26207" end="26242" title="New York City College of Technology" label="New York City College of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760438" start="26246" end="26260" title="Queens College, City University of New York" label="Queens College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055406" start="26264" end="26276" title="York College, City University of New York" label="York College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974180" start="26301" end="26324" title="Bronx Community College" label="Bronx Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946345" start="26328" end="26366" title="Borough of Manhattan Community College" label="Borough of Manhattan Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006662" start="26370" end="26395" title="Guttman Community College" label="Guttman Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909476" start="26399" end="26423" title="Hostos Community College" label="Hostos Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413125" start="26427" end="26457" title="Kingsborough Community College" label="Kingsborough Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460759" start="26461" end="26488" title="LaGuardia Community College" label="LaGuardia Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270850" start="26492" end="26523" title="Queensborough Community College" label="Queensborough Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024543" start="26569" end="26589" title="CUNY Graduate Center" label="CUNY Graduate Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706210" start="26605" end="26639" title="Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism at the City University of New York" label="CUNY Graduate School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123486" start="26655" end="26673" title="CUNY School of Law" label="CUNY School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275598" start="26689" end="26727" title="CUNY School of Labor and Urban Studies" label="CUNY School of Labor and Urban Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014706" start="26743" end="26778" title="CUNY School of Professional Studies" label="CUNY School of Professional Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011419" start="26794" end="26840" title="CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy" label="CUNY School of Public Health and Health Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008270" start="26850" end="26884" title="William E. Macaulay Honors College" label="William E. Macaulay Honors College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="26906" end="26934" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q620640" start="26944" end="26972" title="Appalachian State University" label="Appalachian State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277776" start="27008" end="27032" title="East Carolina University" label="East Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362587" start="27041" end="27072" title="Elizabeth City State University" label="Elizabeth City State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399078" start="27082" end="27111" title="Fayetteville State University" label="Fayetteville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476484" start="27120" end="27159" title="North Carolina A&amp;amp;T State University" label="North Carolina A&amp;amp;T State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518804" start="27187" end="27220" title="North Carolina Central University" label="North Carolina Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="27256" end="27287" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895940" start="27329" end="27370" title="University of North Carolina at Asheville" label="University of North Carolina at Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="27397" end="27440" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783178" start="27489" end="27530" title="University of North Carolina at Charlotte" label="University of North Carolina at Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321380" start="27562" end="27604" title="University of North Carolina at Greensboro" label="University of North Carolina at Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709746" start="27632" end="27672" title="University of North Carolina at Pembroke" label="University of North Carolina at Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092214" start="27690" end="27729" title="University of North Carolina Wilmington" label="University of North Carolina Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895938" start="27757" end="27804" title="University of North Carolina School of the Arts" label="University of North Carolina School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050078" start="27832" end="27859" title="Western Carolina University" label="Western Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026034" start="27868" end="27898" title="Winston-Salem State University" label="Winston-Salem State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="27914" end="27948" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708186" start="27975" end="27993" title="PBS North Carolina" label="PBS North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539422" start="28008" end="28032" title="North Carolina Arboretum" label="North Carolina Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878529" start="28058" end="28088" title="North Dakota University System" label="North Dakota University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273748" start="28107" end="28133" title="Dickinson State University" label="Dickinson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708361" start="28137" end="28162" title="Mayville State University" label="Mayville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017530" start="28166" end="28188" title="Minot State University" label="Minot State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="28192" end="28218" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="28226" end="28237" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="28243" end="28272" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912012" start="28305" end="28333" title="Valley City State University" label="Valley City State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918312" start="28358" end="28380" title="Bismarck State College" label="Bismarck State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209997" start="28384" end="28411" title="Dakota College at Bottineau" label="Dakota College at Bottineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477507" start="28415" end="28440" title="Lake Region State College" label="Lake Region State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055057" start="28444" end="28481" title="North Dakota State College of Science" label="North Dakota State College of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022152" start="28485" end="28508" title="Williston State College" label="Williston State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11400830" start="28540" end="28565" title="Northern Marianas College" label="Northern Marianas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331177" start="28647" end="28672" title="University System of Ohio" label="University System of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="28691" end="28710" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q895457" start="28722" end="28752" title="Bowling Green State University" label="Bowling Green State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061855" start="28763" end="28787" title="Central State University" label="Central State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="28791" end="28815" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100801" start="28819" end="28845" title="Cleveland State University" label="Cleveland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="28849" end="28870" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q590643" start="28875" end="28891" title="Miami University" label="Miami University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057949" start="28901" end="28934" title="Northeast Ohio Medical University" label="Northeast Ohio Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="28944" end="28965" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075339" start="28969" end="28984" title="Ohio University" label="Ohio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491567" start="28989" end="29013" title="Shawnee State University" label="Shawnee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="29017" end="29037" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002085" start="29041" end="29064" title="Wright State University" label="Wright State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783191" start="29068" end="29095" title="Youngstown State University" label="Youngstown State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884341" start="29120" end="29135" title="Belmont College" label="Belmont College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061542" start="29139" end="29169" title="Central Ohio Technical College" label="Central Ohio Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120311" start="29173" end="29221" title="Cincinnati State Technical and Community College" label="Cincinnati State Technical and Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127383" start="29225" end="29244" title="Clark State College" label="Clark State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150126" start="29248" end="29280" title="Columbus State Community College" label="Columbus State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197072" start="29284" end="29310" title="Cuyahoga Community College" label="Cuyahoga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947040" start="29314" end="29344" title="Edison State Community College" label="Edison State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875780" start="29348" end="29363" title="Hocking College" label="Hocking College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478788" start="29367" end="29393" title="Lakeland Community College" label="Lakeland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678731" start="29397" end="29428" title="Lorain County Community College" label="Lorain County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765382" start="29432" end="29456" title="Marion Technical College" label="Marion Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054763" start="29460" end="29487" title="North Central State College" label="North Central State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060206" start="29491" end="29524" title="Northwest State Community College" label="Northwest State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114740" start="29528" end="29551" title="Owens Community College" label="Owens Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128246" start="29555" end="29575" title="Rhodes State College" label="Rhodes State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896213" start="29579" end="29603" title="University of Rio Grande" label="University of Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522014" start="29607" end="29633" title="Sinclair Community College" label="Sinclair Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570499" start="29637" end="29669" title="Southern State Community College" label="Southern State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601976" start="29673" end="29692" title="Stark State College" label="Stark State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703070" start="29696" end="29725" title="Terra State Community College" label="Terra State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972231" start="29729" end="29761" title="Washington State College of Ohio" label="Washington State College of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066116" start="29765" end="29783" title="Zane State College" label="Zane State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444292" start="29799" end="29817" title="Cameron University" label="Cameron University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328060" start="29819" end="29842" title="East Central University" label="East Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302016" start="29844" end="29863" title="Langston University" label="Langston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124195" start="29865" end="29894" title="Northeastern State University" label="Northeastern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060359" start="29896" end="29934" title="Northwestern Oklahoma State University" label="Northwestern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="29969" end="29991" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40347" start="30004" end="30010" title="Norman, Oklahoma" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30037" end="30084" title="University of Oklahoma#University of Oklahoma-Tulsa Schusterman Center" label="University of Oklahoma-Tulsa Schusterman Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896014" start="30093" end="30138" title="University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center" label="University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082284" start="30146" end="30181" title="Oklahoma Panhandle State University" label="Oklahoma Panhandle State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017355" start="30183" end="30215" title="Oklahoma State University System" label="Oklahoma State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="30219" end="30255" title="Oklahoma State University–Stillwater" label="Oklahoma State University–Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q852714" start="30274" end="30284" title="Stillwater, Oklahoma" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082377" start="30317" end="30369" title="Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences" label="Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082389" start="30378" end="30427" title="Oklahoma State University Institute of Technology" label="Oklahoma State University Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082388" start="30430" end="30469" title="Oklahoma State University–Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma State University–Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082390" start="30472" end="30503" title="Oklahoma State University–Tulsa" label="Oklahoma State University–Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582663" start="30505" end="30528" title="Rogers State University" label="Rogers State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896279" start="30530" end="30572" title="University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma" label="University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q866829" start="30574" end="30612" title="Southeastern Oklahoma State University" label="Southeastern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811567" start="30614" end="30652" title="Southwestern Oklahoma State University" label="Southwestern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275637" start="30654" end="30684" title="University of Central Oklahoma" label="University of Central Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278219" start="30698" end="30723" title="Eastern Oregon University" label="Eastern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q282097" start="30731" end="30769" title="Oregon Health &amp;amp; Science University" label="Oregon Health &amp;amp; Science University"/>
<link wikidata="Q427553" start="30778" end="30808" title="Oregon Institute of Technology" label="Oregon Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="30831" end="30854" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101371" start="30879" end="30911" title="Oregon State University–Cascades" label="Oregon State University–Cascades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="30928" end="30953" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888661" start="30979" end="31005" title="Southern Oregon University" label="Southern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="31013" end="31033" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629641" start="31050" end="31075" title="Western Oregon University" label="Western Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304232" start="31100" end="31145" title="Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education" label="Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="31377" end="31389" title="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163001" start="31438" end="31477" title="Commonwealth University of Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928377" start="31482" end="31519" title="Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania" label="Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665223" start="31524" end="31561" title="Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania" label="Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751699" start="31566" end="31602" title="Mansfield University of Pennsylvania" label="Mansfield University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297499" start="31606" end="31637" title="Pennsylvania Western University" label="Pennsylvania Western University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021159" start="31642" end="31685" title="Pennsylvania Western University, California" label="Pennsylvania Western University, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127034" start="31690" end="31707" title="Penn West Clarion" label="Penn West Clarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338120" start="31712" end="31753" title="Pennsylvania Western University, Edinboro" label="Pennsylvania Western University, Edinboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445541" start="31757" end="31791" title="Cheyney University of Pennsylvania" label="Cheyney University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329446" start="31795" end="31838" title="East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania" label="East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661325" start="31842" end="31876" title="Indiana University of Pennsylvania" label="Indiana University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340908" start="31886" end="31921" title="Kutztown University of Pennsylvania" label="Kutztown University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859396" start="31925" end="31964" title="Millersville University of Pennsylvania" label="Millersville University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498066" start="31968" end="32007" title="Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania" label="Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799642" start="32011" end="32035" title="Slippery Rock University" label="Slippery Rock University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443893" start="32039" end="32062" title="West Chester University" label="West Chester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153864" start="32064" end="32103" title="Commonwealth System of Higher Education" label="Commonwealth System of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="32422" end="32440" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="32444" end="32473" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534544" start="32478" end="32504" title="Penn State University Park" label="Penn State University Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163224" start="32551" end="32570" title="Penn State Abington" label="Penn State Abington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163226" start="32590" end="32608" title="Penn State Altoona" label="Penn State Altoona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265894" start="32627" end="32643" title="Penn State Berks" label="Penn State Berks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265893" start="32660" end="32677" title="Penn State Beaver" label="Penn State Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163236" start="32695" end="32716" title="Penn State Brandywine" label="Penn State Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32738" end="32768" title="Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center#Penn State College of Medicine" label="Penn State College of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159531" start="32773" end="32797" title="Penn State Dickinson Law" label="Penn State Dickinson Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163245" start="32802" end="32819" title="Penn State DuBois" label="Penn State DuBois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163248" start="32837" end="32873" title="Penn State Erie, The Behrend College" label="Penn State Erie, The Behrend College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163249" start="32900" end="32918" title="Penn State Fayette" label="Penn State Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265897" start="32943" end="32966" title="Penn State Great Valley School of Graduate Professional Studies" label="Penn State Great Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065536" start="32996" end="33024" title="Penn State Greater Allegheny" label="Penn State Greater Allegheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163254" start="33053" end="33074" title="Penn State Harrisburg" label="Penn State Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163256" start="33096" end="33115" title="Penn State Hazleton" label="Penn State Hazleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163261" start="33135" end="33159" title="Penn State Lehigh Valley" label="Penn State Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163262" start="33184" end="33204" title="Penn State Mont Alto" label="Penn State Mont Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163264" start="33225" end="33250" title="Penn State New Kensington" label="Penn State New Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163294" start="33276" end="33297" title="Penn State Schuylkill" label="Penn State Schuylkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163304" start="33319" end="33338" title="Penn State Scranton" label="Penn State Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163296" start="33358" end="33377" title="Penn State Shenango" label="Penn State Shenango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163303" start="33397" end="33420" title="Penn State Wilkes-Barre" label="Penn State Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33444" end="33467" title="Pennsylvania_College_of_Technology#Campuses" label="Penn State Williamsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163305" start="33472" end="33495" title="Penn State World Campus" label="Penn State World Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163306" start="33500" end="33515" title="Penn State York" label="Penn State York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="33552" end="33569" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746102" start="33589" end="33613" title="Temple University Ambler" label="Temple University Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698685" start="33630" end="33661" title="Temple University, Japan Campus" label="Temple University, Japan Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123357817" start="33672" end="33694" title="Temple University Rome" label="Temple University Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="33910" end="33934" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896145" start="33960" end="33996" title="University of Pittsburgh at Bradford" label="University of Pittsburgh at Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896147" start="34001" end="34039" title="University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg" label="University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896148" start="34044" end="34081" title="University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown" label="University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896149" start="34086" end="34124" title="University of Pittsburgh at Titusville" label="University of Pittsburgh at Titusville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075365" start="34143" end="34168" title="University of Puerto Rico" label="University of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896167" start="34179" end="34224" title="University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus" label="University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q683206" start="34235" end="34246" title="Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico" label="Rio Piedras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896177" start="34273" end="34310" title="University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez" label="University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896172" start="34320" end="34356" title="University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo" label="University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156806" start="34366" end="34402" title="University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón" label="University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896174" start="34412" end="34449" title="University of Puerto Rico at Carolina" label="University of Puerto Rico at Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896175" start="34459" end="34493" title="University of Puerto Rico at Cayey" label="University of Puerto Rico at Cayey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896176" start="34508" end="34544" title="University of Puerto Rico at Humacao" label="University of Puerto Rico at Humacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896171" start="34554" end="34592" title="University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla" label="University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896178" start="34603" end="34637" title="University of Puerto Rico at Ponce" label="University of Puerto Rico at Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896179" start="34647" end="34682" title="University of Puerto Rico at Utuado" label="University of Puerto Rico at Utuado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896165" start="34692" end="34742" title="University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus" label="University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432544" start="34753" end="34803" title="Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de Puerto Rico" label="Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163150" start="34805" end="34841" title="Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico" label="Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613236" start="34861" end="34881" title="Rhode Island College" label="Rhode Island College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641788" start="34889" end="34915" title="University of Rhode Island" label="University of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806300" start="34937" end="34948" title="The Citadel" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="34951" end="34969" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104405" start="34971" end="34998" title="Coastal Carolina University" label="Coastal Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="35026" end="35047" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441652" start="35070" end="35095" title="Francis Marion University" label="Francis Marion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484421" start="35097" end="35114" title="Lander University" label="Lander University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806451" start="35116" end="35152" title="Medical University of South Carolina" label="Medical University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537299" start="35154" end="35189" title="University of South Carolina System" label="University of South Carolina System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024426" start="35192" end="35220" title="University of South Carolina" label="University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="35247" end="35255" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896316" start="35283" end="35317" title="University of South Carolina Aiken" label="University of South Carolina Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896318" start="35332" end="35369" title="University of South Carolina Beaufort" label="University of South Carolina Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976539" start="35388" end="35404" title="Palmetto College" label="Palmetto College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896319" start="35409" end="35447" title="University of South Carolina Lancaster" label="University of South Carolina Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709668" start="35468" end="35509" title="University of South Carolina Salkehatchie" label="University of South Carolina Salkehatchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896322" start="35533" end="35568" title="University of South Carolina Sumter" label="University of South Carolina Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896323" start="35586" end="35620" title="University of South Carolina Union" label="University of South Carolina Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896324" start="35635" end="35671" title="University of South Carolina Upstate" label="University of South Carolina Upstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566644" start="35698" end="35729" title="South Carolina State University" label="South Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026588" start="35738" end="35757" title="Winthrop University" label="Winthrop University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920974" start="35782" end="35810" title="Black Hills State University" label="Black Hills State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210049" start="35812" end="35835" title="Dakota State University" label="Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001088" start="35837" end="35862" title="Northern State University" label="Northern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="35865" end="35891" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566983" start="35915" end="35958" title="South Dakota School of Mines and Technology" label="South Dakota School of Mines and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302260" start="36060" end="36089" title="South Dakota State University" label="South Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q781153" start="36135" end="36163" title="Austin Peay State University" label="Austin Peay State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q634669" start="36187" end="36218" title="East Tennessee State University" label="East Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784748" start="36227" end="36260" title="Middle Tennessee State University" label="Middle Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="36269" end="36295" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700206" start="36303" end="36337" title="Tennessee Tech" label="Tennessee Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094177" start="36363" end="36384" title="University of Memphis" label="University of Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="36395" end="36402" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495917" start="36428" end="36458" title="University of Tennessee system" label="University of Tennessee system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="36619" end="36655" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee at Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="36684" end="36693" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781384" start="36720" end="36758" title="University of Tennessee at Chattanooga" label="University of Tennessee at Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566138" start="36785" end="36818" title="University of Tennessee at Martin" label="University of Tennessee at Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896420" start="36846" end="36891" title="University of Tennessee Health Science Center" label="University of Tennessee Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="36928" end="36935" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776185" start="36945" end="36977" title="University of Tennessee Southern" label="University of Tennessee Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="37021" end="37028" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896423" start="37038" end="37077" title="University of Tennessee Space Institute" label="University of Tennessee Space Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292530" start="37106" end="37115" title="Tullahoma, Tennessee" label="Tullahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q569446" start="37129" end="37157" title="University of Houston System" label="University of Houston System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="37160" end="37181" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="37183" end="37190" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895505" start="37216" end="37248" title="University of Houston–Clear Lake" label="University of Houston–Clear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895509" start="37252" end="37282" title="University of Houston–Downtown" label="University of Houston–Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895510" start="37286" end="37316" title="University of Houston–Victoria" label="University of Houston–Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q385046" start="37319" end="37351" title="University of North Texas System" label="University of North Texas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="37354" end="37379" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128306" start="37381" end="37387" title="Denton, Texas" label="Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895983" start="37414" end="37449" title="University of North Texas at Dallas" label="University of North Texas at Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895977" start="37459" end="37506" title="University of North Texas Health Science Center" label="University of North Texas Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140391" start="37514" end="37544" title="University of Texas System" label="The University of Texas System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230739" start="37575" end="37611" title="University of Texas at Arlington" label="The University of Texas at Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="37617" end="37650" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="The University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="37652" end="37658" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781394" start="37687" end="37720" title="University of Texas at Dallas" label="The University of Texas at Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="37726" end="37760" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="The University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495935" start="37765" end="37802" title="University of Texas Permian Basin" label="The University of Texas Permian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028121" start="37807" end="37848" title="University of Texas Rio Grande Valley" label="The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="37853" end="37891" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="The University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212528" start="37897" end="37929" title="University of Texas at Tyler" label="The University of Texas at Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344683" start="37933" end="37967" title="Stephen F. Austin State University" label="Stephen F. Austin State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525831" start="38001" end="38026" title="MD Anderson Cancer Center" label="MD Anderson Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="38043" end="38077" title="University of Texas Medical Branch" label="University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725999" start="38094" end="38141" title="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center" label="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896431" start="38152" end="38204" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="38220" end="38276" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781044" start="38278" end="38309" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="38313" end="38337" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="38366" end="38381" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="38383" end="38392" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="38394" end="38398" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407584" start="38425" end="38454" title="East Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="East Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306469" start="38459" end="38490" title="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University" label="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551554" start="38494" end="38519" title="Tarleton State University" label="Tarleton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707466" start="38523" end="38561" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M International University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707476" start="38565" end="38603" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Central Texas" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Central Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q634651" start="38608" end="38647" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Corpus Christi" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707478" start="38652" end="38687" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Kingsville" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Kingsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707479" start="38692" end="38728" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711364" start="38733" end="38767" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Texarkana" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986651" start="38771" end="38800" title="West Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="West Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707495" start="38804" end="38835" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M AgriLife Research" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M AgriLife Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707494" start="38839" end="38879" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M AgriLife Extension Service" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M AgriLife Extension Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707662" start="38883" end="38927" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M Engineering Experiment Station" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M Engineering Experiment Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707458" start="38931" end="38974" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M Engineering Extension Service" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M Engineering Extension Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707700" start="38978" end="39006" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M Forest Service" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708192" start="39010" end="39048" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M Transportation Institute" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M Transportation Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708200" start="39052" end="39098" title="Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory" label="Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018489" start="39102" end="39140" title="Texas Division of Emergency Management" label="Texas Division of Emergency Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q626591" start="39142" end="39167" title="Texas Southern University" label="Texas Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q623581" start="39170" end="39199" title="Texas State University System" label="Texas State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393647" start="39203" end="39219" title="Lamar University" label="Lamar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422594" start="39223" end="39251" title="Sam Houston State University" label="Sam Houston State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635933" start="39256" end="39281" title="Sul Ross State University" label="Sul Ross State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="39285" end="39307" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152130" start="39311" end="39340" title="Lamar Institute of Technology" label="Lamar Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480920" start="39344" end="39370" title="Lamar State College–Orange" label="Lamar State College–Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480921" start="39374" end="39405" title="Lamar State College–Port Arthur" label="Lamar State College–Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407664" start="39407" end="39435" title="Texas Tech University System" label="Texas Tech University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q536709" start="39464" end="39487" title="Angelo State University" label="Angelo State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932075" start="39491" end="39518" title="Midwestern State University" label="Midwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="39522" end="39543" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="39558" end="39565" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119816" start="39622" end="39666" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center" label="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708149" start="39682" end="39734" title="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso" label="Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468361" start="39882" end="39911" title="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University" label="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468361" start="40104" end="40133" title="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University" label="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="40137" end="40143" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="40154" end="40161" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902486" start="40180" end="40211" title="Utah System of Higher Education" label="Utah System of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548203" start="40214" end="40226" title="Snow College" label="Snow College"/>
<link wikidata="Q632573" start="40321" end="40345" title="Southern Utah University" label="Southern Utah University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="40371" end="40389" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052614" start="40414" end="40435" title="Utah State University" label="Utah State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q254191" start="40459" end="40488" title="Utah State University Eastern" label="Utah State University Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231724" start="40498" end="40518" title="Utah Tech University" label="Utah Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q940919" start="40539" end="40561" title="Utah Valley University" label="Utah Valley University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787152" start="40585" end="40607" title="Weber State University" label="Weber State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799807" start="40636" end="40658" title="Vermont State Colleges" label="Vermont State Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q113245681" start="40703" end="40727" title="Vermont State University" label="Vermont State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154694" start="40771" end="40799" title="Community College of Vermont" label="Community College of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="40801" end="40822" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444675" start="40844" end="40874" title="Christopher Newport University" label="Christopher Newport University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330559" start="40888" end="40912" title="Virginia Health Sciences" label="Virginia Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="40927" end="40950" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="40982" end="41006" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551429" start="41031" end="41050" title="Longwood University" label="Longwood University"/>
<link wikidata="Q657374" start="41052" end="41081" title="University of Mary Washington" label="University of Mary Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q632506" start="41120" end="41144" title="Norfolk State University" label="Norfolk State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="41146" end="41169" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q632465" start="41193" end="41211" title="Radford University" label="Radford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="41213" end="41235" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128111" start="41243" end="41288" title="University of Virginia&amp;#x27;s College at Wise" label="University of Virginia&amp;#x27;s College at Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303536" start="41316" end="41348" title="Virginia Commonwealth University" label="Virginia Commonwealth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="41356" end="41383" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="41391" end="41442" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934591" start="41466" end="41491" title="Virginia State University" label="Virginia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="41499" end="41532" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896780" start="41582" end="41614" title="University of the Virgin Islands" label="University of the Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896780" start="41624" end="41656" title="University of the Virgin Islands" label="University of the Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896780" start="41694" end="41726" title="University of the Virgin Islands" label="University of the Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054064" start="41781" end="41810" title="Central Washington University" label="Central Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278253" start="41818" end="41847" title="Eastern Washington University" label="Eastern Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941731" start="41855" end="41878" title="Evergreen State College" label="Evergreen State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="41880" end="41904" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896565" start="41927" end="41934" title="University of Washington Bothell" label="Bothell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896583" start="41940" end="41946" title="University of Washington Tacoma" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q597236" start="41986" end="42013" title="Washington State University" label="Washington State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q983540" start="42015" end="42022" title="Pullman, Washington" label="Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48807711" start="42049" end="42084" title="Washington State University Everett" label="Washington State University Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972302" start="42087" end="42122" title="Washington State University Spokane" label="Washington State University Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972303" start="42125" end="42163" title="Washington State University Tri-Cities" label="Washington State University Tri-Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972305" start="42166" end="42203" title="Washington State University Vancouver" label="Washington State University Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972299" start="42206" end="42247" title="Washington State University Global Campus" label="Washington State University Global Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284777" start="42249" end="42278" title="Western Washington University" label="Western Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930306" start="42305" end="42331" title="Bluefield State University" label="Bluefield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158896" start="42333" end="42351" title="Concord University" label="Concord University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981651" start="42353" end="42378" title="Fairmont State University" label="Fairmont State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569419" start="42380" end="42406" title="Glenville State University" label="Glenville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379613" start="42408" end="42427" title="Marshall University" label="Marshall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494490" start="42430" end="42449" title="Shepherd University" label="Shepherd University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985746" start="42451" end="42474" title="West Liberty University" label="West Liberty University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983276" start="42476" end="42515" title="West Virginia University at Parkersburg" label="West Virginia University at Parkersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="42551" end="42575" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="42583" end="42593" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235085" start="42620" end="42669" title="Potomac State College of West Virginia University" label="Potomac State College of West Virginia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="42746" end="42770" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degrees" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="42781" end="42803" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986928" start="42815" end="42863" title="West Virginia University Institute of Technology" label="West Virginia University Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986914" start="42904" end="42948" title="West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine" label="West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986919" start="42956" end="42986" title="West Virginia State University" label="West Virginia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10814056" start="43010" end="43040" title="University of Wisconsin System" label="University of Wisconsin System"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="43043" end="43074" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="43088" end="43095" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551771" start="43122" end="43156" title="University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire" label="University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378091" start="43160" end="43193" title="University of Wisconsin–Green Bay" label="University of Wisconsin–Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688358" start="43197" end="43230" title="University of Wisconsin–La Crosse" label="University of Wisconsin–La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="43234" end="43267" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503441" start="43271" end="43302" title="University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh" label="University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590739" start="43306" end="43338" title="University of Wisconsin–Parkside" label="University of Wisconsin–Parkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590962" start="43342" end="43377" title="University of Wisconsin–Platteville" label="University of Wisconsin–Platteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687532" start="43381" end="43416" title="University of Wisconsin–River Falls" label="University of Wisconsin–River Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687782" start="43420" end="43457" title="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point" label="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590529" start="43460" end="43489" title="University of Wisconsin–Stout" label="University of Wisconsin–Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943718" start="43493" end="43525" title="University of Wisconsin–Superior" label="University of Wisconsin–Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551772" start="43528" end="43562" title="University of Wisconsin–Whitewater" label="University of Wisconsin–Whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326975" start="43577" end="43598" title="University of Wyoming" label="University of Wyoming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481839" wikidata="Q7892196" url="?curid=481839" title="United States service academies">
<text>The United States service academies, also known as United States military academies, are federal academies for the undergraduate education and training of commissioned officers for the United States Armed Forces.

There are five U.S. service academies:

* The United States Military Academy (USMA) in West Point, New York, founded in 1802
* The United States Naval Academy (USNA) in Annapolis, Maryland, founded in 1845
* The United States Coast Guard Academy (USCGA) in New London, Connecticut, founded in 1876
* The United States Merchant Marine Academy (USMMA) in Kings Point, New York, founded in 1943
* The United States Air Force Academy (USAFA) in Colorado Springs, Colorado, founded in 1954

==Description==

Service academies can be used to refer to all of the academies collectively. While they are often referred to as military academies, only the Military Academy, the Naval Academy, and the Air Force Academy are operated by the Department of Defense. The Coast Guard Academy is operated by the Department of Homeland Security, and the Merchant Marine Academy is operated by the Department of Transportation. Students enrolled at the Military Academy, the Naval Academy, the Air Force Academy, and the Coast Guard Academy are considered to be on active duty in the United States Armed Forces from the day they enter the academy, with the rank of cadet or midshipman, and subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Students enrolled at the Merchant Marine Academy serve in the U.S. Navy Reserve, with the rank of midshipman and are only subject to the UCMJ while actively training with the U.S. military on Navy orders.

The Naval Academy and Air Force Academy are noteworthy in that they each serve two different services. The Naval Academy commissions midshipmen into both the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Marine Corps. The Air Force Academy commissions cadets into both the U.S. Air Force and the U.S. Space Force.

In the case of the non–military Merchant Marine Academy, midshipmen may elect to receive an active duty or reserves commission in any branch of the uniformed services, including NOAA and the United States Public Health Service, most are commissioned into the Navy Reserve, Strategic Sealift Officer Force.

Students at the Military Academy, the Air Force Academy, and the Coast Guard Academy are cadets, while students at the Naval Academy and the Merchant Marine Academy are midshipmen. All cadets and midshipmen receive taxable pay at a rate of 35% of an O-1 under two years of service (which can be used to pay for textbooks and uniforms), free room and board, and pay no tuition or fees, with the exception of USMMA who receive taxable pay at US$1,217.10 a month only during their required 300+ days at sea during their four-year studies.

===Nominations===
All applicants, except for the Coast Guard Academy, are required to obtain a nomination to the academies. Nominations may be made by Congressional Representatives, Senators, the Vice President, and the President. Applicants to the Coast Guard Academy compete in a direct nationwide competitive process that has no by-state quotas.

===Admissions===

The admissions process to the U.S. service academies is an extensive and very competitive process. The Military Academy, the Naval Academy, and the Air Force Academy all require an applicant to submit an online file and proceed through pre-candidate qualification before an application is provided. The Merchant Marine Academy requires an applicant to submit part 1 of the 3 part application prior to receiving a nomination. All these schools have an extremely competitive application process and are ranked annually by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; and &quot;Forbes&quot; as some of the most selective colleges and universities in the United States. The average acceptance rate is between 8-17% for each of the schools.

===Duty commitments===

Upon graduation and the receipt of a Bachelor of Science degree, the cadets and midshipmen commission as second lieutenants or ensigns and must serve a minimum term of duty, usually five years plus another three years in the reserves. If the student&#x27;s chosen occupation requires particularly extensive training (such as aviation or special operations), the service commitment may be longer.

At the Merchant Marine Academy, midshipmen repay their service obligations through a variety of methods depending on their selected career path. On average, about one third of the graduating class each year will actively sail on their Coast Guard license as either Unlimited Third Mates or Third Assistant Engineers in the U.S. Merchant Marine, about one third will go to work in the civilian maritime industry ashore, and the remaining one third will enter active duty military service.

A Merchant Marine midshipman who enters active duty military service will typically assume a service obligation similar to those of cadets and midshipmen entering the military services from their respective service academies (i.e., a Merchant Marine midshipman entering the U.S. Marine Corps would assume a similar obligation to a midshipman from the Naval Academy entering the Marine Corps).

Merchant Marine midshipmen not entering active duty typically assume an eight-year obligation to the Navy Reserve Strategic Sealift Officer Program, unless they have elected to enter another branch of the armed forces. In addition, midshipmen who do not serve on active duty are restricted from working outside the maritime industry or merchant marine for a period of five years following graduation and must seek annual MARAD approval for their employment.

==Preparatory schools==

Preparatory schools provide for strengthening of academic potential of candidates to each of the above-described U.S. service academies. Admission is restricted to those students who have applied to an academy, failed initially to qualify, either academically or physically, but who have demonstrated an ability to qualify during the initial admission selection process:
* United States Military Academy Preparatory School
* Naval Academy Preparatory School
* United States Air Force Academy Preparatory School

==See also==
* List of United States military schools and academies
* List of defunct United States military academies
* Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps
** Army ROTC
** Navy ROTC
** Air Force ROTC
* United States senior military colleges (SMCs)
* United States military junior colleges (MJCs)
* U.S. military graduate schools:
** Air Force Institute of Technology
** Naval Postgraduate School
** Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
* Staff colleges

==References==
==External links==
* United States Military Academy
* United States Naval Academy
* United States Coast Guard Academy
* United States Merchant Marine Academy
* United States Air Force Academy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="4" end="35" title="United States service academies" label="United States service academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="51" end="83" title="United States service academies" label="United States military academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892484" start="89" end="106" title="United States federal academies" label="federal academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="115" end="138" title="undergraduate education" label="undergraduate education"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="155" end="176" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="185" end="211" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="260" end="290" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="301" end="321" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="345" end="372" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="383" end="402" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="426" end="459" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="United States Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49146" start="471" end="494" title="New London, Connecticut" label="New London, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="518" end="555" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449107" start="567" end="588" title="Kings Point, New York" label="Kings Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="612" end="643" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="655" end="681" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="942" end="963" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="1008" end="1039" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="1092" end="1120" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677555" start="1259" end="1270" title="active duty" label="active duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="1359" end="1364" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="1368" end="1378" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="1399" end="1431" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="1495" end="1512" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1797" end="1806" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1815" end="1832" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1889" end="1903" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="1912" end="1928" title="United States Space Force" label="U.S. Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579934" start="2079" end="2097" title="Uniformed services of the United States" label="uniformed services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873184" start="2109" end="2113" title="NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632308" start="2122" end="2157" title="United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps" label="United States Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="2971" end="2985" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2995" end="3004" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="3669" end="3697" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="3714" end="3720" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="3937" end="3956" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="4005" end="4022" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="4027" end="4033" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762477" start="4060" end="4072" title="tour of duty" label="term of duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q657908" start="4125" end="4133" title="Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q627716" start="4225" end="4233" title="Military aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="4237" end="4255" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163194" start="4572" end="4583" title="Third mate" label="Third Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070920" start="4587" end="4612" title="Fourth engineer" label="Third Assistant Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="4620" end="4640" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="U.S. Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="5601" end="5606" title="United States Maritime Administration" label="MARAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890748" start="6037" end="6086" title="United States Military Academy Preparatory School" label="United States Military Academy Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981688" start="6089" end="6121" title="Naval Academy Preparatory School" label="Naval Academy Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889204" start="6124" end="6174" title="United States Air Force Academy Preparatory School" label="United States Air Force Academy Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602850" start="6191" end="6243" title="List of United States military schools and academies" label="List of United States military schools and academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615948" start="6246" end="6294" title="List of defunct military academies in the United States" label="List of defunct United States military academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="6297" end="6334" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794233" start="6338" end="6347" title="Army Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Army ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="6351" end="6360" title="Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps" label="Navy ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697942" start="6364" end="6378" title="Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Air Force ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445354" start="6381" end="6418" title="United States senior military college" label="United States senior military college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890755" start="6429" end="6467" title="Military junior college" label="United States military junior colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697913" start="6512" end="6545" title="Air Force Institute of Technology" label="Air Force Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="6549" end="6574" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114428" start="6578" end="6630" title="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences" label="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522839" start="6633" end="6646" title="Staff college" label="Staff college"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481841" wikidata="Q1806541" url="?curid=481841" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy">
<text>The United States Merchant Marine Academy (USMMA or Kings Point) is a United States service academy in Kings Point, New York. It trains its midshipmen (as students at the academy are called) to serve as officers in the United States Merchant Marine, branches of the United States Armed Forces, and the transportation industry. Midshipmen are trained in marine engineering, navigation, ship&#x27;s administration, maritime law, personnel management, international law, customs, and other subjects important to the task of running a large ship.

==History==
Between 1874 and 1936, diverse federal legislation supported maritime training through school ships, internships at sea, and other methods. A disastrous fire in 1934 aboard the passenger ship SS &quot;Morro Castle&quot;, in which 134 people died, convinced the U.S. Congress that direct federal involvement in efficient and standardized training was needed. 

Originally – and in cooperation with the State of New York, which donated the land – the U.S. government planned to establish a large-scale Merchant Marine Academy at Fort Schuyler, New York; nothing came of these plans. Fort Schuyler would later be used as the grounds for SUNY (State University of New York) Maritime.

Congress passed the landmark Merchant Marine Act in 1936, and two years later, the U.S. Merchant Marine Cadet Corps was established. In that year, the USTS &quot;Nantucket&quot; (ex-USS &quot;Ranger&quot;) was transferred from the Massachusetts Maritime Academy to Kings Point and renamed the USTS &quot;Emory Rice&quot;. The first training was given at temporary facilities until the academy&#x27;s permanent site in Kings Point, New York was acquired in early 1942. The Kings Point campus was originally Walter Chrysler&#x27;s twelve-acre waterfront estate, named &quot;Forker House&quot; (now known as the USMMA&#x27;s Wiley Hall). Construction of the academy began immediately, and 15 months later the task was virtually completed. The academy was dedicated on 30 September 1943, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who noted &quot;the Academy serves the Merchant Marine as West Point serves the Army and Annapolis the Navy.&quot;

World War II required the academy to forgo its normal operation and to devote all of its resources toward meeting the emergency need for Merchant Marine officers. Its enrollment rose to 2,700 men, and the planned course of instruction was reduced in length from four years to 18 months. To meet the wartime needs for qualified merchant marine officers two additional merchant marine cadet training school sites were established, one located in Pass Christian, Mississippi, and the other in San Mateo, California. (The San Mateo location was closed in September 1947, and the students transferred to Kings Point. The location in Pass Christian was similarly closed in 1950.) In spite of the war, shipboard training continued to be an integral part of the academy curriculum, and midshipmen served at sea in combat zones the world over. One hundred and forty-two midshipmen gave their lives in service to their country, and many others survived torpedo and aerial attacks. From 1942 to 1945, the academy graduated 6,895 officers. As the war drew to a close, plans were made to convert the academy&#x27;s wartime curriculum to a four-year, college-level program to meet the peacetime requirements of the merchant marine. In 1948, such a course was instituted.

Authorization for awarding the degree of Bachelor of Science to graduates was granted by Congress in 1949. The academy became fully accredited as a degree-granting institution in the same year. It was made a permanent institution by an Act of Congress in 1956. The academy accelerated graduating classes during the Korean War and the Vietnam War. It was involved in such programs as training U.S. officers for the nuclear-powered merchant ship, the NS &quot;Savannah&quot;.

Admission requirements were amended in 1974, and the academy became the first federal service academy to enroll female students, two years before the Military, Naval, Air Force, and Coast Guard academies.

Prior to and during the Persian Gulf War in early 1991, academy graduates and midshipmen played important roles in the large sealift of military supplies to the Middle East. Midshipmen training at sea also participated in the humanitarian sealift to Somalia during Operation Restore Hope.

In 1992, the academy acquired its largest campus-based training vessel, the T/V &quot;Kings Pointer&quot;. After 20 years at the academy, MARAD transferred the ship to the Texas Maritime Academy in Galveston to serve as its new primary training vessel. This was followed by an announcement on 21 August 2012, that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) agreed to transfer the MV &quot;Liberty Star&quot; to the U.S. Department of Transportation for use as the new training vessel at the academy. Before being redesigned to serve as a training vessel for students, the former MV &quot;Liberty Star&quot; served as a solid rocket booster recovery vessel for NASA retrieving solid rocket boosters following space shuttle launches. In June 2014, the vessel was rechristened the T/V &quot;Kings Pointer&quot;, the fifth vessel of the academy to carry that name. The rechristening followed the earlier dedication of the academy&#x27;s newly replaced Mallory Pier.

In the 1990s, the academy&#x27;s future came into question when it was included in the National Performance Review, chaired by Vice President Al Gore. The report recommended halving the federal subsidy and requiring students to pay half of tuition to reduce costs. Congress, however, soundly rejected the recommendation and voted to continue the prohibitions on charging tuition to students.

During the attacks of 11 September 2001, the Merchant Marine Academy assisted in the evacuation of civilians from Lower Manhattan as well as the transportation of first responders and supplies to and from Ground Zero. Midshipman, faculty, and staff from the academy, within hours of the attack, were using boats from the waterfront and sending them to the city. Members of the Merchant Marine Academy participated in the relief efforts for nine days. These efforts were recognized by President George W Bush with the award of the 
Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award, the equivalent of the Defense Department’s Presidential Unit Citation.

Merchant Marine Academy midshipmen and graduates have been involved in many facets of the war in Iraq. Many graduates were involved in the transportation of supplies during the buildup to the war in 2003. Many graduates in the U.S. Navy Reserve have been called to active duty to serve supporting naval roles in ports in Iraq and Kuwait. Graduates who have entered other branches of the service have had more direct roles in Iraq. Aaron Seesan, a 2003 graduate and U.S. Army first lieutenant, was the first Academy graduate since the Vietnam War to be killed by enemy action. Since that time, two additional graduates, LTJG Francis L. Toner, IV, USN (class of 2006) and 1st Lt. William N. Donnelly, IV, USMC (class of 2008) have both given their lives while serving their country in Afghanistan.
Between 2009 and 2014, the Obama Administration invested more than $450 million at the academy, including almost $100 million for capital improvementsthe most funding ever secured for physical improvements at the academy.

Because of the service of midshipmen in every major conflict the country has been involved in since World War II, the regiment is privileged to carry a regimental battle standard. The Merchant Marine Academy is the only federal service academy granted the right to do so, and the standard is carried with the colors at all times. Campaign ribbons from all the conflicts in which midshipmen have taken part help to dress the battle standard. The academy’s battle standard is emblazoned with the number “142” representing the number of USMMA midshipmen that have been killed in action since the academy’s inception. 

On 19 June 2006, President George W. Bush gave the commencement address at the academy, the first sitting president to visit the academy.

Since 2016, the academy has come under public scrutiny and sharp criticism from lawmakers for alleged sexual assault and harassment within its &quot;Sea Year&quot; program. The program, which places students on commercial vessels, was temporarily suspended in 2016 and again in 2021 for multiple allegations of sexual assault in the program. Following both suspensions, the Department of Transportation and the Maritime Administration implemented new safety standards and reforms.

In 2022, President Joe Biden awarded the Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award, for a second time, to Academy midshipmen who were in attendance between March 13, 2020 and June 18, 2022 based on the Regiment of Midshipmen’s leadership and relentless efforts to excel on campus, but more importantly for manning the ships during the logistical crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Admissions==
In addition to requiring strong GPA and SAT/ACT scores, to be eligible to enter the academy a candidate must:
* Be of good moral character.
* Be at least 17 years of age and must not have passed his or her 25th birthday before 1 July in the year of entrance.
* Be a citizen of the United States either by birth or naturalization, except for a limited number of international midshipmen specially authorized by Congress.
* Meet the physical, security and character requirements necessary for appointment as midshipman in the U.S. Navy.
* Obtain a Congressional nomination to the academy from a member of Congress.
* Submit a completed application; and
* Qualify academically.
Medical/Physical Clearance – Candidates are required to pass a DoDMERB (Department of Defense Medical Examination Review Board) physical, and take the Candidate Fitness Assessment (CFA) to assess physical fitness.

Security Clearance – In order to receive a commission at graduation as an officer in the U.S. armed forces, candidates are required to complete a security clearance upon enrollment at the academy.

==Organization==

The academy is administered by the United States Maritime Administration, and has a budget of $82.3 million (FY20) from the United States Department of Transportation.

The entire student body is referred to as the Regiment of Midshipmen and is subdivided into three battalions and six companies (as of 2017). The 1st and 2nd Companies form the 1st Battalion, the 3rd and Band Companies make up the 2nd Battalion, while the 4th and 5th Company make the 3rd Battalion. Company assignment is random, although candidates with experience playing a musical instrument are highly considered for joining the Band Company. 

=== Regimental Band ===
The United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band serves a dual purpose as both the academy&#x27;s marching band as well as the official band of the United States Merchant Marine, often playing in official events alongside the other bands of the Armed Forces as well as representing the U.S. Merchant Marine at official events around the country and overseas. The United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band regularly represents the United States Merchant Marine Academy and veterans of the United States Merchant Marine at presidential inauguration parades and other events of national significance.

===Department of Public Safety===
The USMMA Department of Public Safety is a full-service law enforcement agency responsible for campus safety and security. The academy has mutual-aid agreements with multiple agencies in both Great Neck and Nassau County, including the Kings Point Police Department, Great Neck Alert Fire Department (fire and rescue coverage), Great Neck Vigilant Fire Department (EMS coverage), and the Nassau County Police Department, as well as investigative support from the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Department Head is assisted by two federal police officers and two federal guards, with contract security guards utilized to meet minimum manning requirements. Federal police officers, federal guards, and contract guards wear distinct uniforms and perform access control, foot and motor patrols, respond to transmitted fire and security alarms, address safety and security matters, direct traffic, and enforce parking and traffic regulations. The police officers have full arrest authority under federal law (Title 40 United States Code Section 1315), and may also issue federal and New York state summonses, protect persons and property, prevent breaches of the peace, and enforce rules and regulations for the protection of property at the academy. The guards have no arrest authority other than that of an ordinary citizen.

EMS coverage of the academy is also provided by the Regimental Emergency Service Squad. This is a certified New York State EMS department under the Chief Medical Officer at the academy. The squad contains about 100 midshipman at a time who volunteer to take the EMT-B class and staff the department. The squad has one ambulance housed at Patten Medical Clinic on campus.

==Curriculum==
Admitted appointees enter as &quot;candidates&quot; in early July, and begin a two-and-a-half-week indoctrination period, or &quot;indoc&quot;, run by upperclass instructors and supervised by United States Maritime Service officers of the Commandant of Midshipman&#x27;s staff. It is a high-stress, intensive introduction to regimental life at the academy including physical training, history, customs and courtesies, and drill and ceremony. After indoc, the candidates earn the title of &quot;plebe candidates&quot;. The academic year begins in late July, and on Acceptance Day in September, plebe candidates are sworn into the U.S. Navy Reserve and join the regiment as plebes. As plebes they are subject to stringent rules that govern daily life until the following spring, when they are recognized as midshipmen, fourth class, with eased restrictions and additional privileges.

The following academic programs (Bachelor of Science 4-year degree programs) are offered at USMMA:
* Marine Transportation
* Maritime Logistics and Security
* Marine Engineering
* Marine Engineering Systems
* Marine Engineering and Shipyard Management

These five majors can be grouped as follows:
* The two &quot;Deck Majors&quot; are Marine Transportation and Maritime Logistics and Security. Marine transportation students learn about ship navigation, cargo handling, navigation rules and maritime law. These majors grant midshipman a Third Mate license for work on steam or motor vessels of unlimited tonnage.
* The three &quot;Engine Majors&quot; are Marine Engineering, Marine Engineering Systems, and Marine Engineering and Shipyard Management. Marine engineering students learn about the function of the ship&#x27;s engines and its supporting systems. These majors lead to the issuance of Third Assistant Engineer (3 A/E – Engineering Officer) licenses for steam and motor vessel of any horsepower. Marine Engineering Systems, and Marine Engineering and Shipyard Management, graduates are also qualified to sit for the Engineer in Training (EIT) examination administered by the National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES).

For portions of their sophomore (third-class) and junior (second-class) years, midshipmen serve as cadets on U.S. merchant ships. Midshipmen are typically assigned as pairs to a ship, an engineering cadet and a deck cadet, and operate as part of the crew, gaining hands-on experience as well as the opportunity to travel abroad to foreign ports; the average midshipman travels to eighteen countries during the three-hundred-day training period. This practical training results in an extended academic year that runs from late July to mid-June.

Toward the end of 1st class (senior) year, midshipmen prepare for U.S. Coast Guard exams for a mandatory license as Third Assistant Engineer (steam and motor unlimited HP) or Third Mate (any gross tons, oceans).

==Athletics==
The USMMA Mariners compete in Division III of the NCAA, as a member of the Skyline Conference in all sports (men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, and track &amp; field; women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, lacrosse, swimming &amp; diving, track &amp; field, and volleyball) except in football, where they are an associate member of the New England Women&#x27;s and Men&#x27;s Athletic Conference, and collegiate wrestling, where they are a member of the Centennial Conference. The USMMA was a member of the Skyline Conference until the 2006–07 season; the USMMA returned to the Skyline Conference for the 2016–17 academic year. The academy was also a charter member in the Landmark Conference from 2007 until 2016.

==Distinguished midshipmen==
The Merchant Marine Distinguished Service Medal is the highest award which can be bestowed upon members of the United States Merchant Marine and is the service&#x27;s equivalent of the Medal of Honor. Since mariners serving in the U.S. Merchant Marine are not directly employed by the Department of Defense, they are not eligible for the Medal of Honor.

Since USMMA opened in 1943, eight midshipmen have been awarded the Merchant Marine Distinguished Service Medal.
*Midshipman Francis A. Dales,
*Midshipman Elmer C. Donnelly, 
*Midshipman Carl M. Medved – Awarded posthumously,
*Midshipman Edwin Joseph O&#x27;Hara – Awarded posthumously,
*Midshipman Walter G. Sittmann, 
*Midshipman William M. Thomas, Jr.,
*Midshipman Phil Cox Vannais, and 
*Midshipman Frederick R. Zito.

==Post-graduation service obligations==

Midshipmen at Kings Point have a wide variety of options upon graduation. Unlike the nation&#x27;s other federal service academies, graduates of USMMA are required to fulfill their service obligation on their own by providing annual proof of employment in a wide variety of occupations as approved by MARAD for a specified period of time.

Graduates may elect to fulfill their service obligation by working as licensed officers on U.S.-flagged merchant vessels, as civilians in the maritime industry, or as active duty officers in any branch of the military or the uniformed services of the United States, including the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration. Regardless, graduates are required to maintain their U.S. Coast Guard-issued merchant marine officer&#x27;s license for a period of at least 6 years.

Those graduates electing to enter the civilian work force in the maritime industry, and those sailing in the Merchant Marine, are also required to maintain their Navy Reserve commission (or another reserve component commission in the Army National Guard or Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air Force National Guard or Reserve, or Coast Guard Reserve) for a period of at least 8 years after their commissioning as officers, and are required to serve in the maritime industry for at least 5 years following graduation.

* On average about 1/3 of each graduating class goes to sea working in the Merchant Marine serving with the Military Sealift Command (part of the U.S. Navy) and the National Defense Reserve Fleet or on various U.S.-flagged ships in international trade, inland &amp; near-coastal transportation, research vessels, and other types of vessels.
* Another 1/3 generally go to work in the U.S. maritime industry ashore working in commercial shipping, ship broking, ship repair, intermodal logistics, marine engineering, maritime law, maritime insurance, or defense contracting.
* About 1/3 enter the military as active duty commissioned officers in the Uniformed Services. Of those going on active duty, most enter the Navy as naval aviators, naval flight officers, surface warfare officers, submarine officers, or occasionally even as SEALs. Many midshipmen enter the Coast Guard, while others enter the Marine Corps, Army, Air Force, United States Space Force, and their Reserve or National Guard components. Midshipmen may also apply for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) with the NOAA Commissioned Corps. 
*Those graduates who sail in the U.S. Merchant Marine or work ashore in the U.S. Maritime Industry will receive a Navy reserve commission as Strategic Sealift Officers.

A graduate from USMMA receives upon graduation:
* A Bachelor of Science degree,
* An Unlimited USCG License as a Merchant Marine Officer, either 3rd Mate or 3rd Assistant Engineer, and
* A Commission as an ensign in the U.S. Navy Reserve Strategic Sealift Officer Program (see: Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia), or if accepted on Active Duty, as an ensign in the U.S. Navy, U.S. Coast Guard, or National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or as a 2nd lieutenant in the U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. Army, U.S. Air Force, or U.S. Space Force. Graduates who choose military service must serve at least five years in the active duty force of their respective service.

==American Merchant Marine Museum==

The USMMA in Kings Point, New York is the home of the American Merchant Marine Museum. The museum houses:
*A learning center which is open to the regiment and the public
*The academy&#x27;s collection of maritime art and artifacts
*Exhibits, including:
** The only known back-acting engine still in existence, that of the former gunboat 
**The National Maritime Hall of Fame (the only permanent exhibit of its kind in the nation), which honors people and ships important to American oceanic, coastal, inland waterways, and Great Lakes shipping. Inductees into the Hall of Fame must be deceased, or sunk or scrapped, for at least five years. Only one person and one ship are inducted into the Hall of Fame each year. The Hall inducted its first set of members in or about 1982.

Among the museum&#x27;s many items are the world&#x27;s largest collection of navigation and nautical instruments, and the only extensive selection of ship&#x27;s china, on display anywhere in the world. In addition, one of the five surrender swords presented by the Japanese to General of the Army Douglas MacArthur at the conclusion of World War II is housed there.

==Superintendents==


Above right is the academy photograph of Rear Admiral Richard Robert McNulty. As commodore of the U.S. Merchant Marine Cadet Corps of the U.S. Maritime Commission from 1938 to 1948 and for decades prior, he advocated for creation of the academy. The USMMA community considers McNulty to be the academy&#x27;s &quot;father&quot;. He was the academy&#x27;s third superintendent. The letter appearing right is from the academy&#x27;s early history and accompanied the photograph. The letter from the United States Merchant Marine Academy explains how, as the academy&#x27;s third superintendent, Rear Admiral McNulty, strongly supported cadet sports, especially, baseball. The Academic Dean, Shashi Kumar, Master Mariner served as acting superintendent between Admirals Worley and Greene and again between Greene and Helis. Rear Admiral Susan Dunlap, the deputy superintendent, serving as acting superintendent between Buono and Nunan.

==Congressional Board of Visitors==
In accordance with 46 USC § 51312, The Board of Visitors to the United States Merchant Marine Academy provides independent advice and recommendations on matters relating to the United States Merchant Marine Academy to the President of the United States and the United States Congress. The 19-member board is composed of members of Congress, academy alumni, and stakeholders from the federal government and the maritime industry. Specifically:

* 2 Senators appointed by the chair of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation;
* 1 Senator appointed by the Vice President of the United States from the Senate Appropriations Committee;
* 3 members of the House of Representatives appointed by the chair of the United States House Committee on Armed Services;
* 2 members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, at least 1 of whom shall be a member of the House Appropriations Committee;
* 5 individuals appointed by the President, at least 2 of which shall be graduates of the academy, at least 1 shall be a senior corporate officer from a United States maritime shipping company, and 1 or more may be a Senate-confirmed presidential appointee, a member of the Senior Executive Service, or any officer of flag-rank who from the U.S. Coast Guard, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), or any of the military services that commission graduates of the academy; and
* 6 ex officio members:
** the commander of the U.S. Navy Military Sealift Command;
** the Deputy Commandant for Operations of the U.S. Coast Guard;
** the chair of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation;
** the chair of the United States House Committee on Armed Services;
** the chair of the USMMA Academic Advisory Board; and—the member of the House of Representatives for the congressional district in which the academy is located, as a nonvoting member—Chairmanship is rotated on a biannual basis between a member of the House of Representatives and a member of the Senate.

===Meetings of the board===
The board is required to meet at least quarterly, in accordance with their charter, including at least 1 meeting held at the academy on a date selected by the board in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the Superintendent of the academy. However, board members, in cooperation with the Superintendent, may make other visits to the academy in connection with the duties of the board. While visiting the academy under this subsection, members of the board shall have reasonable access to the grounds, facilities, midshipmen, faculty, staff, and other personnel of the academy for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the board.

===Responsibility of the board===
The board shall inquire into the state of morale and discipline, the curriculum, instruction, physical equipment, fiscal affairs, and academic methods of the academy, and other matters relating to the academy that the board decides to consider.

Not later than 60 days after each annual visit to the academy, the board shall submit to the President of the United States, a written report of its actions, views, and recommendations pertaining to the academy. If the members of the board make other visits to the academy, the board may prepare a report on such visit; and if approved by a majority of the members of the board, submit such report to the President not later than 60 days after the date of the approval. Any report submitted to the President will be concurrently submitted to the Secretary of Transportation, the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate, and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.

(Pub. L. 109–304, §8(b), 6 Oct. 2006, 120 Stat. 1575; Pub. L. 113–291, div. C, title XXXV, §3504(a), 19 Dec. 2014, 128 Stat. 3905.)

==Notable alumni==
* Lane Kirkland (1942) U.S. labor union leader who served as President of the AFL-CIO for over 16 years.
* Robert H. Scarborough (1944) First graduate to become a vice admiral in the United States Coast Guard; Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard; inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 1997.
* Theodore &quot;Ted&quot; Taylor (1944) author of over 50 fiction and non-fiction books; best known for his 1969 novel &quot;The Cay.&quot;
* Russell B. Cummings (1945) Texas state representative from Harris County (1963–1967).
* Dean White (1945) Chairman and CEO of Whiteco Industries, Inc, Hotel/display sign magnate, Member of Fortune 500; philanthropist; the Dean and Barbara White Admissions Center at USMMA is named in his honor; inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 2006.
* Jack Lord (1945) American television, film and Broadway actor, director and producer. He starred as Steve McGarrett in the CBS television program Hawaii Five-O, which ran from 1968 to 1980.
* John Diebold (1946) Author of the book &quot;Automation&quot; (1954); established DieBold Group in 1961 designed and installed the first electronic banking network. Inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 2003.
* Thomas William McNamara (1948) United States Navy rear admiral
* Elliot See (1949) Project Gemini astronaut; killed in training; inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 1999.
* William B. Morgan (1950) Distinguished naval architect and marine engineer who revolutionized propeller design; 50-year career with the U.S. Navy David Taylor Model Basin; inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 2008.
* Romulo Espaldon (1950) First rear admiral of the Philippine Navy; First commander of the Philippine Southern Command; First governor of Tawi-Tawi province; First congressman of Tawi-Tawi; First regional commissioner of Western Mindanao; First minister of Muslim Affairs; Ambassador to Egypt and Saudi Arabia; Inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 1995.
* Albert J. Herberger (1955) First graduate to become a vice admiral in the United States Navy; Administrator, U.S. Maritime Administration under President Bill Clinton; inducted into USMMA Hall of Distinguished Graduates in 2000.
* George Oster (1961) Professor mathematical biology, University of California; MacArthur Fellow; member National Academy of Science.
*Edward S.G. Dennis (1967) Assistant U.S. Attorney General, Criminal Division (1988–1990)
* Robert Kiyosaki (1969) Author of the &quot;Rich Dad, Poor Dad&quot; books; Marine Corps helicopter gunship pilot during the Vietnam War.
* Skip Prosser (1972) Men&#x27;s basketball coach at Loyola (Md.), Xavier University and Wake Forest University.
* Joe Rizzo (1973) &quot;Orange Crush&quot; Denver Broncos linebacker; starting Broncos linebacker in Super Bowl XII.
* Mark H. Buzby (1979) Rear admiral, U.S. Navy; Administrator, U.S. Maritime Administration (2017–2021); Commander, Military Sealift Command; former Deputy Director Expeditionary Warfare; Commander, Joint Task Force, Guantanamo; Commanding Officer, USS &quot;Carney&quot; (DDG-64) and DESRON-31.
* Sean Connaughton (1983) Administrator, U.S. Maritime Administration (2006–2009), Virginia Secretary of Transportation (2010–2013).
*Christopher D. Thayer (1983) Director, Maritime Operations at Military Sealift Command (MSC), 1986 – present 
* Morgan Reeser (1984) Silver medalist, 1992 Olympics – Sailing, 470 Class; National Champion Multiple Times; Two-time College Sailor of the Year (1983, 1984).
* Mark E. Kelly (1986) U.S. Senator; Captain, U.S. Navy; pilot, STS-108 Space Shuttle &quot;Endeavour&quot;, STS-121 Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery&quot;, STS-124 Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery.&quot;
* Ken Schwaber, co-creator of the Scrum software development methodology and co-founder of Scrum.org
* Jennifer Boykin (1986) – President of Newport News Shipbuilding, Vice President of Huntington Ingalls Industries.
* Sean Marshall (1987) Former child actor, star of Disney&#x27;s &quot;Pete&#x27;s Dragon&quot;.
* Johnny Wolfe (1988) Vice Admiral, U.S. Navy, Director for Strategic Systems Programs 
* Benjamin Nicholson (1993) Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command Representative, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau/Commander, U.S. Naval Forces, Marianas/Commander, Joint Region Marianas.
* David &quot;Dubs&quot; Wright (2004) Laser sailor, 2002 National Champion. All American 2003. Represented Canada in 2012 London Olympic Games.

===Non-graduate alumni===
* Andrew Card – Former White House Chief-of Staff
* Henry Way Kendall – Nobel Laureate in Physics (1990)
* Gray H. Miller – Senior United States District Judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas
* Carroll O&#x27;Connor – Actor – portrayed Archie Bunker on &quot;All in the Family&quot;
* Martin Lewis Perl – Nobel Laureate in Physics (1995)
* Jordan Weisman - American game designer

==Notable faculty==
* Kenneth R. Force -- Musician; director of the USMMA regimental band (1971-2016)
* Clark G. Reynolds – Historian; professor of history and head of the USMMA Department of Humanities (1976–1978)

==See also==

*List of maritime colleges
* List of maritime museums in the United States
* Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia
* The Olmsted Scholar Program
* U.S. Department of Transportation
* U.S. Department of Defense
* United States Maritime Service
** U.S. Maritime Administration
** United States Merchant Marine
** United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band
*United States service academies
** United States Air Force Academy (USAFA)
** United States Coast Guard Academy (USCGA)
** United States Merchant Marine Academy (USMMA)
** United States Military Academy (USMA; Army)
** United States Naval Academy (USNA)
* Vice Admiral Emory S. Land, USN. Instrumental in overseeing founding of Academy

==Notes==
While &quot;cadet&quot; and &quot;midshipman&quot; are frequently used interchangeably to refer to students at USMMA, to do so is incorrect. The terms serve two different purposes—the term &quot;midshipman&quot; refers to a military rank, whereas the term &quot;cadet&quot; refers to a job description, much the same way the term &quot;captain&quot; is used for any officer in command of a ship regardless of actual rank. &quot;Examples: Midshipman Smith is the deck cadet on the SS &quot;Kauai&quot;, Midshipman Jones is the engine cadet.&quot;

==References==
==External links==

*Official website
*USMMA Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="4" end="41" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="43" end="48" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="USMMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="52" end="63" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="Kings Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="70" end="99" title="United States service academies" label="United States service academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449107" start="103" end="124" title="Kings Point, New York" label="Kings Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="140" end="150" title="midshipman" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="219" end="248" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="United States Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="266" end="292" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11482290" start="353" end="371" title="Marine propulsion" label="marine engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="373" end="383" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="413" end="425" title="maritime law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056396" start="427" end="447" title="human resource management" label="personnel management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="449" end="466" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="468" end="475" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q917221" start="748" end="775" title="SS Morro Castle (1930)" label="SS &amp;quot;Morro Castle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="817" end="830" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="966" end="974" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471994" start="1083" end="1096" title="Fort Schuyler" label="Fort Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603615" start="1190" end="1234" title="State University of New York Maritime College" label="SUNY (State University of New York) Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818377" start="1266" end="1293" title="Merchant Marine Act of 1936" label="Merchant Marine Act in 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872102" start="1388" end="1414" title="USS Nantucket (IX-18)" label="USTS &amp;quot;Nantucket&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784318" start="1468" end="1498" title="Massachusetts Maritime Academy" label="Massachusetts Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449107" start="1655" end="1676" title="Kings Point, New York" label="Kings Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="1743" end="1758" title="Walter Chrysler" label="Walter Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2024" end="2055" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="President Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="2115" end="2125" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2137" end="2141" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="2146" end="2155" title="United States Naval Academy" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q867480" start="2617" end="2644" title="Pass Christian, Mississippi" label="Pass Christian, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="2663" end="2684" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="3472" end="3491" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="3667" end="3682" title="Act of Congress" label="Act of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="3746" end="3756" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3765" end="3776" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364576" start="3880" end="3903" title="NS Savannah" label="NS &amp;quot;Savannah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="4056" end="4064" title="United States Military Academy" label="Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="4066" end="4071" title="United States Naval Academy" label="Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="4073" end="4082" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="4088" end="4099" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4136" end="4152" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440642" start="4237" end="4244" title="sealift" label="sealift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4273" end="4284" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="4362" end="4369" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q460844" start="4377" end="4399" title="Operation Restore Hope" label="Operation Restore Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="4478" end="4481" title="School ship" label="T/V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866532" start="4488" end="4501" title="USNS Contender" label="Kings Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973443" start="4574" end="4596" title="Texas Maritime Academy" label="Texas Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="4600" end="4609" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4720" end="4765" title="NASA" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4767" end="4771" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237812" start="4796" end="4823" title="MV Liberty Star" label="MV &amp;quot;Liberty Star&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="4831" end="4864" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="U.S. Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237812" start="4995" end="5022" title="MV Liberty Star" label="MV &amp;quot;Liberty Star&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="5035" end="5055" title="solid rocket booster" label="solid rocket booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237812" start="5194" end="5223" title="T/V Kings Pointer" label="T/V &amp;quot;Kings Pointer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974782" start="5466" end="5493" title="National Partnership for Reinventing Government" label="National Performance Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="5506" end="5520" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="5521" end="5528" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="5794" end="5811" title="September 11 attacks" label="11 September 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="5886" end="5901" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410" start="5977" end="5988" title="Ground Zero" label="Ground Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444402" start="6303" end="6353" title="Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award" label="Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="6517" end="6528" title="war in Iraq" label="war in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="6654" end="6671" title="U.S. Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="6748" end="6752" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="6757" end="6763" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6858" end="6870" title="Aaron Seesan" label="Aaron Seesan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6902" end="6918" title="First lieutenant#United States" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6961" end="6972" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="7472" end="7482" title="midshipmen" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8089" end="8103" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="8575" end="8603" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444402" start="8724" end="8774" title="Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award" label="Secretary of Transportation Outstanding Unit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287953" start="9841" end="9895" title="Department of Defense Medical Examination Review Board" label="Department of Defense Medical Examination Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="10235" end="10272" title="United States Maritime Administration" label="United States Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="10324" end="10366" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="United States Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067682" start="10845" end="10898" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067682" start="11213" end="11266" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="11350" end="11379" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="United States Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967564" start="11883" end="11914" title="Nassau County Police Department" label="Nassau County Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="11958" end="11989" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="13704" end="13709" title="plebe" label="plebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="13839" end="13856" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="14015" end="14025" title="Midshipman" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="14536" end="14546" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q584586" start="14564" end="14580" title="International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea" label="navigation rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="14585" end="14597" title="admiralty law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163194" start="14631" end="14641" title="Third Mate (Deck Officer)" label="Third Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070920" start="14990" end="15014" title="Third Assistant Engineer" label="Third Assistant Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360440" start="15371" end="15380" title="Sophomore year" label="sophomore"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="15448" end="15453" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="15960" end="15976" title="United States Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070920" start="16010" end="16034" title="Third Assistant Engineer" label="Third Assistant Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163194" start="16069" end="16079" title="Third Mate" label="Third Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="16151" end="16163" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="16171" end="16175" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537898" start="16196" end="16214" title="Skyline Conference" label="Skyline Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007436" start="16550" end="16609" title="New England Women&amp;#x27;s and Men&amp;#x27;s Athletic Conference" label="New England Women&amp;#x27;s and Men&amp;#x27;s Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="16615" end="16635" title="collegiate wrestling" label="collegiate wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059134" start="16668" end="16689" title="Centennial Conference" label="Centennial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537898" start="16721" end="16739" title="Skyline Conference" label="Skyline Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484767" start="16887" end="16906" title="Landmark Conference" label="Landmark Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306330" start="16963" end="17006" title="Merchant Marine Distinguished Service Medal" label="Merchant Marine Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="17144" end="17158" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479908" start="17438" end="17454" title="Francis A. Dales" label="Francis A. Dales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121925" start="17551" end="17575" title="SS Stephen Hopkins" label="Edwin Joseph O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="18078" end="18083" title="MARAD" label="MARAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="18259" end="18276" title="maritime industry" label="maritime industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579934" start="18342" end="18381" title="uniformed services of the United States" label="uniformed services of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="18397" end="18418" title="United States Public Health Service" label="Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873184" start="18427" end="18470" title="NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps" label="National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="18732" end="18747" title="Merchant Marine of the United States" label="Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="18785" end="18797" title="U.S. Naval Reserve" label="Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="19247" end="19271" title="Military Sealift Command" label="Military Sealift Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087571" start="19304" end="19334" title="National Defense Reserve Fleet" label="National Defense Reserve Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885131" start="19786" end="19804" title="Uniformed Services" label="Uniformed Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19852" end="19856" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="19860" end="19873" title="naval aviator" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981815" start="19876" end="19896" title="naval flight officer" label="naval flight officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645940" start="19899" end="19922" title="surface warfare officer" label="surface warfare officer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19925" end="19942" title="submarine officer" label="submarine officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="19969" end="19974" title="United States Navy SEALs" label="SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="20002" end="20013" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="20038" end="20050" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="20052" end="20056" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="20058" end="20067" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088961" start="20069" end="20094" title="United States Space Force" label="United States Space Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q657908" start="20106" end="20113" title="Reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States" label="Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="20117" end="20131" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="20144" end="20154" title="Midshipmen" label="Midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="20174" end="20221" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873184" start="20238" end="20261" title="NOAA Corps" label="NOAA Commissioned Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982469" start="20405" end="20431" title="Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia" label="Strategic Sealift Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="20486" end="20505" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="20654" end="20671" title="U.S. Navy Reserve" label="U.S. Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982469" start="20712" end="20749" title="Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia" label="Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449107" start="21155" end="21176" title="Kings Point, New York" label="Kings Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21413" end="21424" title="marine steam engine#Back acting" label="back-acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="21471" end="21478" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="21486" end="21516" title="National Maritime Hall of Fame" label="National Maritime Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q499814" start="21643" end="21659" title="Inland navigation" label="inland waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="21665" end="21676" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331037" start="22199" end="22218" title="General of the Army (United States)" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="22219" end="22236" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22258" end="22270" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="22352" end="22364" title="Rear Admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326941" start="22449" end="22473" title="U.S. Maritime Commission" label="U.S. Maritime Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378864" start="23768" end="23825" title="Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation" label="Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495418" start="23901" end="23932" title="Senate Appropriations Committee" label="Senate Appropriations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508630" start="24008" end="24055" title="United States House Committee on Armed Services" label="United States House Committee on Armed Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="24118" end="24157" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="24203" end="24233" title="House Appropriations Committee" label="House Appropriations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="24576" end="24592" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="24598" end="24645" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="24790" end="24814" title="Military Sealift Command" label="Military Sealift Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="24863" end="24879" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378864" start="24901" end="24958" title="Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation" label="Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508630" start="24980" end="25027" title="United States House Committee on Armed Services" label="United States House Committee on Armed Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400324" start="27163" end="27176" title="Lane Kirkland" label="Lane Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089784" start="27268" end="27289" title="Robert H. Scarborough" label="Robert H. Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782064" start="27484" end="27515" title="Theodore Taylor (author)" label="Theodore &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27625" end="27644" title="Russell B. Cummings" label="Russell B. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246545" start="27713" end="27723" title="Dean White (businessman)" label="Dean White"/>
<link wikidata="Q704473" start="27983" end="27992" title="Jack Lord" label="Jack Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q325451" start="28175" end="28187" title="John Diebold" label="John Diebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q100332177" start="28403" end="28426" title="Thomas William McNamara" label="Thomas William McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q621462" start="28468" end="28478" title="Elliot See" label="Elliot See"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004832" start="28595" end="28612" title="William B. Morgan" label="William B. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17371048" start="28830" end="28845" title="Romulo Espaldon" label="Romulo Espaldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13893" start="28966" end="28975" title="Tawi-Tawi" label="Tawi-Tawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13893" start="29007" end="29016" title="Tawi-Tawi" label="Tawi-Tawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13682" start="29049" end="29065" title="Western Mindanao" label="Western Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710536" start="29202" end="29221" title="Albert J. Herberger" label="Albert J. Herberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508017" start="29433" end="29445" title="George Oster" label="George Oster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29566" end="29584" title="Edward S.G. Dennis" label="Edward S.G. Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311147" start="29657" end="29672" title="Robert Kiyosaki" label="Robert Kiyosaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535715" start="29796" end="29808" title="Skip Prosser" label="Skip Prosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212032" start="29909" end="29918" title="Joe Rizzo (American football)" label="Joe Rizzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767855" start="30027" end="30040" title="Mark H. Buzby" label="Mark H. Buzby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440896" start="30323" end="30339" title="Sean Connaughton" label="Sean Connaughton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30455" end="30476" title="Christopher D. Thayer" label="Christopher D. Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911822" start="30567" end="30580" title="Morgan Reeser" label="Morgan Reeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q357510" start="30727" end="30740" title="Mark E. Kelly" label="Mark E. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q93032" start="30926" end="30938" title="Ken Schwaber" label="Ken Schwaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q97011212" start="31027" end="31042" title="Jennifer Boykin" label="Jennifer Boykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82610" start="31065" end="31090" title="Newport News Shipbuilding" label="Newport News Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257522" start="31110" end="31139" title="Huntington Ingalls Industries" label="Huntington Ingalls Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q472460" start="31143" end="31156" title="Sean Marshall (actor)" label="Sean Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q106912880" start="31240" end="31252" title="Johnny Wolfe" label="Johnny Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31328" end="31346" title="Benjamin Nicholson" label="Benjamin Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241312" start="31598" end="31627" title="David Wright (sailor)" label="David &amp;quot;Dubs&amp;quot; Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q840659" start="31635" end="31640" title="Laser (dinghy)" label="Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q504029" start="31770" end="31781" title="Andrew Card" label="Andrew Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q190495" start="31820" end="31837" title="Henry Way Kendall" label="Henry Way Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598182" start="31875" end="31889" title="Gray H. Miller" label="Gray H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q555487" start="32001" end="32022" title="Carroll O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Carroll O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q107416" start="32092" end="32109" title="Martin Lewis Perl" label="Martin Lewis Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277123" start="32147" end="32161" title="Jordan Weisman" label="Jordan Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q858057" start="32173" end="32186" title="game designer" label="game designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125453395" start="32210" end="32226" title="Kenneth R. Force" label="Kenneth R. Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127233" start="32292" end="32309" title="Clark G. Reynolds" label="Clark G. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18609271" start="32419" end="32444" title="List of maritime colleges" label="List of maritime colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627199" start="32447" end="32492" title="List of maritime museums in the United States" label="List of maritime museums in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982469" start="32495" end="32532" title="Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia" label="Navy Reserve Merchant Marine Insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864173" start="32535" end="32562" title="The Olmsted Scholar Program" label="The Olmsted Scholar Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="32565" end="32598" title="U.S. Department of Transportation" label="U.S. Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="32601" end="32627" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932471" start="32630" end="32660" title="United States Maritime Service" label="United States Maritime Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="32664" end="32692" title="U.S. Maritime Administration" label="U.S. Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="32696" end="32725" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="United States Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067682" start="32729" end="32782" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy Regimental Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="32784" end="32815" title="United States service academies" label="United States service academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="32819" end="32850" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="32862" end="32895" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="United States Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="32956" end="32986" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="33003" end="33030" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373715" start="33053" end="33066" title="Emory S. Land" label="Emory S. Land"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481843" wikidata="Q848497" url="?curid=481843" title="Uranium-235">
<text>Uranium-235 ( or U-235) is an isotope of uranium making up about 0.72% of natural uranium. Unlike the predominant isotope uranium-238, it is fissile, i.e., it can sustain a nuclear chain reaction. It is the only fissile isotope that exists in nature as a primordial nuclide.

Uranium-235 has a half-life of 703.8 million years. It was discovered in 1935 by Arthur Jeffrey Dempster. Its fission cross section for slow thermal neutrons is about barns. For fast neutrons it is on the order of 1 barn.
Most neutron absorptions induce fission, though a minority (about 15%) result in the formation of uranium-236.

== Fission properties ==

The fission of one atom of uranium-235 releases () inside the reactor. That corresponds to 19.54 TJ/mol, or 83.14 TJ/kg. Another 8.8 MeV escapes the reactor as anti-neutrinos. When nuclei are bombarded with neutrons, one of the many fission reactions that it can undergo is the following (shown in the adjacent image):
Heavy water reactors and some graphite moderated reactors can use natural uranium, but light water reactors must use low enriched uranium because of the higher neutron absorption of light water. Uranium enrichment removes some of the uranium-238 and increases the proportion of uranium-235. Highly enriched uranium (HEU), which contains an even greater proportion of uranium-235, is sometimes used in the reactors of nuclear submarines, research reactors and nuclear weapons.

If at least one neutron from uranium-235 fission strikes another nucleus and causes it to fission, then the chain reaction will continue. If the reaction continues to sustain itself, it is said to be critical, and the mass of 235U required to produce the critical condition is said to be a critical mass. A critical chain reaction can be achieved at low concentrations of 235U if the neutrons from fission are moderated to lower their speed, since the probability for fission with slow neutrons is greater. A fission chain reaction produces intermediate mass fragments which are highly radioactive and produce further energy by their radioactive decay. Some of them produce neutrons, called delayed neutrons, which contribute to the fission chain reaction. The power output of nuclear reactors is adjusted by the location of control rods containing elements that strongly absorb neutrons, e.g., boron, cadmium, or hafnium, in the reactor core. In nuclear bombs, the reaction is uncontrolled and the large amount of energy released creates a nuclear explosion.

=== Nuclear weapons ===
The Little Boy gun-type atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, was made of highly enriched uranium with a large tamper. The nominal spherical critical mass for an untampered 235U nuclear weapon is , which would form a sphere in diameter. The material must be 85% or more of 235U and is known as weapons grade uranium, though for a crude and inefficient weapon 20% enrichment is sufficient (called &quot;weapon(s)-usable&quot;). Even lower enrichment can be used, but this results in the required critical mass rapidly increasing. Use of a large tamper, implosion geometries, trigger tubes, polonium triggers, tritium enhancement, and neutron reflectors can enable a more compact, economical weapon using one-fourth or less of the nominal critical mass, though this would likely only be possible in a country that already had extensive experience in engineering nuclear weapons. Most modern nuclear weapon designs use plutonium-239 as the fissile component of the primary stage; however, HEU (highly enriched uranium, in this case uranium that is 20% or more 235U) is frequently used in the secondary stage as an ignitor for the fusion fuel.

== Natural decay chain ==
formula_1

== Astrophysical dating ==
Knowledge of current and theoretical production ratios of uranium-235 to uranium-238 allows radiometric dating, the time since modern uranium nuclei were formed in stellar nucleosynthesis.

The 1957 B2FH landmark paper in astrophysics explained the r-process by which both nuclei form. The authors predicted their relative abundances, and those of their rapidly alpha-chain decaying parent nuclides. Thus they predicted 1.64 as the 235U/238U ratio contributed to the interstellar medium by r-process events (supernovae and subsequently discovered kilonovae). This takes billions of years to diminish to their present value of 0.0072 (see natural uranium). They investigate scenarios for historical contribution to the solar nebula, before contribution is cut off at the Sun&#x27;s formation 4.5 billion years ago. The scenarios are: a single supernova, a finite continuous uniform series of supernovae representing the lifetime of the Milky Way, and an infinite series representing the steady-state universe. From the second scenario, they estimated an age of the Milky Way at around 10 billion years, compared to a modern value of 13.61 billion years. Significantly, at this point the oldest known objects were stellar clusters at 6.5 billion years old.

This technique is identical to uranium–thorium dating and uranium-234-uranium-238 dating.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Table of Nuclides.
* &quot;DOE Fundamentals Handbook: Nuclear Physics and Reactor Theory&quot; Vol. 1 (), Vol. 2 ().
* Radionuclide Basics: Uranium—US EPA
* NLM Hazardous Substances Databank – Uranium, Radioactive
* &quot;The Miracle of U-235&quot;, &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, January 1941—one of the earliest articles on U-235 for the general public</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="0" end="11" title="Uranium-235" label="Uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="13" end="13" title="Uranium-235" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="17" end="22" title="Uranium-235" label="U-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="30" end="48" title="isotope of uranium" label="isotope of uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015337" start="74" end="89" title="natural uranium" label="natural uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="122" end="133" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="141" end="148" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="173" end="195" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="255" end="273" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="294" end="303" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q710025" start="357" end="380" title="Arthur Jeffrey Dempster" label="Arthur Jeffrey Dempster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562475" start="386" end="407" title="fission cross section" label="fission cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="417" end="432" title="thermal neutron" label="thermal neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q209351" start="443" end="448" title="Barn (unit)" label="barns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="454" end="466" title="fast neutron" label="fast neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="503" end="521" title="neutron absorption" label="neutron absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955496" start="596" end="607" title="uranium-236" label="uranium-236"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="736" end="739" title="mole (unit)" label="mol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217441" start="955" end="974" title="Heavy water reactor" label="Heavy water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395559" start="985" end="1011" title="graphite moderated reactor" label="graphite moderated reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q558106" start="1042" end="1061" title="light water reactor" label="light water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1072" end="1092" title="low enriched uranium" label="low enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="1115" end="1133" title="neutron absorption" label="neutron absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1150" end="1168" title="Uranium enrichment" label="Uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1246" end="1269" title="Highly enriched uranium" label="Highly enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142489" start="1372" end="1390" title="Nuclear marine propulsion" label="nuclear submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438105" start="1392" end="1409" title="research reactors" label="research reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="1414" end="1429" title="nuclear weapon design" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="1448" end="1455" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="1632" end="1640" title="critical mass" label="critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q466714" start="1842" end="1851" title="neutron moderator" label="moderated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="1913" end="1926" title="Thermal neutron" label="slow neutrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="1986" end="2000" title="Fission product" label="mass fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2018" end="2029" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2066" end="2083" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044545" start="2123" end="2138" title="delayed neutron" label="delayed neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="2209" end="2224" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q615306" start="2257" end="2269" title="control rods" label="control rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="2327" end="2332" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="2334" end="2341" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="2346" end="2353" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2379" end="2391" title="nuclear bomb" label="nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="2447" end="2453" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656967" start="2473" end="2490" title="nuclear explosion" label="nuclear explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181013" start="2521" end="2531" title="Little Boy" label="Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079490" start="2532" end="2540" title="Gun-type fission weapon" label="gun-type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2642" end="2648" title="Nuclear weapon design#Pure fission weapons" label="tamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479936" start="2825" end="2838" title="weapons grade" label="weapons grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="3026" end="3039" title="Critical mass (nuclear)" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="3083" end="3092" title="Implosion-type nuclear weapon" label="implosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="3120" end="3128" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="3139" end="3146" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889369" start="3164" end="3181" title="neutron reflector" label="neutron reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="3447" end="3460" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="3828" end="3846" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="3900" end="3923" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q921309" start="3935" end="3939" title="B2FH paper" label="B2FH"/>
<link wikidata="Q285033" start="3985" end="3994" title="r-process" label="r-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="4104" end="4109" title="Decay chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="4119" end="4134" title="Parent nuclide" label="parent nuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="4203" end="4222" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="4244" end="4254" title="supernovae" label="supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14468623" start="4283" end="4292" title="Kilonova" label="kilonovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015337" start="4374" end="4389" title="natural uranium" label="natural uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="4454" end="4466" title="solar nebula" label="solar nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="4671" end="4680" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="4722" end="4743" title="steady-state universe" label="steady-state universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="4948" end="4964" title="stellar clusters" label="stellar clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q668593" start="5023" end="5045" title="uranium–thorium dating" label="uranium–thorium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899662" start="5050" end="5080" title="Uranium-234-Uranium-238 Dating" label="uranium-234-uranium-238 dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="5271" end="5277" title="US EPA" label="US EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="5379" end="5396" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481845" wikidata="Q615306" url="?curid=481845" title="Control rod">
<text>Control rods are used in nuclear reactors to control the rate of fission of the nuclear fuel – uranium or plutonium. Their compositions include chemical elements such as boron, cadmium, silver, hafnium, or indium, that are capable of absorbing many neutrons without themselves decaying. These elements have different neutron capture cross sections for neutrons of various energies. Boiling water reactors (BWR), pressurized water reactors (PWR), and heavy-water reactors (HWR) operate with thermal neutrons, while breeder reactors operate with fast neutrons. Each reactor design can use different control rod materials based on the energy spectrum of its neutrons. Control rods have been used in nuclear aircraft engines like Project Pluto as a method of control.

==Operating principle==

Control rods are inserted into the core of a nuclear reactor and adjusted in order to control the rate of the nuclear chain reaction and, thereby, the thermal power output of the reactor, the rate of steam production, and the electrical power output of the power station.

The number of control rods inserted, and the distance to which they are inserted, strongly influence the &quot;reactivity&quot; of the reactor. When reactivity (as effective neutron multiplication factor) is above 1, the rate of the nuclear chain reaction increases exponentially over time. When reactivity is below 1, the rate of the reaction decreases exponentially over time. When all control rods are fully inserted, they keep reactivity barely above 0, which quickly slows a running reactor to a stop and keeps it stopped (in shutdown). If all control rods are fully removed, reactivity is significantly above 1, and the reactor quickly runs hotter and hotter, until some other factor (such as temperature reactivity feedback) slows the reaction rate. Maintaining a constant power output requires keeping the long-term average neutron multiplication factor close to 1.

A new reactor is assembled with its control rods fully inserted. Control rods are partially removed from the core to allow the nuclear chain reaction to start up and increase to the desired power level. Neutron flux can be measured, and is roughly proportional to reaction rate and power level. To increase power output, some control rods are pulled out a small distance for a while. To decrease power output, some control rods are pushed in a small distance for a while. Several other factors affect the reactivity; to compensate for them, an automatic control system adjusts the control rods small amounts in or out, as-needed in some reactors. Each control rod influences some part of the reactor more than others; calculated adjustments to fuel distribution can be made to maintain similar reaction rates and temperatures in different parts of the core.

Typical shutdown time for modern reactors such as the European Pressurized Reactor or Advanced CANDU reactor is two seconds for 90% reduction, limited by decay heat.

Control rods are usually used in control rod assemblies (typically 20 rods for a commercial PWR assembly) and inserted into guide tubes within the fuel elements. Control rods often stand vertically within the core. In PWRs they are inserted from above, with the control rod drive mechanisms mounted on the reactor pressure vessel head. In BWRs, due to the necessity of a steam dryer above the core, this design requires insertion of the control rods from beneath.

==Materials==
Chemical elements with usefully high neutron capture cross-sections include silver, indium, and cadmium. Other candidate elements include boron, cobalt, hafnium, samarium, europium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, ytterbium, and lutetium. Alloys or compounds may also be used, such as high-boron steel, silver-indium-cadmium alloy, boron carbide, zirconium diboride, titanium diboride, hafnium diboride, gadolinium nitrate, gadolinium titanate, dysprosium titanate, and boron carbide–europium hexaboride composite.

The material choice is influenced by the neutron energy in the reactor, their resistance to neutron-induced swelling, and the required mechanical and lifespan properties. The rods may have the form of tubes filled with neutron-absorbing pellets or powder. The tubes can be made of stainless steel or other &quot;neutron window&quot; materials such as zirconium, chromium, silicon carbide, or cubic (cubic boron nitride).

The burnup of &quot;burnable poison&quot; isotopes also limits lifespan of a control rod. They may be reduced by using an element such as hafnium, a &quot;non-burnable poison&quot; which captures multiple neutrons before losing effectiveness, or by not using neutron absorbers for trimming. For example, in pebble bed reactors or in possible new type lithium-7-moderated and -cooled reactors that use fuel and absorber pebbles.

Some rare-earth elements are excellent neutron absorbers and are more common than silver (reserves of about 500,000t). For example, ytterbium (reserves about one M tons) and yttrium, 400 times more common, with middle capturing values, can be found and used together without separation inside minerals like xenotime (Yb) (Yb0.40Y0.27Lu0.12Er0.12Dy0.05Tm0.04Ho0.01)PO4, or keiviite (Yb) (Yb1.43Lu0.23Er0.17Tm0.08Y0.05Dy0.03Ho0.02)2Si2O7, lowering the cost. Xenon is also a strong neutron absorber as a gas, and can be used for controlling and (emergency) stopping helium-cooled reactors, but does not function in cases of pressure loss, or as a burning protection gas together with argon around the vessel part especially in case of core catching reactors or if filled with sodium or lithium. Fission-produced xenon can be used after waiting for caesium to precipitate, when practically no radioactivity is left. Cobalt-59 is also used as an absorber for winning of cobalt-60 for use as a gamma ray source. Control rods can also be constructed as thick turnable rods with a tungsten reflector and absorber side turned to stop by a spring in less than one second.

Silver-indium-cadmium alloys, generally 80% Ag, 15% In, and 5% Cd, are a common control rod material for pressurized water reactors. The somewhat different energy absorption regions of the materials make the alloy an excellent neutron absorber. It has good mechanical strength and can be easily fabricated. It must be encased in stainless steel to prevent corrosion in hot water. Although indium is less rare than silver, it is more expensive.

Boron is another common neutron absorber. Due to the different cross sections of 10B and 11B, materials containing boron enriched in 10B by isotopic separation are frequently used. The wide absorption spectrum of boron also makes it suitable as a neutron shield. The mechanical properties of boron in its elementary form are unsuitable, and therefore alloys or compounds have to be used instead. Common choices are high-boron steel and boron carbide. The latter is used as a control rod material in both PWRs and BWRs. 10B/11B separation is done commercially with gas centrifuges over BF3, but can also be done over BH3 from borane production or directly with an energy optimized melting centrifuge, using the heat of freshly separated boron for preheating.

Hafnium has excellent properties for reactors using water for both moderation and cooling. It has good mechanical strength, can be easily fabricated, and is resistant to corrosion in hot water. Hafnium can be alloyed with other elements, e.g. with tin and oxygen to increase tensile and creep strength, with iron, chromium, and niobium for corrosion resistance, and with molybdenum for wear resistance, hardness, and machineability. Such alloys are designated as Hafaloy, Hafaloy-M, Hafaloy-N, and Hafaloy-NM. The high cost and low availability of hafnium limit its use in civilian reactors, although it is used in some US Navy reactors. Hafnium carbide can also be used as an insoluble material with a high melting point of 3890 °C and density higher than that of uranium dioxide for sinking, unmelted, through corium.

Dysprosium titanate was undergoing evaluation for pressurized water control rods. Dysprosium titanate is a promising replacement for Ag-In-Cd alloys because it has a much higher melting point, does not tend to react with cladding materials, is easy to produce, does not produce radioactive waste, does not swell and does not outgas. It was developed in Russia and is recommended by some for VVER and RBMK reactors. A disadvantage is less titanium and oxide absorption, that other neutron absorbing elements do not react with the already high-melting point cladding materials and that just using the unseparated content with dysprosium inside of minerals like Keiviit Yb inside chromium, SiC or c11B15N tubes deliver superior price and absorption without swelling and outgassing.

Hafnium diboride is another such material. It can be used alone or in a sintered mixture of hafnium and boron carbide powders.

Many other compounds of rare-earth elements can be used, such as samarium with boron-like europium and samarium boride, which is already used in the colour industry. Less absorptive compounds of boron similar to titanium, but inexpensive, such as molybdenum as Mo2B5. Since they all swell with boron, in practice other compounds are better, such as carbides, or compounds with two or more neutron-absorbing elements together. It is important that tungsten, and probably also other elements such as tantalum, have much the same high capture qualities as hafnium, but with the opposite effect. This is not explainable by neutron reflection alone. An obvious explanation is resonance gamma rays increasing the fission and breeding ratio versus causing greater capture of uranium, and others over metastable conditions such as for isotope 235mU, which has a half-life of approximately 26 minutes.

===Additional means of reactivity regulation===
Other means of controlling reactivity include (for PWR) a soluble neutron absorber (boric acid) added to the reactor coolant, allowing the complete extraction of the control rods during stationary power operation, ensuring an even power and flux distribution over the entire core. This chemical shim, along with the use of burnable neutron poisons within the fuel pellets, is used to assist regulation of the core&#x27;s long term reactivity, while the control rods are used for rapid reactor power changes (e.g. shutdown and start up). Operators of BWRs use the coolant flow through the core to control reactivity by varying the speed of the reactor recirculation pumps (an increase in coolant flow through the core improves the removal of steam bubbles, thus increasing the density of the coolant/moderator, increasing power).

==Safety==
In most reactor designs, as a safety measure, control rods are attached to the lifting machinery by electromagnets, rather than direct mechanical linkage. This means that in the event of power failure, or if manually invoked due to failure of the lifting machinery, the control rods fall automatically, under gravity, all the way into the pile to stop the reaction. A notable exception to this fail-safe mode of operation is the BWR, which requires hydraulic insertion in the event of an emergency shut-down, using water from a special tank under high pressure. Quickly shutting down a reactor in this way is called scramming.

===Criticality accident prevention===
Mismanagement or control rod failure have often been blamed for nuclear accidents, including the SL-1 explosion and the Chernobyl disaster.
&quot;Homogeneous&quot; neutron absorbers have often been used to manage criticality accidents which involve aqueous solutions of fissile metals. In several such accidents, either borax (sodium borate) or a cadmium compound has been added to the system. The cadmium can be added as a metal to nitric acid solutions of fissile material; the corrosion of the cadmium in the acid will then generate cadmium nitrate &quot;in situ&quot;.

In carbon dioxide-cooled reactors such as the AGR, if the solid control rods fail to arrest the nuclear reaction, nitrogen gas can be injected into the primary coolant cycle. This is because nitrogen has a larger absorption cross-section for neutrons than carbon or oxygen; hence, the core then becomes less reactive.

As the neutron energy increases, the neutron cross section of most isotopes decreases. The boron isotope 10B is responsible for the majority of the neutron absorption. Boron-containing materials can also be used as neutron shielding, to reduce the activation of material close to a reactor core.

==See also==
*Nuclear power
*Nuclear reactor
*Nuclear safety
*Wigner effect

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q615306" start="0" end="12" title="Control rod" label="Control rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="25" end="40" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="95" end="102" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="106" end="115" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="144" end="160" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="170" end="175" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="177" end="184" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="186" end="192" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="194" end="201" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="206" end="212" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="249" end="256" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="317" end="332" title="neutron capture" label="neutron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q751259" start="333" end="347" title="neutron cross section" label="cross sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="372" end="380" title="neutron temperature" label="energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q468846" start="382" end="403" title="Boiling water reactor" label="Boiling water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q377968" start="412" end="437" title="pressurized water reactor" label="pressurized water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217441" start="450" end="469" title="heavy-water reactor" label="heavy-water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="490" end="505" title="thermal neutron" label="thermal neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q552334" start="514" end="529" title="breeder reactor" label="breeder reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="544" end="556" title="fast neutron" label="fast neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059282" start="726" end="739" title="Project Pluto" label="Project Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353262" start="825" end="850" title="nuclear reactor core" label="core of a nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649571" start="876" end="883" title="process control" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394849" start="888" end="892" title="reaction rate" label="rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="900" end="922" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200297" start="941" end="954" title="thermal power" label="thermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251738" start="990" end="995" title="steam" label="steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="1016" end="1032" title="electrical power" label="electrical power"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1168" end="1190" title="reactivity of a nuclear reactor" label="&amp;quot;reactivity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="1227" end="1266" title="effective neutron multiplication factor" label="effective neutron multiplication factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="1296" end="1318" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q331902" start="1594" end="1602" title="shutdown (nuclear reactor)" label="shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507178" start="1762" end="1793" title="Fuel temperature coefficient of reactivity" label="temperature reactivity feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="2065" end="2087" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q239277" start="2141" end="2153" title="Neutron flux" label="Neutron flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q331902" start="2805" end="2813" title="shutdown (nuclear reactor)" label="shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q643657" start="2851" end="2879" title="European Pressurized Reactor" label="European Pressurized Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379401" start="2883" end="2905" title="Advanced CANDU reactor" label="Advanced CANDU reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662393" start="2951" end="2961" title="decay heat" label="decay heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740460" start="3278" end="3293" title="pressure vessel" label="pressure vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="3519" end="3525" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="3527" end="3533" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="3539" end="3546" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="3581" end="3586" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="3588" end="3594" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="3596" end="3603" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819" start="3605" end="3613" title="samarium" label="samarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="3615" end="3623" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832" start="3625" end="3635" title="gadolinium" label="gadolinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838" start="3637" end="3644" title="terbium" label="terbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843" start="3646" end="3656" title="dysprosium" label="dysprosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846" start="3658" end="3665" title="holmium" label="holmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849" start="3667" end="3673" title="erbium" label="erbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853" start="3675" end="3682" title="thulium" label="thulium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855" start="3684" end="3693" title="ytterbium" label="ytterbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857" start="3699" end="3707" title="lutetium" label="lutetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656508" start="3760" end="3771" title="boron steel" label="boron steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q417399" start="3802" end="3815" title="boron carbide" label="boron carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161107" start="3817" end="3835" title="zirconium diboride" label="zirconium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093696" start="3837" end="3854" title="titanium diboride" label="titanium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161099" start="3856" end="3872" title="hafnium diboride" label="hafnium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q577230" start="3915" end="3934" title="dysprosium titanate" label="dysprosium titanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003062" start="4078" end="4102" title="neutron-induced swelling" label="neutron-induced swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="4358" end="4373" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410193" start="4391" end="4404" title="boron nitride" label="boron nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q221033" start="4428" end="4443" title="burnable poison" label="burnable poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="4450" end="4457" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622414" start="4715" end="4733" title="pebble bed reactor" label="pebble bed reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q468718" start="4759" end="4768" title="lithium-7" label="lithium-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="4842" end="4860" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q941" start="5011" end="5018" title="yttrium" label="yttrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q421241" start="5144" end="5152" title="xenotime" label="xenotime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="5293" end="5298" title="Xenon" label="Xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="5400" end="5406" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="5518" end="5523" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="5682" end="5689" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5825" end="5834" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="5910" end="5918" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q377968" start="6105" end="6130" title="pressurized water reactor" label="pressurized water reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221033" start="6227" end="6243" title="neutron absorber" label="neutron absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="6585" end="6604" title="isotopic separation" label="isotopic separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="6871" end="6876" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q417399" start="6881" end="6894" title="boron carbide" label="boron carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q134141" start="7009" end="7023" title="gas centrifuge" label="gas centrifuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634214" start="7070" end="7076" title="borane" label="borane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="7204" end="7211" title="Hafnium" label="Hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="7374" end="7383" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="7452" end="7455" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7460" end="7466" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7512" end="7516" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="7518" end="7526" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="7532" end="7539" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="7575" end="7585" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="7824" end="7831" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910355" start="8016" end="8022" title="corium (nuclear reactor)" label="corium"/>
<link wikidata="Q577230" start="8025" end="8044" title="Dysprosium titanate" label="Dysprosium titanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q778653" start="8350" end="8356" title="outgas" label="outgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35957" start="8416" end="8420" title="VVER" label="VVER"/>
<link wikidata="Q319449" start="8425" end="8429" title="RBMK" label="RBMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161099" start="8805" end="8821" title="Hafnium diboride" label="Hafnium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="9023" end="9031" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819" start="9036" end="9044" title="samarium" label="samarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="9180" end="9190" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="9380" end="9388" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="9431" end="9439" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="9486" end="9493" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9726" end="9736" title="metastability in nuclear decay#Metastable isomers" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="9760" end="9773" title="isotopes of uranium" label="isotope 235mU"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="9959" end="9969" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221033" start="10161" end="10174" title="chemical shim" label="chemical shim"/>
<link wikidata="Q466714" start="10674" end="10683" title="neutron moderator" label="moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888109" start="10746" end="10760" title="nuclear safety" label="safety measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="10816" end="10829" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="11110" end="11119" title="fail-safe" label="fail-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591311" start="11332" end="11337" title="scram" label="scram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620824" start="11446" end="11462" title="nuclear accident" label="nuclear accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296817" start="11479" end="11483" title="SL-1" label="SL-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="11502" end="11520" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321523" start="11595" end="11615" title="criticality accident" label="criticality accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="11652" end="11659" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="11660" end="11665" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="11702" end="11707" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="11709" end="11715" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q421726" start="11716" end="11722" title="borate" label="borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="11815" end="11826" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="11926" end="11933" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="11959" end="11973" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q379573" start="12002" end="12005" title="Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor" label="AGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="12070" end="12078" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="12212" end="12218" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="12222" end="12228" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="12366" end="12371" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="12372" end="12379" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q901707" start="12523" end="12533" title="neutron activation" label="activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="12586" end="12599" title="Nuclear power" label="Nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="12601" end="12616" title="Nuclear reactor" label="Nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888109" start="12618" end="12632" title="Nuclear safety" label="Nuclear safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775760" start="12634" end="12647" title="Wigner effect" label="Wigner effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481850" wikidata="Q757360" url="?curid=481850" title="Red-vented cockatoo">
<text>The red-vented cockatoo (Cacatua haematuropygia), also known as the Philippine cockatoo and locally katala, abukay, agay, or kalangay, is a species of cockatoo. It is endemic to the Philippines, formerly found throughout the entire country, but due to the illegal wildlife trade, it is now locally extinct in most of its range with the only sizeable population remaining in Palawan and Sulu Archipelago. Remnant populations occur in Polillo Islands, Bohol, and Samar. It is roughly the size and shape of the Tanimbar corella, but is easily distinguished by the red feathers around the vent. It is threatened by habitat loss and the cage-bird trade.

== Description and taxonomy ==

Their plumage is all white with red undertail coverts tipped white, yellowish undertail, and pale-yellow underwings. They average long and have an wingspan.

Ebird describes it as, &quot;A rare large parrot of forest on Palawan and several other scattered islands. Heavily persecuted. Can roost on small islets or in mangroves and forage in more open areas, including agricultural fields. Mostly white with a pale yellowish cheek, undertail, and underwings and a red patch under the base of the tail. Note the pale bill and the bare white skin around the eye. Hidden crest is usually held flat. Unmistakable. Voice includes various nasal or rasping squawks.&quot;

The red-vented cockatoo makes a characteristic bleating call, as well as screeching or whistling noises that are common to most cockatoos. It is quieter than most cockatoos, and much quieter than the umbrella cockatoo or Moluccan cockatoo.

== Behaviour and ecology ==
The diet of red-vented cockatoos is mostly seeds, but they also eat fruit, flowers, and nectar. They even eat rice and corn, which is why they are considered pests.

Nests are in tree cavities, mainly from February to June. Based on captive breeding, thir clutch size is two or three white eggs. Incubation takes 28 days, and hatchlings remain in the nest for 9 to 10 weeks.

== Habitat and conservation status ==

It appears to be restricted to lowland primary and/or secondary forest predominantly below 50 m, in or adjacent to riverine or coastal areas with mangroves.

The IUCN Red List has assessed this bird as critically endangered with an estimate of 430 - 750 mature individuals. Red-vented cockatoos were formerly widely distributed on all larger and many smaller islands of the Philippines, excluding northern and central Luzon. In the early 1990s, the total wild population was estimated at 1000–4000, but by 2008, this was reduced to probably less than 1000. Remnant populations exist on the islands of Palawan, Tawitawi, Bohol, and Samar. The species&#x27; stronghold is the Palawan Faunal Region, where the Katala Foundation has been running the Philippine Cockatoo Conservation Programme since 1998. Around 180 are found in wilderness conservation in the municipality of Narra and Puerto Princesa, Palawan, particularly in Rasa Island. The efforts for conservation of the Katala Foundation are threatened by plans to build a coal-fired power station on Palawan&#x27;s coast. Environmental organizations such as the Katala Foundation or Rainforest Rescue are trying to prevent the construction.

Populations have decreased dramatically due to illegal trapping for the cage-bird trade. The high-price fetched per bird (around US$300 in Manila in 2006) means that chicks are taken from virtually every accessible nest. Other contributing factors are loss of coastal habitat and persecution as an agricultural pest. In 1992, an international captive-breeding program was initiated, with 39 birds kept under the European Studbook in 2007. It is also threatened by habitat loss; deforestation still continues due to both legal and illegal logging, conversion into farmland, mining, and road and urban development. In its stronghold on Rasa Island, it is threatened by climate change and extreme weather in which droughts caused up to 60% nest fatality.

Thanks to the efforts of the Katala Foundation, the population has increased in key sites from 23 in 1998 to 260-340 individuals by end of 2015. Individuals have reportedly self-introduced from Rasa Island to the mainland, indicating that Rasa may be reaching carrying capacity. With the implementation of a nest-protection scheme on Pandanan in 2008, the cockatoo population increased from 40 birds to at least 230 by the end of 2015. Despite these massive efforts, the cockatoo population is still believed to be decreasing overall with the many threats affecting other sites.

Currently, sites are assessed and tested for their suitability for translocation. An attempt on a resort island in northern Palawan indicated that rescued hand-raised birds can adapt well to natural conditions, including foraging and predator avoidance, but was terminated owing to problems caused by tameness. Siargao is being assessed and made suitable for reintroduction efforts.

==See also==
*Katala Foundation, Inc.

==References==
==External links==
* Katala Foundation Incorporated
* Oriental Bird Images: &quot;Philippine cockatoo&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="4" end="23" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="red-vented cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="68" end="87" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="Philippine cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="100" end="106" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="katala"/>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="108" end="114" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="abukay"/>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="116" end="120" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="agay"/>
<link wikidata="Q757360" start="125" end="133" title="Red-vented cockatoo" label="kalangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q31448" start="151" end="159" title="cockatoo" label="cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="167" end="174" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="182" end="193" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="374" end="381" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061195" start="386" end="402" title="Sulu Archipelago" label="Sulu Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101315" start="433" end="448" title="Polillo Islands" label="Polillo Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13752" start="450" end="455" title="Bohol" label="Bohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219737" start="461" end="466" title="Samar" label="Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q757402" start="508" end="524" title="Tanimbar corella" label="Tanimbar corella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141338" start="632" end="647" title="cage-bird trade" label="cage-bird trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q463135" start="1547" end="1564" title="umbrella cockatoo" label="umbrella cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q735231" start="1568" end="1585" title="Moluccan cockatoo" label="Moluccan cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="2193" end="2206" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="2233" end="2254" title="Critically Endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="2632" end="2639" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13893" start="2641" end="2649" title="Tawitawi" label="Tawitawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13752" start="2651" end="2656" title="Bohol" label="Bohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219737" start="2662" end="2667" title="Samar" label="Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375044" start="2738" end="2755" title="Katala Foundation" label="Katala Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247763" start="2955" end="2966" title="Rasa Island" label="Rasa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q766328" start="2984" end="2996" title="Wildlife conservation" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="3057" end="3081" title="coal-fired power station" label="coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670725" start="3107" end="3134" title="Environmental organizations" label="Environmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q14083" start="3356" end="3359" title="dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="3366" end="3372" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="3757" end="3772" title="illegal logging" label="illegal logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="3800" end="3806" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3894" end="3908" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280814" start="4871" end="4878" title="Siargao" label="Siargao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375044" start="4958" end="4981" title="Katala Foundation" label="Katala Foundation, Inc."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481852" wikidata="Q407166" url="?curid=481852" title="Somatostatin">
<text>Somatostatin, also known as growth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GHIH) or by several other names, is a peptide hormone that regulates the endocrine system and affects neurotransmission and cell proliferation via interaction with G protein-coupled somatostatin receptors and inhibition of the release of numerous secondary hormones. Somatostatin inhibits insulin and glucagon secretion.

Somatostatin has two active forms produced by the alternative cleavage of a single preproprotein: one consisting of 14 amino acids (shown in infobox to right), the other consisting of 28 amino acids.

Among the vertebrates, there exist six different somatostatin genes that have been named: &quot;SS1&quot;, &quot;SS2&quot;, &quot;SS3&quot;, &quot;SS4&quot;, &quot;SS5&quot; and &quot;SS6&quot;. Zebrafish have all six. The six different genes, along with the five different somatostatin receptors, allow somatostatin to possess a large range of functions.
Humans have only one somatostatin gene, &quot;SST&quot;.

==Nomenclature==
Synonyms of &quot;somatostatin&quot; include:
* growth hormone–inhibiting hormone (GHIH)
* growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (GHRIH)
* somatotropin release–inhibiting factor (SRIF)
* somatotropin release–inhibiting hormone (SRIH)

==Production==

===Digestive system===

Somatostatin is secreted by delta cells at several locations in the digestive system, namely the pyloric antrum, the duodenum and the pancreatic islets.

Somatostatin released in the pyloric antrum travels via the portal venous system to the heart, then enters the systemic circulation to reach the locations where it will exert its inhibitory effects. In addition, somatostatin release from delta cells can act in a paracrine manner.

In the stomach, somatostatin acts directly on the acid-producing parietal cells via a G-protein coupled receptor (which inhibits adenylate cyclase, thus effectively antagonising the stimulatory effect of histamine) to reduce acid secretion. Somatostatin can also indirectly decrease stomach acid production by preventing the release of other hormones, including gastrin and histamine which effectively slows down the digestive process.

===Brain===

Somatostatin is produced by neuroendocrine neurons of the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus. These neurons project to the median eminence, where somatostatin is released from neurosecretory nerve endings into the hypothalamohypophysial system through neuron axons. Somatostatin is then carried to the anterior pituitary gland, where it inhibits the secretion of growth hormone from somatotrope cells. The somatostatin neurons in the periventricular nucleus mediate negative feedback effects of growth hormone on its own release; the somatostatin neurons respond to high circulating concentrations of growth hormone and somatomedins by increasing the release of somatostatin, so reducing the rate of secretion of growth hormone.

Somatostatin is also produced by several other populations that project centrally, i.e., to other areas of the brain, and somatostatin receptors are expressed at many different sites in the brain. In particular, populations of somatostatin neurons occur in the arcuate nucleus, the hippocampus, and the brainstem nucleus of the solitary tract.

==Functions==
Somatostatin is classified as an inhibitory hormone, and is induced by low pH. Its actions are spread to different parts of the body. Somatostatin release is inhibited by the vagus nerve.

===Anterior pituitary===
In the anterior pituitary gland,the virulent strain on the endocrine disrupting effects of somatostatin are:
* Inhibiting the release of growth hormone (GH) (thus opposing the effects of growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH))
* Inhibiting the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
* Inhibiting adenylyl cyclase in parietal cells
* Inhibiting the release of prolactin (PRL)

===Gastrointestinal system===
* Somatostatin is homologous with cortistatin (see somatostatin family) and suppresses the release of gastrointestinal hormones
* Decreases the rate of gastric emptying, and reduces smooth muscle contractions and blood flow within the intestine
* Suppresses the release of pancreatic hormones
** Somatostatin release is triggered by the beta cell peptide urocortin3 (Ucn3) to inhibit insulin release.
** Inhibits the release of glucagon
* Suppresses the exocrine secretory action of the pancreas

==Synthetic substitutes==

Octreotide (brand name Sandostatin, Novartis Pharmaceuticals) is an octapeptide that mimics natural somatostatin pharmacologically, though is a more potent inhibitor of growth hormone, glucagon, and insulin than the natural hormone, and has a much longer half-life (about 90 minutes, compared to 2–3 minutes for somatostatin). Since it is absorbed poorly from the gut, it is administered parenterally (subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intravenously). It is indicated for symptomatic treatment of carcinoid syndrome and acromegaly. It is also finding increased use in polycystic diseases of the liver and kidney.

Lanreotide (Somatuline, Ipsen Pharmaceuticals) is a medication used in the management of acromegaly and symptoms caused by neuroendocrine tumors, most notably carcinoid syndrome. It is a long-acting analog of somatostatin, like octreotide. It is available in several countries, including the United Kingdom, Australia, and Canada, and was approved for sale in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration on August 30, 2007.

Pasireotide, sold under the brand name Signifor, is an orphan drug approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of Cushing&#x27;s disease in patients who fail or are ineligible for surgical therapy. It was developed by Novartis. Pasireotide is somatostatin analog with a 40-fold increased affinity to somatostatin receptor 5 compared to other somatostatin analogs.

==Evolutionary history==
Six somatostatin genes have been discovered in vertebrates. The current proposed history as to how these six genes arose is based on the three whole-genome duplication events that took place in vertebrate evolution along with local duplications in teleost fish. An ancestral somatostatin gene was duplicated during the first whole-genome duplication event (1R) to create &quot;SS1&quot; and &quot;SS2&quot;. These two genes were duplicated during the second whole-genome duplication event (2R) to create four new somatostatin genes:&quot;SS1, SS2, SS3&quot;, and one gene that was lost during the evolution of vertebrates. Tetrapods retained &quot;SS1&quot; (also known as &quot;SS-14&quot; and &quot;SS-28&quot;) and &quot;SS2&quot; (also known as cortistatin) after the split in the Sarcopterygii and Actinopterygii lineage split. In teleost fish, &quot;SS1, SS2&quot;, and &quot;SS3&quot; were duplicated during the third whole-genome duplication event (3R) to create &quot;SS1, SS2, SS4, SS5,&quot; and two genes that were lost during the evolution of teleost fish. &quot;SS1&quot; and &quot;SS2&quot; went through local duplications to give rise to &quot;SS6&quot; and &quot;SS3&quot;.

== See also ==
* FK962
* Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis
* Octreotide

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407166" start="0" end="12" title="Somatostatin" label="Somatostatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407166" start="28" end="61" title="Somatostatin" label="growth hormone-inhibiting hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q407166" start="63" end="67" title="Somatostatin" label="GHIH"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75" end="94" title="#Nomenclature" label="several other names"/>
<link wikidata="Q416997" start="101" end="116" title="peptide hormone" label="peptide hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="136" end="152" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q969316" start="165" end="182" title="neurotransmission" label="neurotransmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="187" end="205" title="cell proliferation" label="cell proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="227" end="244" title="G protein-coupled" label="G protein-coupled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067077" start="245" end="267" title="somatostatin receptors" label="somatostatin receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="504" end="514" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="596" end="607" title="vertebrates" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q169444" start="781" end="790" title="Zebrafish" label="Zebrafish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067077" start="860" end="882" title="somatostatin receptors" label="somatostatin receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621407" start="1324" end="1335" title="delta cells" label="delta cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q290248" start="1393" end="1407" title="pyloric antrum" label="pyloric antrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="1413" end="1421" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q728309" start="1430" end="1447" title="pancreatic islets" label="pancreatic islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q290248" start="1479" end="1493" title="pyloric antrum" label="pyloric antrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14873666" start="1713" end="1722" title="paracrine" label="paracrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640093" start="1797" end="1811" title="parietal cells" label="parietal cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q407181" start="2094" end="2101" title="gastrin" label="gastrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="2106" end="2115" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10599959" start="2210" end="2224" title="neuroendocrine" label="neuroendocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920337" start="2240" end="2260" title="ventromedial nucleus" label="ventromedial nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="2268" end="2280" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337712" start="2311" end="2326" title="median eminence" label="median eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531242" start="2402" end="2431" title="Hypophyseal portal system" label="hypothalamohypophysial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="2490" end="2514" title="anterior pituitary gland" label="anterior pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="2551" end="2565" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015605" start="2571" end="2582" title="somatotrope" label="somatotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="2683" end="2697" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q253246" start="3179" end="3194" title="arcuate nucleus" label="arcuate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="3200" end="3211" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q119744" start="3231" end="3260" title="nucleus of the solitary tract" label="nucleus of the solitary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185869" start="3310" end="3320" title="inhibitory" label="inhibitory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="3452" end="3463" title="vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="3498" end="3522" title="anterior pituitary gland" label="anterior pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q409489" start="3678" end="3710" title="growth hormone–releasing hormone" label="growth hormone–releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211544" start="3747" end="3774" title="thyroid-stimulating hormone" label="thyroid-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="3794" end="3810" title="adenylyl cyclase" label="adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="3857" end="3866" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q588367" start="3938" end="3949" title="CORT" label="cortistatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24778427" start="3955" end="3974" title="somatostatin family" label="somatostatin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526842" start="4006" end="4030" title="gastrointestinal hormone" label="gastrointestinal hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="4288" end="4295" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419935" start="4428" end="4438" title="Octreotide" label="Octreotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="4464" end="4488" title="Novartis" label="Novartis Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="4496" end="4507" title="peptide" label="octapeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="4683" end="4692" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="4902" end="4923" title="symptomatic treatment" label="symptomatic treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q339547" start="4927" end="4945" title="carcinoid syndrome" label="carcinoid syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="4950" end="4960" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707877" start="5044" end="5054" title="Lanreotide" label="Lanreotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q111546" start="5068" end="5089" title="Ipsen" label="Ipsen Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="5243" end="5249" title="structural analog" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896970" start="5479" end="5490" title="Pasireotide" label="Pasireotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367466" start="5534" end="5545" title="orphan drug" label="orphan drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947304" start="5620" end="5642" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="5724" end="5732" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="5762" end="5768" title="Analog (chemistry)" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031734" start="5806" end="5829" title="somatostatin receptor 5" label="somatostatin receptor 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="5943" end="5954" title="vertebrates" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="6144" end="6151" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6221" end="6251" title="whole-genome duplication event" label="whole-genome duplication event"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="6519" end="6528" title="Tetrapods" label="Tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q588367" start="6645" end="6656" title="Cortistatin (neuropeptide)" label="cortistatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160830" start="6681" end="6694" title="Sarcopterygii" label="Sarcopterygii"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="6699" end="6713" title="Actinopterygii" label="Actinopterygii"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="6732" end="6739" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q110255249" start="7105" end="7110" title="FK962" label="FK962"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047677" start="7113" end="7148" title="Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis" label="Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419935" start="7151" end="7161" title="Octreotide" label="Octreotide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481856" wikidata="Q2037529" url="?curid=481856" title="Rigid body dynamics">
<text>In the physical science of dynamics, rigid-body dynamics studies the movement of systems of interconnected bodies under the action of external forces. The assumption that the bodies are &quot;rigid&quot; (i.e. they do not deform under the action of applied forces) simplifies analysis, by reducing the parameters that describe the configuration of the system to the translation and rotation of reference frames attached to each body. This excludes bodies that display fluid, highly elastic, and plastic behavior.
The dynamics of a rigid body system is described by the laws of kinematics and by the application of Newton&#x27;s second law (kinetics) or their derivative form, Lagrangian mechanics. The solution of these equations of motion provides a description of the position, the motion and the acceleration of the individual components of the system, and overall the system itself, as a function of time. The formulation and solution of rigid body dynamics is an important tool in the computer simulation of mechanical systems.

==Planar rigid body dynamics==
If a system of particles moves parallel to a fixed plane, the system is said to be constrained to planar movement. In this case, Newton&#x27;s laws (kinetics) for a rigid system of N particles, P, &quot;i&quot;=1...,&quot;N&quot;, simplify because there is no movement in the &quot;k&quot; direction. Determine the resultant force and torque at a reference point R, to obtain
formula_1

where r denotes the planar trajectory of each particle.

The kinematics of a rigid body yields the formula for the acceleration of the particle P in terms of the position R and acceleration A of the reference particle as well as the angular velocity vector ω and angular acceleration vector α of the rigid system of particles as,
formula_2

For systems that are constrained to planar movement, the angular velocity and angular acceleration vectors are directed along k perpendicular to the plane of movement, which simplifies this acceleration equation. In this case, the acceleration vectors can be simplified by introducing the unit vectors e from the reference point R to a point r and the unit vectors formula_3, so
formula_4

This yields the resultant force on the system as
formula_5
and torque as
formula_6

where formula_7 and formula_8 is the unit vector perpendicular to the plane for all of the particles P.

Use the center of mass C as the reference point, so these equations for Newton&#x27;s laws simplify to become
formula_9

where is the total mass and &quot;I&quot; is the moment of inertia about an axis perpendicular to the movement of the rigid system and through the center of mass.

==Rigid body in three dimensions==
=== Orientation or attitude descriptions ===
Several methods to describe orientations of a rigid body in three dimensions have been developed. They are summarized in the following sections.

====Euler angles====

The first attempt to represent an orientation is attributed to Leonhard Euler. He imagined three reference frames that could rotate one around the other, and realized that by starting with a fixed reference frame and performing three rotations, he could get any other reference frame in the space (using two rotations to fix the vertical axis and another to fix the other two axes). The values of these three rotations are called Euler angles. Commonly, formula_10 is used to denote precession, formula_11 nutation, and formula_12 intrinsic rotation.

====Tait–Bryan angles====
These are three angles, also known as yaw, pitch and roll, Navigation angles and Cardan angles. Mathematically they constitute a set of six possibilities inside the twelve possible sets of Euler angles, the ordering being the one best used for describing the orientation of a vehicle such as an airplane. In aerospace engineering they are usually referred to as Euler angles.

====Orientation vector ====

Euler also realized that the composition of two rotations is equivalent to a single rotation about a different fixed axis (Euler&#x27;s rotation theorem). Therefore, the composition of the former three angles has to be equal to only one rotation, whose axis was complicated to calculate until matrices were developed.

Based on this fact he introduced a vectorial way to describe any rotation, with a vector on the rotation axis and module equal to the value of the angle. Therefore, any orientation can be represented by a rotation vector (also called Euler vector) that leads to it from the reference frame. When used to represent an orientation, the rotation vector is commonly called orientation vector, or attitude vector.

A similar method, called axis-angle representation, describes a rotation or orientation using a unit vector aligned with the rotation axis, and a separate value to indicate the angle (see figure).

====Orientation matrix====

With the introduction of matrices the Euler theorems were rewritten. The rotations were described by orthogonal matrices referred to as rotation matrices or direction cosine matrices. When used to represent an orientation, a rotation matrix is commonly called orientation matrix, or attitude matrix.

The above-mentioned Euler vector is the eigenvector of a rotation matrix (a rotation matrix has a unique real eigenvalue). 
The product of two rotation matrices is the composition of rotations. Therefore, as before, the orientation can be given as the rotation from the initial frame to achieve the frame that we want to describe.

The configuration space of a non-symmetrical object in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional space is SO(&quot;n&quot;) × R&quot;n&quot;. Orientation may be visualized by attaching a basis of tangent vectors to an object. The direction in which each vector points determines its orientation.

====Orientation quaternion====

Another way to describe rotations is using rotation quaternions, also called versors. They are equivalent to rotation matrices and rotation vectors. With respect to rotation vectors, they can be more easily converted to and from matrices. When used to represent orientations, rotation quaternions are typically called orientation quaternions or attitude quaternions.

===Newton&#x27;s second law in three dimensions===
To consider rigid body dynamics in three-dimensional space, Newton&#x27;s second law must be extended to define the relationship between the movement of a rigid body and the system of forces and torques that act on it.

Newton formulated his second law for a particle as, &quot;The change of motion of an object is proportional to the force impressed and is made in the direction of the straight line in which the force is impressed.&quot; Because Newton generally referred to mass times velocity as the &quot;motion&quot; of a particle, the phrase &quot;change of motion&quot; refers to the mass times acceleration of the particle, and so this law is usually written as
formula_13
where F is understood to be the only external force acting on the particle, &quot;m&quot; is the mass of the particle, and a is its acceleration vector. The extension of Newton&#x27;s second law to rigid bodies is achieved by considering a rigid system of particles.

===Rigid system of particles===
If a system of &quot;N&quot; particles, Pi, i=1...,&quot;N&quot;, are assembled into a rigid body, then Newton&#x27;s second law can be applied to each of the particles in the body. If Fi is the external force applied to particle Pi with mass &quot;m&quot;i, then
formula_14
where Fij is the internal force of particle Pj acting on particle Pi that maintains the constant distance between these particles.
An important simplification to these force equations is obtained by introducing the resultant force and torque that acts on the rigid system. This resultant force and torque is obtained by choosing one of the particles in the system as a reference point, R, where each of the external forces are applied with the addition of an associated torque. The resultant force F and torque T are given by the formulas,
formula_15
where Ri is the vector that defines the position of particle Pi.

Newton&#x27;s second law for a particle combines with these formulas for the resultant force and torque to yield,
formula_16
where the internal forces F&quot;ij&quot; cancel in pairs. The kinematics of a rigid body yields the formula for the acceleration of the particle Pi in terms of the position R and acceleration a of the reference particle as well as the angular velocity vector ω and angular acceleration vector α of the rigid system of particles as,
formula_17

===Mass properties===
The mass properties of the rigid body are represented by its center of mass and inertia matrix. Choose the reference point R so that it satisfies the condition
formula_18

then it is known as the center of mass of the system.

The inertia matrix [IR] of the system relative to the reference point R is defined by
formula_19

where formula_20 is the column vector ; formula_21 is its transpose, and formula_22 is the 3 by 3 identity matrix.

formula_23 is the scalar product of formula_20 with itself, while formula_25 is the tensor product of formula_20 with itself.

===Force-torque equations===
Using the center of mass and inertia matrix, the force and torque equations for a single rigid body take the form
formula_27
and are known as Newton&#x27;s second law of motion for a rigid body.

The dynamics of an interconnected system of rigid bodies, , , is formulated by isolating each rigid body and introducing the interaction forces. The resultant of the external and interaction forces on each body, yields the force-torque equations
formula_28

Newton&#x27;s formulation yields 6&quot;M&quot; equations that define the dynamics of a system of &quot;M&quot; rigid bodies.

===Rotation in three dimensions===
A rotating object, whether under the influence of torques or not, may exhibit the behaviours of precession and nutation.
The fundamental equation describing the behavior of a rotating solid body is Euler&#x27;s equation of motion:
formula_29
where the pseudovectors τ and L are, respectively, the torques on the body and its angular momentum, the scalar &quot;I&quot; is its moment of inertia, the vector ω is its angular velocity, the vector α is its angular acceleration, D is the differential in an inertial reference frame and d is the differential in a relative reference frame fixed with the body.

The solution to this equation when there is no applied torque is discussed in the articles Euler&#x27;s equation of motion and Poinsot&#x27;s ellipsoid.

It follows from Euler&#x27;s equation that a torque τ applied perpendicular to the axis of rotation, and therefore perpendicular to L, results in a rotation about an axis perpendicular to both τ and L. This motion is called &quot;precession&quot;. The angular velocity of precession ΩP is given by the cross product:
formula_30

Precession can be demonstrated by placing a spinning top with its axis horizontal and supported loosely (frictionless toward precession) at one end. Instead of falling, as might be expected, the top appears to defy gravity by remaining with its axis horizontal, when the other end of the axis is left unsupported and the free end of the axis slowly describes a circle in a horizontal plane, the resulting precession turning. This effect is explained by the above equations. The torque on the top is supplied by a couple of forces: gravity acting downward on the device&#x27;s centre of mass, and an equal force acting upward to support one end of the device. The rotation resulting from this torque is not downward, as might be intuitively expected, causing the device to fall, but perpendicular to both the gravitational torque (horizontal and perpendicular to the axis of rotation) and the axis of rotation (horizontal and outwards from the point of support), i.e., about a vertical axis, causing the device to rotate slowly about the supporting point.

Under a constant torque of magnitude &quot;τ&quot;, the speed of precession &quot;Ω&quot;P is inversely proportional to &quot;L&quot;, the magnitude of its angular momentum:
formula_31
where &quot;θ&quot; is the angle between the vectors ΩP and L. Thus, if the top&#x27;s spin slows down (for example, due to friction), its angular momentum decreases and so the rate of precession increases. This continues until the device is unable to rotate fast enough to support its own weight, when it stops precessing and falls off its support, mostly because friction against precession cause another precession that goes to cause the fall.

By convention, these three vectors - torque, spin, and precession - are all oriented with respect to each other according to the right-hand rule.

==Virtual work of forces acting on a rigid body==
An alternate formulation of rigid body dynamics that has a number of convenient features is obtained by considering the virtual work of forces acting on a rigid body.

The virtual work of forces acting at various points on a single rigid body can be calculated using the velocities of their point of application and the resultant force and torque. To see this, let the forces F1, F2 ... F&quot;n&quot; act on the points R1, R2 ... R&quot;n&quot; in a rigid body.

The trajectories of R&quot;i&quot;, are defined by the movement of the rigid body. The velocity of the points R&quot;i&quot; along their trajectories are 
formula_32
where ω is the angular velocity vector of the body.

===Virtual work===
Work is computed from the dot product of each force with the displacement of its point of contact
formula_33
If the trajectory of a rigid body is defined by a set of generalized coordinates , , then the virtual displacements are given by
formula_34
The virtual work of this system of forces acting on the body in terms of the generalized coordinates becomes
formula_35

or collecting the coefficients of 
formula_36

===Generalized forces===
For simplicity consider a trajectory of a rigid body that is specified by a single generalized coordinate q, such as a rotation angle, then the formula becomes
formula_37

Introduce the resultant force F and torque T so this equation takes the form
formula_38

The quantity &quot;Q&quot; defined by
formula_39

is known as the generalized force associated with the virtual displacement δq. This formula generalizes to the movement of a rigid body defined by more than one generalized coordinate, that is
formula_40
where
formula_41

It is useful to note that conservative forces such as gravity and spring forces are derivable from a potential function , known as a potential energy. In this case the generalized forces are given by
formula_42

==D&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s form of the principle of virtual work==
The equations of motion for a mechanical system of rigid bodies can be determined using D&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s form of the principle of virtual work. The principle of virtual work is used to study the static equilibrium of a system of rigid bodies, however by introducing acceleration terms in Newton&#x27;s laws this approach is generalized to define dynamic equilibrium.

===Static equilibrium===
The static equilibrium of a mechanical system rigid bodies is defined by the condition that the virtual work of the applied forces is zero for any virtual displacement of the system. This is known as the &quot;principle of virtual work.&quot; This is equivalent to the requirement that the generalized forces for any virtual displacement are zero, that is &quot;Q&quot;&quot;i&quot;=0.

Let a mechanical system be constructed from rigid bodies, B&quot;i&quot;, , and let the resultant of the applied forces on each body be the force-torque pairs, and , . Notice that these applied forces do not include the reaction forces where the bodies are connected. Finally, assume that the velocity and angular velocities , , for each rigid body, are defined by a single generalized coordinate q. Such a system of rigid bodies is said to have one degree of freedom.

The virtual work of the forces and torques, and , applied to this one degree of freedom system is given by
formula_43
where
formula_44
is the generalized force acting on this one degree of freedom system.

If the mechanical system is defined by m generalized coordinates, , , then the system has m degrees of freedom and the virtual work is given by,
formula_45
where
formula_46
is the generalized force associated with the generalized coordinate . The principle of virtual work states that static equilibrium occurs when these generalized forces acting on the system are zero, that is
formula_47

These equations define the static equilibrium of the system of rigid bodies.

===Generalized inertia forces===
Consider a single rigid body which moves under the action of a resultant force F and torque T, with one degree of freedom defined by the generalized coordinate &quot;q&quot;. Assume the reference point for the resultant force and torque is the center of mass of the body, then the generalized inertia force associated with the generalized coordinate is given by
formula_48

This inertia force can be computed from the kinetic energy of the rigid body,
formula_49
by using the formula
formula_50

A system of rigid bodies with m generalized coordinates has the kinetic energy
formula_51
which can be used to calculate the m generalized inertia forces
formula_52

===Dynamic equilibrium===
D&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s form of the principle of virtual work states that a system of rigid bodies is in dynamic equilibrium when the virtual work of the sum of the applied forces and the inertial forces is zero for any virtual displacement of the system. Thus, dynamic equilibrium of a system of n rigid bodies with m generalized coordinates requires that
formula_53
for any set of virtual displacements . This condition yields equations,
formula_54
which can also be written as
formula_55
The result is a set of m equations of motion that define the dynamics of the rigid body system.

===Lagrange&#x27;s equations===
If the generalized forces Q&quot;j&quot; are derivable from a potential energy , then these equations of motion take the form
formula_56

In this case, introduce the Lagrangian, , so these equations of motion become
formula_57
These are known as Lagrange&#x27;s equations of motion.

==Linear and angular momentum==
===System of particles===
The linear and angular momentum of a rigid system of particles is formulated by measuring the position and velocity of the particles relative to the center of mass. Let the system of particles Pi, be located at the coordinates r&quot;i&quot; and velocities v&quot;i&quot;. Select a reference point R and compute the relative position and velocity vectors,
formula_58

The total linear and angular momentum vectors relative to the reference point R are
formula_59
and
formula_60

If R is chosen as the center of mass these equations simplify to
formula_61

===Rigid system of particles===
To specialize these formulas to a rigid body, assume the particles are rigidly connected to each other so P, i=1...,n are located by the coordinates r and velocities v. Select a reference point R and compute the relative position and velocity vectors,
formula_62
where ω is the angular velocity of the system.

The linear momentum and angular momentum of this rigid system measured relative to the center of mass R is
formula_63

These equations simplify to become,
formula_64
where M is the total mass of the system and [I] is the moment of inertia matrix defined by
formula_65
where [r&quot;i&quot; − R] is the skew-symmetric matrix constructed from the vector r&quot;i&quot; − R.
== Applications ==
* For the analysis of robotic systems 
* For the biomechanical analysis of animals, humans or humanoid systems 
* For the analysis of space objects 
* For the understanding of strange motions of rigid bodies.
* For the design and development of dynamics-based sensors, such as gyroscopic sensors.
* For the design and development of various stability enhancement applications in automobiles.
* For improving the graphics of video games which involves rigid bodies

== See also ==

* Analytical mechanics
* Analytical dynamics
* Calculus of variations
* Classical mechanics
* Dynamics (mechanics)
* History of classical mechanics
* Lagrangian mechanics
* Lagrangian
* Hamiltonian mechanics
* Rigid body
* Rigid transformation
* Rigid rotor
* Soft-body dynamics
* Multibody system
* Polhode
* Herpolhode
* Precession
* Poinsot&#x27;s ellipsoid
* Gyroscope
* Physics engine
* Physics processing unit
* Physics Abstraction Layer – Unified multibody simulator
* RigidChips – Japanese rigid-body simulator
* Euler&#x27;s Equation
==References==
== Further reading ==
* E. Leimanis (1965). &quot;The General Problem of the Motion of Coupled Rigid Bodies about a Fixed Point.&quot; (Springer, New York).
* W. B. Heard (2006). &quot;Rigid Body Mechanics: Mathematics, Physics and Applications.&quot; (Wiley-VCH).

== External links ==
*Chris Hecker&#x27;s Rigid Body Dynamics Information 
*Physically Based Modeling: Principles and Practice
*DigitalRune Knowledge Base contains a master thesis and a collection of resources about rigid body dynamics.
*F. Klein, &quot;Note on the connection between line geometry and the mechanics of rigid bodies&quot; (English translation)
*F. Klein, &quot;On Sir Robert Ball&#x27;s theory of screws&quot; (English translation)
*E. Cotton, &quot;Application of Cayley geometry to the geometric study of the displacement of a solid around a fixed point&quot; (English translation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="7" end="15" title="Physics" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q128030" start="27" end="35" title="Dynamics (mechanics)" label="dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037529" start="37" end="56" title="Rigid body dynamics" label="rigid-body dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454986" start="81" end="88" title="Physical system" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="107" end="113" title="Physical object" label="bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="143" end="148" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q192788" start="192" end="197" title="rigid body" label="rigid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193514" start="222" end="228" title="Deformation (physics)" label="deform"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="394" end="409" title="Frame of reference" label="reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="468" end="473" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="482" end="489" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472074" start="495" end="502" title="Plasticity (physics)" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="577" end="587" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="640" end="648" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="676" end="696" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804840" start="892" end="908" title="Time-variant system" label="function of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="1013" end="1030" title="mechanical system" label="mechanical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880612" start="1380" end="1395" title="resultant force" label="resultant force"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="1400" end="1406" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="1513" end="1523" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="2380" end="2394" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="2542" end="2559" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="2968" end="2982" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q751290" start="3335" end="3347" title="Euler angles" label="Euler angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q681406" start="4012" end="4041" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s rotation theorem" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s rotation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625416" start="4643" end="4668" title="axis-angle representation" label="axis-angle representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="4714" end="4725" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="4945" end="4964" title="Orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="5185" end="5196" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="5255" end="5265" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156912" start="5481" end="5500" title="Configuration space (physics)" label="configuration space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="5510" end="5521" title="symmetry" label="symmetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="5567" end="5584" title="Orthogonal group" label="SO(&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="5585" end="5586" title="Product topology" label="×"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="5587" end="5601" title="Euclidean space" label="R&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="5657" end="5672" title="tangent space" label="tangent vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634405" start="5833" end="5853" title="Quaternions and spatial rotation" label="rotation quaternions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880612" start="7681" end="7696" title="resultant force" label="resultant force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="8271" end="8281" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="8636" end="8650" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="8655" end="8669" title="moment of inertia" label="inertia matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="9884" end="9894" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q20180599" start="9899" end="9907" title="nutation" label="nutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q996383" start="9986" end="10017" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s equation of motion" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s equation of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q621476" start="10040" end="10052" title="pseudovector" label="pseudovector"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="10085" end="10091" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="10113" end="10129" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="10163" end="10180" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q996383" start="10484" end="10515" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s equation of motion" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s equation of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139169" start="10520" end="10544" title="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s ellipsoid" label="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="10849" end="10862" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366301" start="12694" end="12709" title="right-hand rule" label="right-hand rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144923" start="12882" end="12894" title="virtual work" label="virtual work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880612" start="13082" end="13108" title="resultant force" label="resultant force and torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="13490" end="13501" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057607" start="13630" end="13653" title="generalized coordinates" label="generalized coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153787" start="14233" end="14250" title="generalized forces" label="generalized force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="14572" end="14588" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480745" start="15952" end="15969" title="degree of freedom (mechanics)" label="degree of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="18154" end="18164" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="18234" end="18269" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="19233" end="19248" title="linear momentum" label="linear momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="19253" end="19269" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="19450" end="19467" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833065" start="20103" end="20123" title="Analytical mechanics" label="Analytical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q833065" start="20126" end="20145" title="Analytical dynamics" label="Analytical dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="20148" end="20170" title="Calculus of variations" label="Calculus of variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="20173" end="20192" title="Classical mechanics" label="Classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128030" start="20195" end="20215" title="Dynamics (mechanics)" label="Dynamics (mechanics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867520" start="20218" end="20248" title="History of classical mechanics" label="History of classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="20251" end="20271" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="20274" end="20284" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="20287" end="20308" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192788" start="20311" end="20321" title="Rigid body" label="Rigid body"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333813" start="20324" end="20344" title="Rigid transformation" label="Rigid transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915184" start="20347" end="20358" title="Rigid rotor" label="Rigid rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553953" start="20361" end="20379" title="Soft-body dynamics" label="Soft-body dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917564" start="20382" end="20398" title="Multibody system" label="Multibody system"/>
<link wikidata="Q597659" start="20401" end="20408" title="Polhode" label="Polhode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479161" start="20411" end="20421" title="Herpolhode" label="Herpolhode"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="20424" end="20434" title="Precession" label="Precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139169" start="20437" end="20461" title="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s ellipsoid" label="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="20464" end="20473" title="Gyroscope" label="Gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q62505" start="20476" end="20490" title="Physics engine" label="Physics engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140942" start="20493" end="20516" title="Physics processing unit" label="Physics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189682" start="20519" end="20544" title="Physics Abstraction Layer" label="Physics Abstraction Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333797" start="20577" end="20587" title="RigidChips" label="RigidChips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386492" start="20622" end="20643" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s Equation" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s Equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580872" start="20795" end="20803" title="Springer Publishing" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q463360" start="20912" end="20921" title="Wiley-VCH" label="Wiley-VCH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481861" wikidata="Q7535311" url="?curid=481861" title="Skin (Melissa Etheridge album)">
<text>Skin is the seventh studio album by American singer-songwriter Melissa Etheridge, released by Island Records on July 10, 2001. The album explores the pain, confusion, grief, and recovery Etheridge went through following her split from Julie Cypher, her companion of 12 years. &quot;Heal Me&quot; features background vocals by Laura Dern and Meg Ryan. Etheridge plays almost all the instruments and penned all the songs.

&quot;Skin&quot; peaked at No. 9 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and the lead single &quot;I Want to Be in Love&quot; earned Etheridge a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance.

==Track listing==

There is one known outtake titled &#x27;Whispers in the Heart&#x27; &#x27;My Heart&#x27; or &#x27;Heart Whispers&#x27;

==Personnel==
*Melissa Etheridge – guitar, harmonica, mandolin, keyboards, vocals, background vocals
*Kenny Aronoff – drums
*Mark Browne – bass guitar
*David Cole – keyboards, programming
*Abe Laboriel Jr. – programming
*Meg Ryan – background vocals on &quot;Heal Me&quot;
*Laura Dern – background vocals on &quot;Heal Me&quot;
*Gota Yashiki – programming

==Production==
*Producers: Melissa Etheridge, David N. Cole
*Engineer: David N. Cole
*Assistant engineers: Steve Genewick, Charles Paakkari
*Mixing: David N. Cole, Chris Lord-Alge, Sylvia Massy, Matt Silva
*Mastering: Ted Jensen
*Drum programming: David N. Cole
*Production coordination: Steven Girmant
*Assistants: Charles Paakkari, Matt Silva
*Art direction: Rick Patrick
*Photography: Dan Winters

==Charts==
Singles – Billboard (North America)
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="63" end="80" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="94" end="108" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="326" end="336" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="341" end="349" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="461" end="486" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161285" start="514" end="534" title="I Want to Be in Love" label="I Want to Be in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542148" start="579" end="630" title="Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="826" end="834" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q534930" start="874" end="887" title="Kenny Aronoff" label="Kenny Aronoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q318159" start="961" end="977" title="Abe Laboriel Jr." label="Abe Laboriel Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="993" end="1001" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="1046" end="1056" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="1156" end="1173" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728135" start="1175" end="1188" title="David N. Cole" label="David N. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728135" start="1200" end="1213" title="David N. Cole" label="David N. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728135" start="1278" end="1291" title="David N. Cole" label="David N. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107265" start="1293" end="1308" title="Chris Lord-Alge" label="Chris Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267061" start="1347" end="1357" title="Ted Jensen" label="Ted Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728135" start="1377" end="1390" title="David N. Cole" label="David N. Cole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481862" wikidata="Q1148503" url="?curid=481862" title="Uranium-238">
<text>Uranium-238 ( or U-238) is the most common isotope of uranium found in nature, with a relative abundance of 99%. Unlike uranium-235, it is non-fissile, which means it cannot sustain a chain reaction in a thermal-neutron reactor. However, it is fissionable by fast neutrons, and is &quot;fertile&quot;, meaning it can be transmuted to fissile plutonium-239. 238U cannot support a chain reaction because inelastic scattering reduces neutron energy below the range where fast fission of one or more next-generation nuclei is probable. Doppler broadening of 238U&#x27;s neutron absorption resonances, increasing absorption as fuel temperature increases, is also an essential negative feedback mechanism for reactor control.

Around 99.284% of natural uranium&#x27;s mass is uranium-238, which has a half-life of 1.41 seconds (4.468 years, or 4.468 billion years).
Due to its natural abundance and half-life relative to other radioactive elements, 238U produces ~40% of the radioactive heat produced within the Earth. The 238U decay chain contributes six electron anti-neutrinos per 238U nucleus (one per beta decay), resulting in a large detectable geoneutrino signal when decays occur within the Earth. The decay of 238U to daughter isotopes is extensively used in radiometric dating, particularly for material older than approximately 1 million years.

Depleted uranium has an even higher concentration of the 238U isotope, and even low-enriched uranium (LEU), while having a higher proportion of the uranium-235 isotope (in comparison to depleted uranium), is still mostly 238U. Reprocessed uranium is also mainly 238U, with about as much uranium-235 as natural uranium, a comparable proportion of uranium-236, and much smaller amounts of other isotopes of uranium such as uranium-234, uranium-233, and uranium-232.

==Nuclear energy applications==
In a fission nuclear reactor, uranium-238 can be used to generate plutonium-239, which itself can be used in a nuclear weapon or as a nuclear-reactor fuel supply. In a typical nuclear reactor, up to one-third of the generated power comes from the fission of 239Pu, which is not supplied as a fuel to the reactor, but rather, produced from 238U. A certain amount of production of from is unavoidable wherever it is exposed to neutron radiation. Depending on burnup and neutron temperature, different shares of the are converted to , which determines the &quot;grade&quot; of produced plutonium, ranging from weapons grade, through reactor grade, to plutonium so high in that it cannot be used in current reactors operating with a thermal neutron spectrum. The latter usually involves used &quot;recycled&quot; MOX fuel which entered the reactor containing significant amounts of plutonium.

===Breeder reactors===
238U can produce energy via &quot;fast&quot; fission. In this process, a neutron that has a kinetic energy in excess of 1 MeV can cause the nucleus of 238U to split. Depending on design, this process can contribute some one to ten percent of all fission reactions in a reactor, but too few of the average 2.5 neutrons produced in each fission have enough speed to continue a chain reaction.

238U can be used as a source material for creating plutonium-239, which can in turn be used as nuclear fuel. Breeder reactors carry out such a process of transmutation to convert the fertile isotope 238U into fissile 239Pu. It has been estimated that there is anywhere from 10,000 to five billion years worth of 238U for use in these power plants. Breeder technology has been used in several experimental nuclear reactors.

By December 2005, the only breeder reactor producing power was the 600-megawatt BN-600 reactor at the Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station in Russia. Russia later built another unit, BN-800, at the Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station which became fully operational in November 2016. Also, Japan&#x27;s Monju breeder reactor, which has been inoperative for most of the time since it was originally built in 1986, was ordered for decommissioning in 2016, after safety and design hazards were uncovered, with a completion date set for 2047. Both China and India have announced plans to build nuclear breeder reactors.

The breeder reactor as its name implies creates even larger quantities of 239Pu or 233U than the fission nuclear reactor.

The Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor (CAESAR), a nuclear reactor concept that would use steam as a moderator to control delayed neutrons, will potentially be able to use 238U as fuel once the reactor is started with Low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel. This design is still in the early stages of development.

===CANDU reactors===
Natural uranium, with 0.711% , is usable as nuclear fuel in reactors designed specifically to make use of naturally occurring uranium, such as CANDU reactors. By making use of non-enriched uranium, such reactor designs give a nation access to nuclear power for the purpose of electricity production without necessitating the development of fuel enrichment capabilities, which are often seen as a prelude to weapons production.

===Radiation shielding===
238U is also used as a radiation shield – its alpha radiation is easily stopped by the non-radioactive casing of the shielding and the uranium&#x27;s high atomic weight and high number of electrons are highly effective in absorbing gamma rays and X-rays. It is not as effective as ordinary water for stopping fast neutrons. Both metallic depleted uranium and depleted uranium dioxide are used for radiation shielding. Uranium is about five times better as a gamma ray shield than lead, so a shield with the same effectiveness can be packed into a thinner layer.

DUCRETE, a concrete made with uranium dioxide aggregate instead of gravel, is being investigated as a material for dry cask storage systems to store radioactive waste.

===Downblending===
The opposite of enriching is downblending. Surplus highly enriched uranium can be downblended with depleted uranium or natural uranium to turn it into low-enriched uranium suitable for use in commercial nuclear fuel.

238U from depleted uranium and natural uranium is also used with recycled 239Pu from nuclear weapons stockpiles for making mixed oxide fuel (MOX), which is now being redirected to become fuel for nuclear reactors. This dilution, also called downblending, means that any nation or group that acquired the finished fuel would have to repeat the very expensive and complex chemical separation of uranium and plutonium process before assembling a weapon.

==Nuclear weapons==

Most modern nuclear weapons utilize 238U as a &quot;tamper&quot; material (see nuclear weapon design). A tamper which surrounds a fissile core works to reflect neutrons and to add inertia to the compression of the 239Pu charge. As such, it increases the efficiency of the weapon and reduces the critical mass required. In the case of a thermonuclear weapon, 238U
can be used to encase the fusion fuel, the high flux of very energetic neutrons from the resulting fusion reaction causes 238U nuclei to split and adds more energy to the &quot;yield&quot; of the weapon. Such weapons are referred to as &quot;fission-fusion-fission&quot; weapons after the order in which each reaction takes place. An example of such a weapon is Castle Bravo.

The larger portion of the total explosive yield in this design comes from the final fission stage fueled by 238U, producing enormous amounts of radioactive fission products. For example, an estimated 77% of the 10.4-megaton yield of the Ivy Mike thermonuclear test in 1952 came from fast fission of the depleted uranium tamper. Because depleted uranium has no critical mass, it can be added to thermonuclear bombs in almost unlimited quantity. The Soviet Union&#x27;s test of the Tsar Bomba in 1961 produced &quot;only&quot; 50 megatons of explosive power, over 90% of which came from fusion because the 238U final stage had been replaced with lead. Had 238U been used instead, the yield of the Tsar Bomba could have been well above 100 megatons, and it would have produced nuclear fallout equivalent to one third of the global total that had been produced up to that time.

== Radium series (or uranium series)== 
The decay chain of 238U is commonly called the &quot;radium series&quot; (sometimes &quot;uranium series&quot;). Beginning with naturally occurring uranium-238, this series includes the following elements: astatine, bismuth, lead, polonium, protactinium, radium, radon, thallium, and thorium. All of the decay products are present, at least transiently, in any uranium-containing sample, whether metal, compound, or mineral. The decay proceeds as:

:formula_1

The mean lifetime of 238U is 1.41 seconds divided by ln(2) ≈ 0.693 (or multiplied by 1/ln(2) ≈  1.443), i.e. ca. 2 seconds, so 1 mole of 238U emits 3 alpha particles per second, producing the same number of thorium-234 atoms. In a closed system an equilibrium would be reached, with all amounts except for lead-206 and 238U in fixed ratios, in slowly decreasing amounts. The amount of 206Pb will increase accordingly while that of 238U decreases; all steps in the decay chain have this same rate of 3 decayed particles per second per mole 238U.

Thorium-234 has a mean lifetime of 3 seconds, so there is equilibrium if one mole of 238U contains 9 atoms of thorium-234, which is 1.5 mole (the ratio of the two half-lives). Similarly, in an equilibrium in a closed system the amount of each decay product, except the end product lead, is proportional to its half-life.

While 238U is minimally radioactive, its decay products, thorium-234 and protactinium-234, are beta particle emitters with half-lives of about 20 days and one minute respectively. Protactinium-234 decays to uranium-234, which has a half-life of hundreds of millennia, and this isotope does not reach an equilibrium concentration for a very long time. When the two first isotopes in the decay chain reach their relatively small equilibrium concentrations, a sample of initially pure 238U will emit three times the radiation due to 238U itself, and most of this radiation is beta particles.

As already touched upon above, when starting with pure 238U, within a human timescale the equilibrium applies for the first three steps in the decay chain only. Thus, for one mole of 238U, 3 times per second one alpha and two beta particles and a gamma ray are produced, together 6.7 MeV, a rate of 3 μW.

238U atom is itself a gamma emitter at 49.55 keV with probability 0.084%, but that is a very weak gamma line, so activity is measured through its daughter nuclides in its decay series.

==Radioactive dating==
238U abundance and its decay to daughter isotopes comprises multiple uranium dating techniques and is one of the most common radioactive isotopes used in radiometric dating. The most common dating method is uranium-lead dating, which is used to date rocks older than 1 million years old and has provided ages for the oldest rocks on Earth at 4.4 billion years old.

The relation between 238U and 234U gives an indication of the age of sediments and seawater that are between 100,000 years and 1,200,000 years in age.

The 238U daughter product, 206Pb, is an integral part of lead–lead dating, which is most famous for the determination of the age of the Earth.

The Voyager program spacecraft carry small amounts of initially pure 238U on the covers of their golden records to facilitate dating in the same manner.

== Health concerns ==
Uranium emits alpha particles through the process of alpha decay. External exposure has limited effect. Significant internal exposure to tiny particles of uranium or its decay products, such as thorium-230, radium-226 and radon-222, can cause severe health effects, such as cancer of the bone or liver.

Uranium is also a toxic chemical, meaning that ingestion of uranium can cause kidney damage from its chemical properties much sooner than its radioactive properties would cause cancers of the bone or liver.

==See also==
* Depleted uranium
* Uranium-lead dating

==References==
==External links==
* NLM Hazardous Substances Databank – Uranium, Radioactive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="0" end="11" title="Uranium-238" label="Uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="13" end="13" title="Uranium-238" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="17" end="22" title="Uranium-238" label="U-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="43" end="61" title="isotope of uranium" label="isotope of uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="120" end="131" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160121" start="184" end="198" title="chain reaction" label="chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756060" start="204" end="227" title="thermal-neutron reactor" label="thermal-neutron reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="244" end="255" title="fissionable" label="fissionable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="259" end="272" title="fast neutrons" label="fast neutrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409019" start="281" end="300" title="fertile material" label="&amp;quot;fertile&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="320" end="330" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="342" end="355" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027672" start="402" end="422" title="inelastic scattering" label="inelastic scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="431" end="445" title="neutron energy" label="neutron energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391473" start="468" end="480" title="fast fission" label="fast fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q902598" start="532" end="550" title="Doppler broadening" label="Doppler broadening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="566" end="584" title="neutron absorption" label="neutron absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="585" end="594" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="671" end="688" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015337" start="739" end="754" title="natural uranium" label="natural uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="813" end="819" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="921" end="940" title="radioactive element" label="radioactive element"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="1022" end="1033" title="decay chain" label="decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="1050" end="1073" title="Electron neutrino" label="electron anti-neutrinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="1100" end="1110" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535552" start="1145" end="1156" title="geoneutrino" label="geoneutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="1262" end="1280" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698" start="1351" end="1367" title="Depleted uranium" label="Depleted uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1431" end="1451" title="low-enriched uranium" label="low-enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="1499" end="1510" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q10894904" start="1578" end="1597" title="Reprocessed uranium" label="Reprocessed uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="1638" end="1649" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955496" start="1697" end="1708" title="uranium-236" label="uranium-236"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="1744" end="1763" title="isotopes of uranium" label="isotopes of uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153640" start="1772" end="1783" title="uranium-234" label="uranium-234"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668919" start="1785" end="1796" title="uranium-233" label="uranium-233"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077677" start="1802" end="1813" title="uranium-232" label="uranium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1861" end="1876" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="1914" end="1927" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1959" end="1973" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="2173" end="2181" title="nuclear transmutation" label="produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q922364" start="2273" end="2290" title="neutron radiation" label="neutron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q306811" start="2305" end="2311" title="burnup" label="burnup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="2316" end="2335" title="neutron temperature" label="neutron temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479936" start="2455" end="2468" title="weapons grade plutonium" label="weapons grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300325" start="2478" end="2491" title="reactor grade plutonium" label="reactor grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q898519" start="2657" end="2665" title="MOX fuel" label="MOX fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391473" start="2789" end="2813" title="Fast fission" label="&amp;quot;fast&amp;quot; fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="2883" end="2886" title="MeV" label="MeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q552334" start="3262" end="3277" title="Breeder reactor" label="Breeder reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="3307" end="3320" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409019" start="3336" end="3343" title="fertile material" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="3487" end="3499" title="power station" label="power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q20729928" start="3657" end="3671" title="BN-600 reactor" label="BN-600 reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739359" start="3679" end="3710" title="Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station" label="Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025608" start="3755" end="3761" title="BN-800 reactor" label="BN-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331046" start="3870" end="3875" title="Monju Nuclear Power Plant" label="Monju"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130464" start="4311" end="4358" title="Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor" label="Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044545" start="4442" end="4457" title="delayed neutron" label="delayed neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="4538" end="4558" title="Low-enriched uranium" label="Low-enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="4694" end="4706" title="nuclear fuel" label="nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q558181" start="4793" end="4806" title="CANDU reactor" label="CANDU reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574099" start="5127" end="5143" title="radiation shielding" label="radiation shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="5150" end="5165" title="alpha radiation" label="alpha radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="5195" end="5206" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="5259" end="5272" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="5292" end="5300" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5336" end="5345" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="5351" end="5356" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="5413" end="5425" title="fast neutron" label="fast neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698" start="5442" end="5458" title="depleted uranium" label="depleted uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="5472" end="5487" title="uranium dioxide" label="uranium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="5584" end="5588" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311579" start="5667" end="5674" title="DUCRETE" label="DUCRETE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="5713" end="5722" title="Construction aggregate" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q650513" start="5782" end="5798" title="dry cask storage" label="dry cask storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="5816" end="5833" title="radioactive waste" label="radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5884" end="5896" title="enriched uranium#Downblending" label="downblending"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="5906" end="5929" title="highly enriched uranium" label="highly enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q898519" start="6196" end="6212" title="mixed oxide fuel" label="mixed oxide fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="6558" end="6572" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="6625" end="6646" title="nuclear weapon design" label="nuclear weapon design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889369" start="6698" end="6714" title="neutron reflector" label="reflect neutrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="6726" end="6733" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="6841" end="6854" title="critical mass (nuclear)" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="6882" end="6902" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="6980" end="6987" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="7008" end="7014" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909689" start="7151" end="7173" title="fission-fusion-fission" label="fission-fusion-fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="7271" end="7283" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="7442" end="7457" title="fission product" label="fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="7502" end="7509" title="Megatons" label="megaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q248542" start="7523" end="7531" title="Ivy Mike" label="Ivy Mike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7606" end="7612" title="nuclear weapon design#tamper reflector" label="tamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7734" end="7746" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188596" start="7766" end="7776" title="Tsar Bomba" label="Tsar Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="8060" end="8075" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="8205" end="8216" title="decay chain" label="decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="8254" end="8267" title="radium series" label="radium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q999" start="8407" end="8415" title="astatine" label="astatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="8417" end="8424" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="8426" end="8430" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="8432" end="8440" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="8442" end="8454" title="protactinium" label="protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="8456" end="8462" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="8464" end="8469" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="8471" end="8479" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="8485" end="8492" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="8505" end="8518" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="Q574576" start="8666" end="8679" title="mean lifetime" label="mean lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963772" start="8715" end="8720" title="Natural logarithm of 2" label="ln(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="8791" end="8795" title="mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="8881" end="8885" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="9625" end="9638" title="beta particle" label="beta particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="9653" end="9663" title="half-life" label="half-lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="9807" end="9814" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="10789" end="10807" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="10842" end="10861" title="Uranium–lead dating" label="uranium-lead dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="11070" end="11078" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508336" start="11210" end="11226" title="lead–lead dating" label="lead–lead dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q935310" start="11278" end="11294" title="age of the Earth" label="age of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q155311" start="11301" end="11316" title="Voyager program" label="Voyager program"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="11394" end="11408" title="voyager golden record" label="golden records"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="11487" end="11501" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="11526" end="11537" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387321" start="11680" end="11690" title="radium-226" label="radium-226"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387827" start="11695" end="11704" title="radon-222" label="radon-222"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698" start="12000" end="12016" title="Depleted uranium" label="Depleted uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="12019" end="12038" title="Uranium–lead dating" label="Uranium-lead dating"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481865" wikidata="Q6520800" url="?curid=481865" title="Leland Stanford Jr.">
<text>Leland Stanford Jr. (May 14, 1868 – March 13, 1884), known as Leland DeWitt Stanford until he was nine, was the only son of American industrialist and politician Leland Stanford and his wife Jane. Following his death from typhoid at age 15, he became the namesake of Stanford University, which is officially called Leland Stanford Junior University.

==Early life==
He was the only child of California Governor Leland Stanford and his wife, Jane Stanford (née Lathrop). His mother was 39 and had an 18-year childless marriage until he was born.

==Illness and death==
Leland caught typhoid two months before his 16th birthday on a Grand Tour of Europe with his parents. He originally fell ill in Athens. His parents rushed him to Italy for medical treatment, first to Naples, then to Rome, and eventually to Florence, where he died after weeks of a condition that alternately improved and worsened.

==Legacy==
Leland Stanford Sr. told his wife that &quot;the children of California shall be our children.&quot; To honor their son, once they had returned to the United States, the Stanfords devoted their fortune to a memorial in his name, Leland Stanford Junior University, which opened its doors in 1891.

Leland Stanford Jr. is interred beside his parents at the Stanford family mausoleum on the Stanford campus. After the death of his father on June 21, 1893, his mother guided the development of the university until her murder on February 28, 1905.

===Nomenclature===
Although the university is generally referred to as &quot;Stanford University&quot; or &quot;Stanford,&quot; its official name is still &quot;Leland Stanford Junior University,&quot; as is seen on the university seal.

==References==
==External links==

*Johnston, Theresa, &quot;About a Boy,&quot; &quot;Stanford&quot;, July–August 2003</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6520800" start="0" end="19" title="Leland Stanford Jr." label="Leland Stanford Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6520800" start="62" end="84" title="Leland Stanford Jr." label="Leland DeWitt Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q382109" start="162" end="177" title="Leland Stanford" label="Leland Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891993" start="191" end="195" title="Jane Stanford" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="222" end="229" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="267" end="286" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="391" end="410" title="California Governor" label="California Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q382109" start="411" end="426" title="Leland Stanford" label="Leland Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891993" start="441" end="454" title="Jane Stanford" label="Jane Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="582" end="589" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="631" end="641" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="645" end="651" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="696" end="702" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="730" end="735" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="768" end="774" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="784" end="788" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="808" end="816" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598774" start="1266" end="1291" title="Stanford Mausoleum" label="Stanford family mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="1687" end="1691" title="seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481876" wikidata="Q540255" url="?curid=481876" title="Indulis Emsis">
<text>Indulis Emsis (born 2 January 1952) is a Latvian biologist and politician. He was Prime Minister of Latvia for ten months in 2004, the first Green politician to lead a country in the history of the world. He was Speaker of the Saeima, the Latvian parliament from 2006 to 2007. Emsis&#x27; political views are described as rather conservative, unusual for members of green parties around the world.

== Early life ==
Emsis graduated from Riga First Secondary School in 1970 and graduated from the University of Latvia with a degree in biology in 1975. In 1986, he received his PhD, also in biology. Until 1990, he worked as a research scientist in environmental science. From 1976 to 1987 Emsis worked as a research associate at the scientific production association &quot;Silava&quot;, and head of its labor protection laboratory between 1987 and 1989. Emsis also worked as deputy chairman of the Soviet Latvia&#x27;s State Nature Protection Committee.

== Start of political career ==
In 1990, he became one of founders of Latvian Green Party (LZP) and served as Minister for the environment in the 1990s, working especially for a clean Baltic Sea. He is currently one of the three chairpersons of the Latvian Green Party, which forms a part of Union of Greens and Farmers.
Emsis was included on the Green ticket for the 5th Saeima elections in 1993. Emsis was appointed special assignments minister of natural protection in
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development in the government of Valdis Birkavs in 1993. Emsis also held the office in the government of Māris Gailis in 1994.

Emsis was elected to the 6th Saeima from the ticket of LNNK/LZP in 1995. As a member of the 6th Saeima, Emsis was elected to the parliament&#x27;s Economic Policy Committee. Emsis was appointed special assignments minister of environment in the ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development when Andris Šķēle&#x27;s government was approved in 1995. Emsis again assumed the post when Šķēle returned with a new government in 1997, and also held it in the government of Guntars Krasts.

In 1996, Emsis was awarded the Three Star Order (3rd category). In 1998, Emsis was appointed head of a task force to prepare a development program for Latvia&#x27;s small ports, and chairman of committee for assessment of conformity of beaches and yacht ports. In 1998, Emsis joined the parliamentary group of the Labor Party, Union of Christian Democrats and LZP. He was included on the three parties&#x27; joint ticket for the 7th Saeima elections. In 1998, Emsis assumed the post of Prime Minister Vilis Krištopans&#x27; non-staff advisor on environmental protection issues.

In 2000, LZP congress nominated Emsis as the party&#x27;s candidate for Riga mayor ahead of municipal elections. Emsis was elected to the Riga City Council form LZP ticket in March 2001, he worked as deputy chairman of the city council&#x27;s City Development Committee.

In October 2002, Emsis was included on the ZZS ticket for the 8th Saeima elections. Emsis was elected to Saeima, and was appointed deputy chairman of the ZZS parliamentary group. Emsis was elected head of the Economic, Agricultural, Environmental and Regional Policy Committee, he also worked on the Public Expenditure and Audit Committee.

== As prime minister ==
After the resignation of New Era Party leader Einars Repše&#x27;s government, President Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga assigned Emsis to form a new government; the Saeima voted Emsis&#x27; government in office in March 2004.

On 9 March 2004, he became the prime minister of Latvia, leading a centre-right minority government consisting of The Greens and Farmers union, Latvia&#x27;s First Party and Latvian People&#x27;s Party. For most of time, the government was also supported by the leftist National Harmony Party.

Emsis was the first member of a Green party to become Prime Minister of a country. On 28 October 2004, the government fell as the Saeima voted 39–53 against the government&#x27;s budget proposal for the year 2005. He left office on 2 December 2004, when parliament confirmed Aigars Kalvītis of the People&#x27;s Party as Prime Minister.

== Speaker of Saeima ==
Emsis returned to the Saeima in December 2004. In October 2006, Emsis was elected to the 9th Saeima from the ticket of the Union of Greens and Farmers. On 7 November 2006, he was elected Speaker of the Saeima, defeating Sandra Kalniete of the New Era Party by 74 votes to 22. In September 2007, he resigned after a criminal investigation was opened amid allegations of corruption regarding a briefcase containing $10,000 which he lost in the Cabinet of Ministers building; on 26 October, he confessed to giving false testimony in the investigation and was issued a fine.

== COVID-19 ==
On 12 December 2021, Emsis made public statements on COVID-19 treatment very far removed from the scientific consensus.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="0" end="13" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="41" end="47" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="49" end="58" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q369500" start="82" end="106" title="Prime Minister of Latvia" label="Prime Minister of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="141" end="146" title="Green party" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630529" start="212" end="233" title="Speaker of the Saeima" label="Speaker of the Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="329" end="341" title="conservativism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="366" end="379" title="green party" label="green parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q498407" start="496" end="516" title="University of Latvia" label="University of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="534" end="541" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="576" end="579" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="647" end="668" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135496" start="1024" end="1043" title="Latvian Green Party" label="Latvian Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1138" end="1148" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135496" start="1203" end="1222" title="Latvian Green Party" label="Latvian Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q167928" start="1246" end="1273" title="Union of Greens and Farmers" label="Union of Greens and Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q960031" start="1509" end="1523" title="Valdis Birkavs" label="Valdis Birkavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q710198" start="1581" end="1593" title="Māris Gailis" label="Māris Gailis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511905" start="1916" end="1928" title="Andris Šķēle" label="Andris Šķēle"/>
<link wikidata="Q523755" start="2087" end="2101" title="Guntars Krasts" label="Guntars Krasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="2135" end="2151" title="Three Star Order" label="Three Star Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q944216" start="2605" end="2621" title="Vilis Krištopans" label="Vilis Krištopans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="2755" end="2759" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357342" start="3345" end="3358" title="New Era Party" label="New Era Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q471678" start="3366" end="3378" title="Einars Repše" label="Einars Repše"/>
<link wikidata="Q151301" start="3408" end="3428" title="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga" label="Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="3616" end="3635" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401675" start="3680" end="3705" title="Latvia&amp;#x27;s First Party" label="Latvia&amp;#x27;s First Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250133" start="3710" end="3737" title="Tautas Partija" label="Latvian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337323" start="3806" end="3828" title="National Harmony Party" label="National Harmony Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="3863" end="3874" title="Green party" label="Green party"/>
<link wikidata="Q822919" start="3961" end="3967" title="Saeima" label="Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q210715" start="4106" end="4121" title="Aigars Kalvītis" label="Aigars Kalvītis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630529" start="4380" end="4401" title="Speaker of the Saeima" label="Speaker of the Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q236968" start="4413" end="4428" title="Sandra Kalniete" label="Sandra Kalniete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357342" start="4436" end="4449" title="New Era Party" label="New Era Party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481879" wikidata="Q5231172" url="?curid=481879" title="David Barsamian">
<text>David Barsamian (born 1945) is an Armenian-American radio broadcaster, writer, and the founder and director of &quot;Alternative Radio&quot;, a Boulder, Colorado–based syndicated weekly public affairs program heard on some 250 radio stations worldwide.

Barsamian started working in radio in 1978 at KGNU in Boulder, Colorado, and then KRZA in Alamosa, Colorado.

Articles by (and interviews with) Barsamian have appeared regularly in &quot;The Progressive&quot;, &quot;The Sun&quot; and &quot;Z Magazine&quot;. Barsamian also lectures on U.S. foreign policy, corporate control, the media, and propaganda.

As a writer, Barsamian is best known for his series of interviews with Noam Chomsky, which have been published in book form and translated into many languages.

==Deportation from India==
On 23 September 2011, Barsamian was deported from India. After arriving on a flight at the Indira Gandhi International Airport, he was refused entry and placed on a return flight. Barsamian attributes this to his reportage on human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir.

==Bibliography==
== Filmography ==
==See also==
*List of Armenian Americans

==References==
==External links==
*About David Barsamian, with list of programs featuring him, at Alternative Radio&#x27;s website
*Alternative Radio (Australia) website
*Statement of protest South Asia Citizens Web, Sep 28, 2011
*David Barsamian Collection of &quot;Alternative Radio&quot; Audio Recordings, Tamiment Library and Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives at New York University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5231172" start="0" end="15" title="David Barsamian" label="David Barsamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325516" start="34" end="51" title="Armenian-American" label="Armenian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="144" end="161" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329787" start="300" end="304" title="KGNU" label="KGNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="308" end="325" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706033" start="336" end="340" title="KRZA" label="KRZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010247" start="344" end="361" title="Alamosa, Colorado" label="Alamosa, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q124706" start="441" end="456" title="The Progressive" label="The Progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767321" start="470" end="477" title="The Sun (magazine)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q136638" start="494" end="504" title="Z Magazine" label="Z Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="539" end="558" title="U.S. foreign policy" label="U.S. foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="678" end="690" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="831" end="839" title="deported" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="845" end="850" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="886" end="921" title="Indira Gandhi International Airport" label="Indira Gandhi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938051" start="1021" end="1061" title="human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir" label="human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562239" start="1113" end="1139" title="List of Armenian Americans" label="List of Armenian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231172" start="1239" end="1256" title="Alternative Radio" label="Alternative Radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481880" wikidata="Q7617860" url="?curid=481880" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council">
<text>The Stock Exchange Executive Council (SEEC; ) of the People&#x27;s Republic of China was established to improve the efficiency of the securities market in [[mainland China]].

According to research by Nottle (1993), the re-emergence of securities markets commenced under the introduction of the economic reform programme. The initiative was announced by then party Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping in 1978; under the plan market forces would be brought to bear on the Chinese economy and China&#x27;s &quot;doors would be opened&quot; to foreign capital and entrepreneurs.

Under this economic reform, a number of experiments have been conducted over the part decades in order to facilitate the development of securities markets. 
# September 1984, the first joint stock company and then one was commenced in [[Shanghai Stock Exchange|Shanghai]] in 1985 and in [[Shenzhen Stock Exchange|Shenzhen]] in 1987
# Another experiment consisted of establishing securities trading markets such as, over-the-counter (OTC) market for shares and bonds was established in 1986.

To further improve the economic efficiency of the Chinese securities markets, eventually the Stock Exchange Executive Council (SEEC) was formed in March 1989 to create a nationwide treasury bond trading system, the Securities Trading Automated Quotations System (STAQs), which was established in December 1990.

==See also==
*China Securities Regulatory Commission
* Untraded shares
* Leading stock
* Economy of China
* Economic history of China (Pre-1911)
* Economic history of China (1912–1949)
*Chinese financial system
*Banking in China

==References==
*&quot;The Europa World Year Book&quot;
*&quot;The development of China&#x27;s stockmarket, 1984-2002: equity politics and market institutions&quot; (Stephen Paul Green, 2004)
*&quot;Privatizing China: the stock markets and their role in corporate reform&quot; (Carl E. Walter, Fraser J. T. Howie, 2003)
*&quot;China&#x27;s capital market&quot; (Yebi Hu; Chinese University Press, 1993)
*&quot;Monetary and exchange system reforms in China: an experiment in gradualism&quot;

==External links==
*Securities Association of China
*China Securities Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7617860" start="4" end="36" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council" label="Stock Exchange Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617860" start="38" end="42" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council" label="SEEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="53" end="84" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="134" end="144" title="Security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617860" start="155" end="173" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council" label="[[mainland China]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="295" end="320" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic reform programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="378" end="391" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="416" end="429" title="market forces" label="market forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="462" end="477" title="Economy of China" label="Chinese economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051734" start="501" end="522" title="Open Door Policy" label="doors would be opened"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="532" end="547" title="foreign capital" label="foreign capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="552" end="564" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="753" end="772" title="joint stock company" label="joint stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617860" start="803" end="839" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council" label="[[Shanghai Stock Exchange|Shanghai]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617860" start="855" end="891" title="Stock Exchange Executive Council" label="[[Shenzhen Stock Exchange|Shenzhen]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q66320" start="983" end="999" title="Over-the-counter (finance)" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="1017" end="1023" title="shares" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="1028" end="1033" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="1083" end="1102" title="economic efficiency" label="economic efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1241" end="1269" title="treasury bond trading system" label="treasury bond trading system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1275" end="1321" title="Securities Trading Automated Quotations System" label="Securities Trading Automated Quotations System"/>
<link wikidata="Q642889" start="1386" end="1424" title="China Securities Regulatory Commission" label="China Securities Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309239" start="1427" end="1442" title="Untraded shares" label="Untraded shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508772" start="1445" end="1458" title="Leading stock" label="Leading stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="1461" end="1477" title="Economy of China" label="Economy of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002417" start="1480" end="1516" title="Economic history of China (Pre-1911)" label="Economic history of China (Pre-1911)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002422" start="1519" end="1556" title="Economic history of China (1912–1949)" label="Economic history of China (1912–1949)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="1558" end="1582" title="Chinese financial system" label="Chinese financial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856358" start="1584" end="1600" title="Banking in China" label="Banking in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481881" wikidata="Q415745" url="?curid=481881" title="Michael Moore (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Michael Moore]] is an American filmmaker and author.

Michael Moore may also refer to:

== Academia ==
* Michael G. Moore (fl. 1970s–2020s), professor of education
* Michael S. Moore (academic) (fl. 1960s–2020s), American law professor
* Michael Moore (herbalist) (1941–2009), author, founder of the SW School of Botanical Medicine and expert on medicinal plants
* Michael Moore (physicist) (born 1943), professor of theoretical physics since 1976 at the University of Manchester
* Michael Moore (provost) (c. 1639–1723), Irish priest, philosopher and educationalist

== Entertainment ==
* Mickey Moore or Michael D. Moore (1914–2013), Canadian-born American film director and child actor
* Michael Moore (bassist) (born 1945), American bassist
* Michael Moore (saxophonist and clarinetist) (born 1954), American musician
* Michael S. Moore (comics) (born 1974), American comic book writer
* Michael Moore (actor) (1925–1998), American film actor

== Politics ==
* Michael Moore (Maryland politician) (died 1903), American politician
* Mike Moore (New Zealand politician) (1949–2020), prime minister of New Zealand and director-general of the World Trade Organization
* Michael W. Moore (born 1948), former secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections
* Michael Moore (Australian politician) (born 1950), former member of the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly
* Mike Moore (American politician) (born 1952), former Mississippi attorney-general, known for his involvement with early tobacco litigation
* Michael Moore (Scottish politician) (born 1965), Liberal Democrat politician in the UK, former secretary of state for Scotland
* Michael J. Moore (born 1968), former state senator and United States Attorney for the Middle District of Georgia
* Michael Moore (Australian judge) (fl. 1990s–2000s), former Federal Court of Australia justice
* Michael O. Moore (fl. 2000s–2020s), Massachusetts senator from Millbury, Massachusetts, representing the Second Worcester District
* K. Michael Moore (born 1951), American federal judge

== Sports ==
===Baseball===
* Harry Moore (baseball) or Mike Moore (1876–1917), Negro leagues baseball player
* Mike Moore (baseball) (born 1959), Major League Baseball player
* Mike Moore (baseball executive) (fl. 1960s–2000s), Minor League Baseball president

===Football===
* Mick Moore (footballer) (born 1952), English footballer
* Mike Moore (running back) (1956–2016), college football player
* Michael Moore (offensive lineman) (born 1976), former American football guard
* Michael Moore (footballer) (born 1981), Scottish football player
* Mike Moore (American football coach) (fl. 1980s–2010s), American football coach
* Mike Moore (Canadian football) (born 1993), Canadian football player
* Michael Moore (Cork Gaelic footballer), played in the 1890 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final
* Michael Moore (Galway Gaelic footballer), from the All-Ireland SFC finals of 1963, 1964 and 1965

===Other sports===
* Mike Moore (wrestler) (born 1958), former WCW professional wrestler
* Michael Moore (rowing) (born 1970), American Olympic rower
* Mikki Moore (born 1975), NBA player for the Golden State Warriors
* Mike Moore (ice hockey) (born 1984), ice hockey player
* Mike Moore (basketball) (born 1994), American basketball player
* Michael Moore (sprinter), winner of the 1982 NCAA Division I outdoor 4 × 400 meter relay championship

== Other people ==
* Michael Moore (Swedish officer) (born 1953), major-general in Swedish Air Force, and expert at Swedish Department of Defense
* Michael Scott Moore (born 1969), American journalist and novelist
* Michael D. Moore (evangelist) (fl. 1980s–2020s), pastor of the Faith Chapel Christian Center in Birmingham, Alabama
* Michel Moore (born 1960), chief of Los Angeles Police Department
* Mick Moore (political economist), British economist

==See also==
*Mikey Moore (born 2007), English football winger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q415745" start="0" end="17" title="Michael Moore (disambiguation)" label="[[Michael Moore]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q415745" start="56" end="69" title="Michael Moore (disambiguation)" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054072" start="107" end="123" title="Michael G. Moore" label="Michael G. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608090" start="168" end="195" title="Michael S. Moore (academic)" label="Michael S. Moore (academic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832890" start="240" end="265" title="Michael Moore (herbalist)" label="Michael Moore (herbalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21166729" start="367" end="392" title="Michael Moore (physicist)" label="Michael Moore (physicist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837358" start="484" end="507" title="Michael Moore (provost)" label="Michael Moore (provost)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829651" start="592" end="604" title="Mickey Moore" label="Mickey Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752903" start="693" end="716" title="Michael Moore (bassist)" label="Michael Moore (bassist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928646" start="749" end="792" title="Michael Moore (saxophonist and clarinetist)" label="Michael Moore (saxophonist and clarinetist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834075" start="826" end="851" title="Michael S. Moore (comics)" label="Michael S. Moore (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937204" start="894" end="915" title="Michael Moore (actor)" label="Michael Moore (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116442711" start="967" end="1002" title="Michael Moore (Maryland politician)" label="Michael Moore (Maryland politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q558647" start="1038" end="1073" title="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)" label="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856293" start="1172" end="1188" title="Michael W. Moore" label="Michael W. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832887" start="1262" end="1299" title="Michael Moore (Australian politician)" label="Michael Moore (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848089" start="1386" end="1418" title="Mike Moore (American politician)" label="Mike Moore (American politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q333446" start="1527" end="1562" title="Michael Moore (Scottish politician)" label="Michael Moore (Scottish politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31401500" start="1656" end="1672" title="Michael J. Moore" label="Michael J. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832891" start="1771" end="1803" title="Michael Moore (Australian judge)" label="Michael Moore (Australian judge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833205" start="1867" end="1883" title="Michael O. Moore" label="Michael O. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397001" start="2000" end="2016" title="K. Michael Moore" label="K. Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729702" start="2084" end="2106" title="Harry Moore (baseball)" label="Harry Moore (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848093" start="2166" end="2187" title="Mike Moore (baseball)" label="Mike Moore (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095793" start="2232" end="2263" title="Mike Moore (baseball executive)" label="Mike Moore (baseball executive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838345" start="2333" end="2356" title="Mick Moore (footballer)" label="Mick Moore (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848091" start="2391" end="2416" title="Mike Moore (running back)" label="Mike Moore (running back)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832892" start="2456" end="2489" title="Michael Moore (offensive lineman)" label="Michael Moore (offensive lineman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10430120" start="2536" end="2562" title="Michael Moore (footballer)" label="Michael Moore (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848087" start="2603" end="2639" title="Mike Moore (American football coach)" label="Mike Moore (American football coach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959751" start="2685" end="2715" title="Mike Moore (Canadian football)" label="Mike Moore (Canadian football)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2756" end="2794" title="Michael Moore (Cork Gaelic footballer)" label="Michael Moore (Cork Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838163" start="2810" end="2861" title="1890 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final" label="1890 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2864" end="2904" title="Michael Moore (Galway Gaelic footballer)" label="Michael Moore (Galway Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571034" start="2941" end="2945" title="1963 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015681" start="2947" end="2951" title="1964 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571833" start="2956" end="2960" title="1965 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189330" start="2983" end="3004" title="Mike Moore (wrestler)" label="Mike Moore (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47468073" start="3053" end="3075" title="Michael Moore (rowing)" label="Michael Moore (rowing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381732" start="3114" end="3125" title="Mikki Moore" label="Mikki Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345281" start="3182" end="3205" title="Mike Moore (ice hockey)" label="Mike Moore (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954012" start="3239" end="3262" title="Mike Moore (basketball)" label="Mike Moore (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3305" end="3329" title="Michael Moore (sprinter)" label="Michael Moore (sprinter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155545" start="3350" end="3393" title="4 × 400 meter relay at the NCAA Division I Outdoor Track and Field Championships" label="NCAA Division I outdoor 4 × 400 meter relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992831" start="3429" end="3460" title="Michael Moore (Swedish officer)" label="Michael Moore (Swedish officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668091" start="3556" end="3575" title="Michael Scott Moore" label="Michael Scott Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829650" start="3624" end="3653" title="Michael D. Moore (evangelist)" label="Michael D. Moore (evangelist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861352" start="3742" end="3754" title="Michel Moore" label="Michel Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073856" start="3809" end="3841" title="Mick Moore (political economist)" label="Mick Moore (political economist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119700600" start="3876" end="3887" title="Mikey Moore" label="Mikey Moore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481882" wikidata="Q7716007" url="?curid=481882" title="The Beano Annual">
<text>The Beano Annual is the current name of the book that has been published every year since 1939, to tie in with the children&#x27;s comic &quot;The Beano&quot;. there have been 86 editions. The annuals are traditionally published in July or August, in time for Christmas, and since 1965 they have had the date of the following year on the cover. Before then no date was given.

From 1943 to 1950 the annual was called &quot;The Magic-Beano Book&quot;, which referred to the short-lived Magic Comic that had ceased publication in 1941 due to the Second World War&#x27;s paper rationing. The name reverted to the original title of &quot;The Beano Book&quot; in 1950 and continued, the year changing for each subsequent annual, until the release of the 2003 book in 2002 when it was renamed &quot;The Beano Annual&quot;. The 2011 Beano Annual is taller and wider than previous annuals.

After paper rationing had ended, The Magic Comic was never revived, but some of the characters who had originally appeared in the pre-war Magic Comic remained as regular strips in the post-1950 Beano Comic (such as Koko the Pup).

Because of his popularity, Dennis the Menace has appeared on the front cover of every annual since the release of the 1979 book in 1978.

The latest version came out 2024 and was dated 2025. The book consistently retails at 6.99 from 2024
 (released 2023)

==List of annuals==

This information is necessary to identify older annuals which are not dated. If an annual is dated 1940, it would have been published in August 1939. 

Prices are in shillings and pence with one shilling (1/-) equal to 5p. Modern equivalent prices (not inflation-adjusted) are given in brackets. 

===The Beano Book (1940-1942)===
===The Magic-Beano Book (1943-1950)===
===The Beano Book (1951-2002)===
===The Beano Annual (2003-present)===
Since the Beano&#x27;s redesigned logo debuted on the 2017 annual (released 2016), the words &quot;BEANO&quot; and &quot;ANNUAL (year)&quot; have been displayed in a consistent size and font on the cover and spine each year; this had not previously been the case.

==See also==
*List of Beano comic strips by annual
*List of DC Thomson publications

==References==
==External links==
*Beano Annual Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="44" end="48" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="131" end="136" title="comic book" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="143" end="152" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="260" end="269" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749411" start="485" end="496" title="The Magic Comic" label="Magic Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="544" end="560" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="568" end="573" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="574" end="583" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259097" start="1141" end="1158" title="Dennis the Menace (UK)" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563517" start="2112" end="2148" title="List of Beano comic strips by annual" label="List of Beano comic strips by annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568306" start="2150" end="2181" title="List of DC Thomson publications" label="List of DC Thomson publications"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481885" wikidata="Q6271845" url="?curid=481885" title="Jonah (comics)">
<text>Jonah is a comic strip character published in the magazine &quot;The Beano&quot;. He made his first appearance in his eponymous comic strip in 1958, illustrated by Ken Reid. Although his comic strip sporadically appeared throughout the magazine, it has been published in other DC Thomson comic magazines.

== Synopsis ==
Jonah is a skinny, gormless, chinless wonder of a sailor, feared by other mariners because of his clumsiness. He has (accidentally) sunk every ship he has sailed on (as well as all other vessels surrounding, at times), and started a war between the nations of Gorgonzolia and Parafinalia, resulting in the utter destruction of the combined fleets of both countries (a possible reference to the Cold War).

Although unconfirmed, he has similarities to the long-established sailor&#x27;s superstition, which is based on the Biblical prophet Jonah, whose ship nearly sank in a storm).

== Publication history ==
Jonah&#x27;s series first published in issue 817, authored by an uncredited Walter Fearn and illustrated by Ken Reid. Reid&#x27;s passion for the artwork over-stretched Fearn&#x27;s scripts by several panels (sometimes more than 30) but are seemingly trimmed down to print on the back cover of &quot;The Beano&quot;. The strip finished after issue 1090.

Jerry Swaffield would later illustrate a one-off &quot;Jonah&quot; strip in 1988.

== Subsequent appearances ==
=== &quot;The Beano&quot; ===
There have been two spin-offs. In the year &quot;Jonah&quot; ended, a new comic strip began entitled &quot;Jinx,&quot; also drawn by Ken Reid. This strip was similar to &quot;Jonah&quot;, but starred Jonah&#x27;s lisping, equally clumsy sister at school; &quot;Jinx&quot; ended in 1964. Another, entitled &quot;Son of Jonah&quot;, drawn by Jerry Swaffield, appeared in &quot;The Beano&quot; from 2606 to 2957. The &quot;Jinx&quot; series would feature in &quot;The Beano Book 1965&quot;, and a reprint appeared in issue 4 of &quot;The Best of Topper&quot;.

Jonah appeared in a background cameo with Big Eggo and Jack Flash in the comic strip &quot;Lord Snooty&#x27;s Day Out&quot; in issue 3093, revealing formerly popular characters known by previous generations of readers now live in the Beano Retirement Home.

The series had a one-off appearance in issue 2331, as part of the &quot;Reader&#x27;s Request&quot; series. In 2014, Jonah had a supporting role in &quot;The Bash Street Kids&quot;, revealing he is Plug&#x27;s uncle.

Throughout the rest of &quot;Beano&quot; media, Jonah&#x27;s stories have featured in &quot;Beano&quot; annuals between 1960 and 1964&#x27;s editions, and a cameo in 2019&#x27;s, as well as in &quot;The Beano Summer Special 1988&quot;.

=== DC Thomson ===
Jonah appeared frequently outside of &quot;The Beano&quot; franchise in a variety of DC Thomson&#x27;s magazines. In 1971, reprints of his &quot;Beano&quot; strips published in &quot;Hornet&quot; from issue 395, and then in the entirety of &quot;Buddy&quot; run. New stories also appeared in &quot;The Dandy&quot; as part of &quot;The Dandy-Beano Collection&quot;, in which a few &quot;Beano&quot; characters featured in &quot;The Dandy&quot; during 1986 and 1988, followed by new stories in &quot;The Dandy&quot; from 1993 where he meets Captain Timmy &quot;Thick&quot; Fogg and can shapeshift into a monster humanoid with the help of a water gypsy&#x27;s magic earring. Jonah was the star of 17 &quot;Beano Comic Library&quot; books, notably meeting Puss &#x27;n&#x27; Boots from &quot;The Topper&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="0" end="5" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="65" end="74" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388351" start="164" end="172" title="Ken Reid (comics artist)" label="Ken Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="277" end="287" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="350" end="365" title="Social structure of the United Kingdom#Upper class" label="chinless wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="395" end="402" title="mariner" label="mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="715" end="723" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="793" end="819" title="Sailors&amp;#x27; superstitions#Jonah" label="sailor&amp;#x27;s superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468262" start="860" end="865" title="Jonah" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366174" start="1131" end="1137" title="Panel (comics)" label="panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388351" start="1560" end="1568" title="Ken Reid (comics artist)" label="Ken Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q527892" start="1640" end="1644" title="lisp" label="lisp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1767" end="1782" title="Jerry Swaffield" label="Jerry Swaffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716007" start="1888" end="1902" title="The Beano Book" label="The Beano Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769607" start="1970" end="1976" title="The Topper (comics)" label="Topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905638" start="2027" end="2035" title="Big Eggo" label="Big Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112521" start="2040" end="2050" title="Jack Flash" label="Jack Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908" start="2225" end="2240" title="Retirement Home" label="Retirement Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715748" start="2397" end="2417" title="The Bash Street Kids" label="The Bash Street Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716007" start="2547" end="2572" title="The Beano Annual" label="&amp;quot;Beano&amp;quot; annuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="2802" end="2812" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904329" start="2900" end="2906" title="Hornet (DC Thomson)" label="Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="3015" end="3024" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="3256" end="3263" title="Captain (nautical)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261910" start="3469" end="3493" title="Puss &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Boots (comics)" label="Puss &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769607" start="3505" end="3515" title="Topper (comic)" label="The Topper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481890" wikidata="Q1135496" url="?curid=481890" title="Latvian Green Party">
<text>The Latvian Green Party (, LZP) is a green conservative political party in Latvia.

Founded in 1990, the party was a member of the European Green Party from 2003 until its expulsion in 2019. It is positioned in the centre-right of the political spectrum and supports socially conservative and green policies. The party is notable for producing the world&#x27;s first green head of government when Indulis Emsis briefly served as Prime Minister of Latvia in 2004 and the first green head of state when Raimonds Vējonis served as President of Latvia from 2015 to 2019.

==History==
In April 1989, representatives from Green movements in multiple Baltic countries sent a letter to the Paris Green Congress citing the USSR as the reason for ecological ruin in the region. One of the representatives was Arvīds Ulme, a member of the Latvian Environmental Protection Club, who would go on to form the Latvian Green Party alongside Indulis Emsis the following year. The party was registered on 13 January 1990, becoming the first official political party in Latvia four months before it officially declared its independence from the Soviet Union.

The Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia elected in 1990 contained seven Green delegates. After the Constitution of Latvia was restored, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the election of the 5th Saeima (1993-1995) returned one Green deputy, Anna Seile, on the list of the Latvian National Independence Movement (LNNK). In the 6th Saeima (1995-1998), there were four members: Indulis Emsis, Guntis Eniņš, Jānis Kalviņš and Jānis Rāzna.

From 1993 until 1998, the Greens were part of the governing coalition with Indulis Emsis as Minister of State for Environmental Protection. The LZP contested the 1995 general election in an electoral list with the LNNK, but lost its parliamentary representation in the 1998 general election, which it contested in alliance with the Workers&#x27; Party and Christian Democratic Union.

For the 2002 parliamentary election, the party formed the Union of Greens and Farmers (ZZS) with the Latvian Farmers&#x27; Union. Three members of the Green party were elected: Indulis Emsis, Arvīds Ulme and Leopolds Ozoliņš. The ZZS joined a four-party center-right coalition government and was represented with three ministers, one of them from the Green party, Minister for the Environment Raimonds Vējonis.

In February 2004, after the breakdown of the four-party government, Indulis Emsis was appointed to form a new government and became the first head of government of a country anywhere in the world from a Green party. His minority government was forced to resign in December of the same year. A new coalition government led by the People’s Party took office, in which the party was again represented as part of the ZZS.

For the 2006 parliamentary election, the party won four seats as part of the ZZS. The party remained part of the centre-right coalition government along with the People’s Party, Latvia&#x27;s First Party/Latvian Way, and For Fatherland and Freedom. Party chairman and former prime minister Indulis Emsis became Speaker of the Saeima from November 2006 until September 2007, when he resigned amid a criminal corruption investigation.

In 2015, Raimonds Vējonis was elected President of Latvia with the support of 55 out of 100 members of the Saeima, becoming the first ever head of state in Europe from a green party. On 7 May 2019, despite support from his party and coalition, Vējonis announced he would not seek re-election and he was succeeded by longtime judge of the European Court of Justice Egils Levits, who Vējonis had defeated in the 2015 election.

Leading politicians of the party have often supported nationalist and socially conservative views, leading to its expulsion from the European Green Party on 10 November 2019.

By 2022, however, ZZS was embroiled in internal turmoil, with the Green Party announcing that it sees no way of further cooperation in the framework of ZZS with For Latvia and Ventspils, still led by oligarch Aivars Lembergs. Ultimately, it voted to leave the alliance on 11 June 2022; they were later joined by the Liepāja Party. In May 2022, LZP formed a political alliance for the 2022 Saeima elections together with the Latvian Association of Regions, the Liepāja Party and the &quot;United List of Latvia&quot; NGO led by Liepāja construction contractor Uldis Pīlēns, the United List.

The United List won 15 seats in the 2022 election and joined the New Unity and National Alliance coalition as part of the second Krišjānis Kariņš government. On 14 August 2023, Kariņš resigned as prime minister after his coalition fell apart when the National Alliance, a national-conservative party, refused to allow the Union of Greens and Farmers and The Progressives, the only major left-wing party in Latvia, to join the coalition. Since then, the United List has been part of the opposition to the Evika Siliņa government.

== Ideology ==
Unlike most green parties in Europe, the Latvian Green Party holds socially conservative views, variously campaigning on right-wing populism, xenophobia, and homophobia. In 2003, party co-founder Arvīds Ulme co-authored a public letter in support of Aivars Garda, leader of the neo-fascist Latvian National Front, after he was charged for his homophobic rhetoric. Since its expulsion from the European Green Party in 2019, the Latvian Greens and its United List coalition partners have been associated with the soft Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists Group.

The party platform states that their environmental goals are centered on sustainable development and they are aligned with Agenda 21.

==Election results==

=== Legislative elections ===


===European Parliament elections===

==Chairpersons==
Three co-chairpersons share the leadership position at any one time. Former chairpersons of the Latvian Green Party include:
*Oļegs Batarevskis (1990–1997)
*Valts Vilnītis (1990–1991)
*Juris Zvirgzds (1990–1995)
*Gunārs Lākutis (1991–1993)
*Pēteris Jansons (1993–1994)
*Jānis Kalviņš (1994–1995)
*Indulis Emsis (from 1995)
*Rūta Bendere (1995–1996)
*Askolds Kļaviņš (1996–2001)
*Valdis Felsbergs (1997–2003)
*Viesturs Silenieks (2001-2011)
*Raimonds Vējonis (2003-2011)
*Edgars Tavars (from 2011)

==See also==
*Green party
*Green politics
*List of environmental organizations
*Politics of Latvia

==References==
==External links==
*Official website 
*Info of Latvian Green Party on European Green Party website(page not found)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1135496" start="4" end="23" title="Latvian Green Party" label="Latvian Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135496" start="27" end="30" title="Latvian Green Party" label="LZP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062758" start="37" end="55" title="Green conservatism" label="green conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930753" start="56" end="71" title="List of political parties in Latvia" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="75" end="81" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="131" end="151" title="European Green Party" label="European Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="215" end="227" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="267" end="288" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="293" end="298" title="Green politics" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="373" end="391" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="397" end="410" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369500" start="429" end="453" title="Prime Minister of Latvia" label="Prime Minister of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="482" end="495" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416022" start="501" end="517" title="Raimonds Vējonis" label="Raimonds Vējonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="528" end="547" title="President of Latvia" label="President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="799" end="810" title="Arvīds Ulme" label="Arvīds Ulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="925" end="938" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1126" end="1138" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109069" start="1145" end="1186" title="Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia" label="Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143464" start="1246" end="1268" title="Constitution of Latvia" label="Constitution of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1313" end="1325" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q822919" start="1351" end="1357" title="Saeima" label="Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9155673" start="1397" end="1407" title="Anna Seile" label="Anna Seile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702540" start="1428" end="1466" title="Latvian National Independence Movement" label="Latvian National Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="1531" end="1544" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1546" end="1558" title="Guntis Eniņš" label="Guntis Eniņš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1560" end="1573" title="Jānis Kalviņš" label="Jānis Kalviņš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1578" end="1589" title="Jānis Rāzna" label="Jānis Rāzna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517189" start="1597" end="1601" title="Gailis cabinet" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436359" start="1608" end="1612" title="Krasts cabinet" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565623" start="1754" end="1775" title="1995 Latvian parliamentary election" label="1995 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q93981" start="1861" end="1882" title="1998 Latvian parliamentary election" label="1998 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696503" start="1924" end="1943" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Latvia)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q763974" start="1948" end="1974" title="Christian Democratic Union (Latvia)" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052986" start="1985" end="2012" title="2002 Latvian parliamentary election" label="2002 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q167928" start="2035" end="2062" title="Union of Greens and Farmers" label="Union of Greens and Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474484" start="2078" end="2105" title="Latvian Farmers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Latvian Farmers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="2154" end="2167" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2169" end="2180" title="Arvīds Ulme" label="Arvīds Ulme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2185" end="2201" title="Leopolds Ozoliņš" label="Leopolds Ozoliņš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2341" end="2369" title="Minister for the Environment of Latvia" label="Minister for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416022" start="2370" end="2386" title="Raimonds Vējonis" label="Raimonds Vējonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="2531" end="2549" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="2592" end="2603" title="Green party" label="Green party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250133" start="2718" end="2732" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Latvia)" label="People’s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q925632" start="2816" end="2843" title="2006 Latvian parliamentary election" label="2006 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756085" start="2986" end="3023" title="Latvia&amp;#x27;s First Party/Latvian Way" label="Latvia&amp;#x27;s First Party/Latvian Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479723" start="3029" end="3055" title="For Fatherland and Freedom" label="For Fatherland and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630529" start="3119" end="3140" title="Speaker of the Saeima" label="Speaker of the Saeima"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943394" start="3272" end="3299" title="2015 Latvian presidential election" label="elected President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="3580" end="3605" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q348043" start="3606" end="3618" title="Egils Levits" label="Egils Levits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="3722" end="3733" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="3738" end="3759" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="3801" end="3821" title="European Green Party" label="European Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9207905" start="4005" end="4029" title="For Latvia and Ventspils" label="For Latvia and Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q337868" start="4053" end="4068" title="Aivars Lembergs" label="Aivars Lembergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813060" start="4160" end="4173" title="Liepāja Party" label="Liepāja Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528251" start="4228" end="4249" title="2022 Latvian parliamentary election" label="2022 Saeima elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18189957" start="4268" end="4298" title="Latvian Association of Regions" label="Latvian Association of Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813060" start="4304" end="4317" title="Liepāja Party" label="Liepāja Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="4360" end="4363" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="4371" end="4378" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q109864567" start="4403" end="4415" title="Uldis Pīlēns" label="Uldis Pīlēns"/>
<link wikidata="Q113163582" start="4421" end="4432" title="United List (Latvia)" label="United List"/>
<link wikidata="Q98104169" start="4500" end="4509" title="New Unity" label="New Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576026" start="4514" end="4531" title="National Alliance (Latvia)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q115349247" start="4557" end="4591" title="Second Kariņš cabinet" label="second Krišjānis Kariņš government"/>
<link wikidata="Q167928" start="4757" end="4784" title="Union of Greens and Farmers" label="Union of Greens and Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966907" start="4789" end="4805" title="The Progressives (Latvia)" label="The Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q122585769" start="4939" end="4962" title="Siliņa cabinet" label="Evika Siliņa government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="5047" end="5068" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="5101" end="5120" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="5122" end="5132" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="5138" end="5148" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="5258" end="5269" title="Neo-fascism" label="neo-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="5491" end="5507" title="Soft Euroskepticism" label="soft Eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345559" start="5508" end="5551" title="European Conservatives and Reformists Group" label="European Conservatives and Reformists Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="5627" end="5650" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="5677" end="5686" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5923" end="5940" title="Oļegs Batarevskis" label="Oļegs Batarevskis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5954" end="5968" title="Valts Vilnītis" label="Valts Vilnītis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5982" end="5996" title="Juris Zvirgzds" label="Juris Zvirgzds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6010" end="6024" title="Gunārs Lākutis" label="Gunārs Lākutis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6038" end="6053" title="Pēteris Jansons" label="Pēteris Jansons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6067" end="6080" title="Jānis Kalviņš" label="Jānis Kalviņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q540255" start="6094" end="6107" title="Indulis Emsis" label="Indulis Emsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6121" end="6133" title="Rūta Bendere" label="Rūta Bendere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6147" end="6162" title="Askolds Kļaviņš" label="Askolds Kļaviņš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6176" end="6192" title="Valdis Felsbergs" label="Valdis Felsbergs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6206" end="6224" title="Viesturs Silenieks" label="Viesturs Silenieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416022" start="6238" end="6254" title="Raimonds Vējonis" label="Raimonds Vējonis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6268" end="6281" title=":lv:Edgars Tavars" label="Edgars Tavars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="6309" end="6320" title="Green party" label="Green party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="6322" end="6336" title="Green politics" label="Green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670725" start="6338" end="6373" title="List of environmental organizations" label="List of environmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639899" start="6375" end="6393" title="Politics of Latvia" label="Politics of Latvia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481894" wikidata="Q4959407" url="?curid=481894" title="Breakdown (Melissa Etheridge album)">
<text>Breakdown is the sixth studio album by American singer-songwriter Melissa Etheridge, released by Island Records on October 5, 1999. A critical and commercial success, the album peaked at No. 12 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, went Gold, and earned four Grammy Award nominations. A Limited-Edition version of the album was simultaneously released featuring three bonus tracks.

&quot;Scarecrow&quot; is dedicated to the memory of Matthew Shepard, and his family and friends. &quot;Into the Dark&quot; appeared in episodes of &quot;Haven&quot; and &quot;Night Visions&quot;.

==Accolades==
==Track listing==
All songs by Melissa Etheridge, except where noted

#&quot;Breakdown&quot; – 3:54
#&quot;Angels Would Fall&quot; (Etheridge, Shanks) – 4:39
#&quot;Stronger Than Me&quot; – 4:08
#&quot;Into the Dark&quot; – 4:59
#&quot;Enough of Me&quot; – 4:39
#&quot;Truth of the Heart&quot; (Etheridge, Shanks) – 4:31
#&quot;Mama I&#x27;m Strange&quot; – 4:29
#&quot;Scarecrow&quot; – 5:21
#&quot;How Would I Know&quot; – 4:15
#&quot;My Lover&quot; – 5:45
#&quot;Sleep&quot; – 7:10 [standard pressing] / 4:39 [Limited Edition pressing]
#&quot;Touch and Go&quot;* – 4:36
#&quot;Cherry Avenue&quot;* – 4:29
#&quot;Beloved&quot;* – 7:54

* Limited Edition bonus tracks

==Personnel==
*Melissa Etheridge – acoustic guitar, vocals
*Kenny Aronoff – drums, marimba, shaker
*Jon Brion – guitar
*Mark Browne – bass guitar
*Matt Chamberlain – drums
*Steve Ferrone – percussion, drums
*Rami Jaffee – keyboards
*Jim Keltner – drums
*Greg Leisz – guitar, mandolin, lap steel guitar, pedal steel guitar
*Brian MacLeod – percussion, drum loop
*Pino Palladino – bass guitar
*John Shanks – dulcimer, guitar, harp, marimba, background vocals
*Patrick Warren – keyboards
*Gota Yashiki – programming

==Production==
*Producers: Melissa Etheridge, John Shanks
*Engineers: Marc DeSisto, Greg Goldman
*Assistant engineers: John Aguto, Tom Nellen, Geoff Walcha
*Mixing: Bob Clearmountain, Tom Lord-Alge, Chris Lord-Alge
*Mastering: Bob Ludwig
*studio technician: Brett Allen
*Art direction: Scott Denton Cardew
*Artwork: Scott Denton Cardew
*Photography: Barbara Green, Rocky Schenck
*Hair stylist: Bernhard Tammé

==Charts==
==Certifications==


== Notes ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="66" end="83" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="97" end="111" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="201" end="226" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="233" end="237" title="Music recording sales certification" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="255" end="267" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q313244" start="431" end="446" title="Matthew Shepard" label="Matthew Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q864422" start="532" end="537" title="Haven (TV series)" label="Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269054" start="554" end="567" title="Night Visions (TV series)" label="Night Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763070" start="697" end="714" title="Angels Would Fall" label="Angels Would Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430349" start="960" end="969" title="Scarecrow (Melissa Etheridge song)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q534930" start="1320" end="1333" title="Kenny Aronoff" label="Kenny Aronoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q220971" start="1343" end="1350" title="marimba" label="marimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q540389" start="1360" end="1369" title="Jon Brion" label="Jon Brion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388748" start="1407" end="1423" title="Matt Chamberlain" label="Matt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q708218" start="1433" end="1446" title="Steve Ferrone" label="Steve Ferrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q453565" start="1493" end="1504" title="Jim Keltner" label="Jim Keltner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605898" start="1514" end="1524" title="Greg Leisz" label="Greg Leisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="1535" end="1543" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q644440" start="1545" end="1561" title="lap steel guitar" label="lap steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964569" start="1583" end="1596" title="Brian MacLeod (U.S. musician)" label="Brian MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="1611" end="1620" title="Music loop" label="drum loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q922252" start="1622" end="1636" title="Pino Palladino" label="Pino Palladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q348155" start="1652" end="1663" title="John Shanks" label="John Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q341663" start="1666" end="1674" title="dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220971" start="1690" end="1697" title="marimba" label="marimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q21694782" start="1718" end="1732" title="Patrick Warren" label="Patrick Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q348155" start="1820" end="1831" title="John Shanks" label="John Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q370490" start="1939" end="1956" title="Bob Clearmountain" label="Bob Clearmountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="1958" end="1971" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107265" start="1973" end="1988" title="Chris Lord-Alge" label="Chris Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="2001" end="2011" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481903" wikidata="Q453699" url="?curid=481903" title="Augusta Leigh">
<text>Augusta Maria Leigh (&quot;née&quot; Byron; 26 January 1783 – 12 October 1851) was the only surviving daughter of John &quot;Mad Jack&quot; Byron, the poet Lord Byron&#x27;s father, by his first wife, Amelia, née Darcy (Lady Conyers in her own right and the divorced wife of Francis, Marquis of Carmarthen).

==Early life==
Augusta&#x27;s mother died soon after her birth. Her grandmother, Lady Holderness, raised Augusta for a few years, but died when Augusta was still a young girl, and the child divided her time among relatives and friends.

==Marriage==
Augusta later married her cousin, Lt. Colonel George Leigh (1771–1850), son of General Charles Leigh (1748–1815) and his wife, Frances Byron (1749-1823), her paternal aunt. The couple had seven children: Georgiana Augusta, Augusta Charlotte, George Henry, Elizabeth Medora, Frederick George, Amelia Marianne, and Henry Francis. Richard Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos, noted the wedding with disdain in his diary: &quot;Poor Augusta Leigh marries today! Poor thing! I pity her connecting herself with such a Family and such a fool! However, she has nobody to blame but herself.&quot; The marriage turned out unhappily because he fell into a dissolute way of life and gambled away all his money. In the end, he left his wife and children nothing but debts.

==Lord Byron==

Augusta&#x27;s half-brother, George Lord Byron, did not meet her until he went to Harrow School, and even then only very rarely. From 1804 onward, however, she wrote to him regularly and became his confidante, especially in his quarrels with his mother. Their correspondence ceased for two years after Byron had gone abroad, and was not resumed until she sent him a letter expressing her sympathy on the death of his mother, Catherine, in 1811.

Not having been brought up together, they were almost like strangers to each other. But they got on well together and appear to have fallen in love with each other. When Byron&#x27;s marriage collapsed and he sailed away from England never to return, rumours of incest were rife.

There is some evidence to support the incest accusation. Augusta Leigh&#x27;s third daughter, born in spring of 1814, was christened Elizabeth Medora Leigh. A few days after the birth, Byron went to his sister&#x27;s house Swynford Paddocks in Cambridgeshire to see the child, and wrote, in a letter to his confidante, Lady Melbourne: &quot;Oh! but it is &#x27;worth while&#x27;, I can&#x27;t tell you why, and it is &quot;not&quot; an &quot;Ape&quot;, and if it is, that must be my fault; however, I will positively reform. You must however allow that it is utterly impossible I can ever be half so well liked else-where, and I have been all my life trying to make someone love me and never got the sort I preferred before.&quot;

== Later life ==
One of Augusta&#x27;s daughters, Georgiana, married a cousin, Henry Trevanion in 1826, apparently at her mother&#x27;s instigation. They had three daughters. Trevanion, who may also have had a relationship with Augusta herself, left Georgiana in 1829–30 for her younger sister Elizabeth Medora, who had been staying with them; Medora and Trevanion lived together for several years in France, before finally separating in the 1840s, Medora going on to marry a French soldier.

==Poetic references==
Augusta is also the subject of Byron&#x27;s &quot;Epistle to Augusta&quot; (1816) and &quot;Stanzas to Augusta&quot;.

== See also ==
* Margaret de Valois
* Marguerite de Ravalet

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453699" start="0" end="19" title="Augusta Leigh" label="Augusta Maria Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q453699" start="37" end="42" title="Augusta Leigh" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114" end="145" title=" John Byron (British Army officer)" label="John &amp;quot;Mad Jack&amp;quot; Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="156" end="166" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q71854" start="201" end="218" title="Amelia Osborne, Marchioness of Carmarthen" label="Amelia, née Darcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333862" start="275" end="305" title="Francis Godolphin Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds" label="Francis, Marquis of Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28844136" start="646" end="659" title="Charles Leigh (British Army officer)" label="Charles Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q808603" start="694" end="699" title="Baron Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589390" start="887" end="970" title="Richard Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos" label="Richard Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="1458" end="1471" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="2084" end="2090" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q276241" start="2236" end="2258" title="Elizabeth Medora Leigh" label="Elizabeth Medora Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47185023" start="2394" end="2402" title="Byron&amp;#x27;s letters" label="a letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363099" start="2422" end="2436" title="Elizabeth Lamb, Viscountess Melbourne" label="Lady Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q220845" start="3486" end="3504" title="Margaret de Valois" label="Margaret de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189714" start="3507" end="3528" title="Marguerite de Ravalet" label="Marguerite de Ravalet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481905" wikidata="Q7314210" url="?curid=481905" title="Representation of the People Act 1884">
<text>In the United Kingdom under the premiership of William Gladstone, the Representation of the People Act 1884 (48 &amp; 49 Vict. c. 3), also known informally as the Third Reform Act, and the Redistribution Act of the following year were laws which further extended the suffrage in the UK after the Derby government&#x27;s Reform Act 1867. Taken together, these measures extended the same voting qualifications as existed in the towns to the countryside, more than doubling the electorate in the counties, and essentially established the modern one member constituency as the normal pattern for parliamentary representation.

The bill was introduced by Gladstone on 28 February 1884. The Conservative-dominated House of Lords rejected the bill on 17 July but then passed it. It gained royal assent on 6 December of that year.

The Act extended the 1867 concessions from the boroughs to the countryside. All men paying an annual rental of £10 and all those holding land valued at £10 now had the vote. This significantly increased the electorate; in the 1880 general election, before the passing of the Act, 3,040,050 voters were registered, while in the 1885 general election, after the passing of the Act, there were 5,708,030 registered voters. The bill was so objectionable to the House of Lords that Gladstone was forced to separate the legislation into two bills, the second being the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885, which redistributed constituencies in order to equalise representation within constituencies across the UK.

The 1884 Reform Act did not establish universal suffrage: although the size of the electorate was increased considerably, all women and 40% of men were still without the vote. Male suffrage varied throughout the kingdom, too: in England and Wales, two in three adult males had the vote; in Scotland, three in five did; but in Ireland, the figure was only one in two.

==Key sections of the Act==

&quot;Section 2&quot;: This extended a uniform household (freeholder and leaseholder) franchise to all parliamentary boroughs and counties in the United Kingdom.

&quot;Section 3&quot;: Men inhabiting a dwelling-house as an employee, whose employer did not live there, were to be treated for franchise purposes as if they were occupying as tenants.

&quot;Section 4&quot;: Prohibition of multiplicity of votes. This was not to stop people acquiring multiple votes in different constituencies (plural voting was still permitted), but to restrict sub-division of one property to qualify multiple voters (so-called faggot voters).

&quot;Section 5a&quot;: A man who was a £10 occupier in a county or borough was to be a voter in that county or borough. This assimilated the previous county occupation franchise and borough occupation franchise into a uniform occupation franchise.

&quot;Section 6&quot;: Occupation in a borough was not to confer a county franchise.

==Effects==

As many crofters in the Scottish Highlands qualified as £10 occupiers, the Act empowered Scottish Gaels to take action against evictions and rent increases at the end of the Highland Clearances. Their votes led to the formation of the Crofters&#x27; Party and Highland Land League, and eventually the passage of the Crofters&#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886, which addressed many of their grievances and put an end to the Highland Clearances.

==See also==

* Democracy in Europe
* Reform Acts
* Representation of the People Act
* Parliamentary franchise in the United Kingdom 1885–1918
* Medical Relief Disqualification Removal Act 1885

==References==
* &quot;The Statutes: Second Revised Edition, Vol. XVI 1884–1886&quot;, (printed by authority 1900) 
==External links==

*Digital reproduction of the Original Act on the Parliamentary Archives catalogue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7" end="21" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="47" end="64" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="70" end="107" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="Representation of the People Act 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q120109150" start="109" end="126" title="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict." label="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="163" end="179" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="Third Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305979" start="189" end="207" title="Redistribution of Seats Act 1885" label="Redistribution Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="296" end="301" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="320" end="335" title="Reform Act 1867" label="Reform Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="386" end="392" title="voting" label="voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="542" end="565" title="First-past-the-post" label="one member constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="592" end="605" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="871" end="878" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074515" start="1050" end="1071" title="1880 United Kingdom general election" label="1880 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397257" start="1151" end="1172" title="1885 United Kingdom general election" label="1885 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="1301" end="1310" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305979" start="1387" end="1419" title="Redistribution of Seats Act 1885" label="Redistribution of Seats Act 1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="1568" end="1586" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="2030" end="2052" title="Borough constituency" label="parliamentary boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="2057" end="2065" title="County constituency" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2073" end="2087" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563190" start="2420" end="2433" title="plural voting" label="plural voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429415" start="2539" end="2551" title="faggot voter" label="faggot voter"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="2929" end="2947" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="3079" end="3098" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187486" start="3140" end="3160" title="Crofters&amp;#x27; Party" label="Crofters&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78912871" start="3165" end="3185" title="Highland Land League" label="Highland Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140769" start="3221" end="3264" title="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886" label="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="3329" end="3348" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q127378018" start="3367" end="3386" title="Democracy in Europe" label="Democracy in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307387" start="3389" end="3400" title="Reform Acts" label="Reform Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314205" start="3403" end="3435" title="Representation of the People Act" label="Representation of the People Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138991" start="3438" end="3493" title="Parliamentary franchise in the United Kingdom 1885–1918" label="Parliamentary franchise in the United Kingdom 1885–1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806411" start="3496" end="3544" title="Medical Relief Disqualification Removal Act 1885" label="Medical Relief Disqualification Removal Act 1885"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481908" wikidata="Q4878896" url="?curid=481908" title="Become You">
<text>Become You is the eighth studio album by American folk rock duo the Indigo Girls. It was released on March 12, 2002 by Epic Records.

==Track listing==
These bonus tracks were only available when the album was purchased at Borders. The original version of Everything In Its Own Time was released on the album Shaming of the Sun and credited to Emily Saliers only.
==Personnel==
;Indigo Girls
*Amy Ray – vocals, acoustic guitar, mandolin, bouzouki, harmonica
*Emily Saliers – vocals, 6 and 12 string acoustic guitars, classical guitar, electric guitar, bouzouki, mandolin

;Additional musicians
*Carol Isaacs – Hammond B-3, Wurlitzer, piano, accordion, penny whistle, recorder, percussion
*Clare Kenny – acoustic and electric bass guitars
*Brady Blade – drums and percussion
*Michelle Malone – vocals on &quot;Moment of Forgiveness&quot; and &quot;Hope Alone&quot;, vocals and harmonica on &quot;Bitterroot&quot;
*Dan Higgins – saxophone on &quot;You&#x27;ve Got to Show&quot;
*Jerry Hey – string arrangement on &quot;Hope Alone&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="68" end="80" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="119" end="131" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q893430" start="223" end="230" title="Borders (retailer)" label="Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487566" start="309" end="327" title="Shaming of the Sun" label="Shaming of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="595" end="607" title="Carol Isaacs" label="Carol Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955162" start="739" end="750" title="Brady Blade" label="Brady Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837144" start="775" end="790" title="Michelle Malone" label="Michelle Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213681" start="913" end="924" title="Dan Higgins" label="Dan Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183733" start="977" end="986" title="Jerry Hey" label="Jerry Hey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481912" wikidata="Q61146" url="?curid=481912" title="Kurt Hahn">
<text>Kurt Matthias Robert Martin Hahn (5 June 1886 – 14 December 1974) was a German educator. He was decisive in founding Stiftung Louisenlund, Schule Schloss Salem, Gordonstoun, Outward Bound, the Duke of Edinburgh&#x27;s Award, and the first of the United World Colleges, Atlantic College.

== Life ==

=== Early life ===
Born in Berlin to Jewish parents, Hahn attended school in the city, then universities at Oxford, Heidelberg, Freiburg and Göttingen. During World War I, Hahn worked in the German Department for Foreign Affairs, analyzing British newspapers and advising the German Foreign Office. He had been private secretary to Prince Max von Baden, the last Imperial Chancellor of Germany, and in 1919 was part of the German delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, where, as secretary and speechwriter for the German minister of Foreign Affairs, Graf Brockdorff-Rantzau, he witnessed the creation of the Treaty of Versailles.

In 1920 Hahn and Prince Max founded Schule Schloss Salem, a private boarding school in Baden-Württemberg in south-western Germany, where Hahn served as headmaster until 1933 and Adolf Hitler&#x27;s rise to power. Hahn was raised Jewish, and began his fierce criticism of the Nazi regime after the Potempa murder of 1932, when Stormtroopers attacked and killed a young communist in the presence of his mother. The Stormtroopers were originally sentenced to death, but when they were given amnesty and celebrated by the Nazis, Hahn spoke out against Hitler publicly. He asked the students, faculty, and alumni of the Salem school to &quot;choose between Salem and Hitler&quot;. As a result, he was imprisoned for five days, from 11 to 16 March 1933. After an appeal by the British Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, Hahn was released and in July 1933 he was forced to leave Germany and moved to the United Kingdom.

=== United Kingdom ===
Hahn settled in Scotland, where he founded Gordonstoun on similar principles to the school in Salem. Later Hahn converted to Christianity, became a communicant member of the Church of England in 1945 and preached in the Church of Scotland.

Hahn was also involved in the foundation of the Outward Bound Organisation with Lawrence Holt, Atlantic College in Wales and the wider United World College movement, and the Duke of Edinburgh&#x27;s Award.

An international organisation of schools aligned with Hahn&#x27;s educational philosophy was initially to be called The Hahn Schools but is today known as Round Square.

=== Return to Germany ===
After World War II, Hahn divided his time between Britain and Germany. He founded or inspired the founding of several new boarding schools based on the principles of Salem and Gordonstoun: Anavryta, Greece (1949); Louisenlund, Germany (1949); Battisborough, England (1955); Rannoch School, Scotland (1959); Box Hill School, England (1959); International School Ibadan, Nigeria (1963); and The Athenian School, USA (1965).

He resigned from the headship of Gordonstoun on health grounds and returned to Hermannsberg (Heiligenberg), near Salem in 1953. He died there on 14 December 1974 and was buried in Salem.

==Philosophy==
Hahn&#x27;s educational philosophy was based on respect for adolescents, whom he believed to possess an innate decency and moral sense, but who were, he believed, corrupted by society as they aged. He believed that education could prevent this corruption, if students were given opportunities for personal leadership and to see the results of their own actions. This is one reason for the focus on outdoor adventure in his philosophy. Hahn relied here on Bernhard Zimmermann, the former Director of the Göttingen University Physical Education Department, who had to leave Germany in 1938 as he did not want to divorce his Jewish wife. Hahn&#x27;s educational thinking was crystallised by World War I, which he viewed as proof of the corruption of society and a promise of later doom if people, Europeans particularly, could not be taught differently. At the Schule Schloss Salem, in addition to acting as headmaster, he taught history, politics, ancient Greek, Shakespeare, and Schiller. He was deeply influenced by Plato&#x27;s thought.
Gordonstoun is based less on Eton than on Salem. Hahn&#x27;s prefects are called colour bearers, and traditionally they are promoted according to Hahn&#x27;s values: concern and compassion for others, the willingness to accept responsibility, and concern and tenacity in pursuit of the truth. Punishment of any kind is viewed as a last resort. According to the German educational Michael Knoll, &quot;education for democracy&quot; was at the core of Hahn&#x27;s educational philosophy.

Hahn also emphasised what he called &quot;Samaritan service&quot;, having students give service to others. He formulated this as focusing on finding Christian purpose in life. His former pupil, Golo Mann, later described him as a &quot;Christian gentleman.&quot; Hahn&#x27;s ideas were also adopted – through the efforts of Alec Peterson, who previously worked under Hahn at the newly founded Atlantic College in the 1960s – by the International Baccalaureate program and thus secularised.

==Six Declines of Modern Youth==
During his lifetime, Hahn summarised his beliefs about the younger generation at the time into six key points, describing them as the Six Declines of Modern Youth:
# Decline of Fitness due to modern methods of locomotion;
# Decline of Initiative and Enterprise due to the widespread disease of spectatoritis (i.e. &quot;excessive indulgence in forms of amusement in which one is a passive spectator rather than an active participant&quot;);
# Decline of Memory and Imagination due to the confused restlessness of modern life;
# Decline of Skill and Care due to the weakened tradition of craftsmanship;
# Decline of Self-discipline due to the ever-present availability of stimulants and tranquillisers;
# Decline of Compassion due to the unseemly haste with which modern life is conducted or, as William Temple called it, &quot;spiritual death&quot;.

Hahn also proposed four solutions to these problems, all of which manifested themselves in a variety of ways at Salem, Gordonstoun, Atlantic College, and with Outward Bound:
# Fitness Training (e.g., to compete with oneself in physical fitness; in so doing, train the discipline and determination of the mind through the body);
# Expeditions (e.g., via sea or land, to engage in long, challenging endurance tasks);
# Projects (e.g., involving crafts and manual skills);
# Rescue Service (e.g., surf lifesaving, fire fighting, first aid).

==The Seven Laws of Salem==

Kurt applied these seven laws to Salem School, Gordonstoun School, community programs for building physical fitness and social spirit, the worldwide Outward Bound movement and Atlantic College.

==Personality==
In 1934, through his lectures in London to the New Education Fellowship, Hahn met the educationalist T. C. Worsley and persuaded him to spend a summer term at the newly founded Gordonstoun in the capacity of consultant. In his memoir &quot;Flannelled Fool: A Slice of a Life in the Thirties&quot;, Worsley records his impressions of Hahn&#x27;s penetrating character analysis, and his energy and commitment in the cause of human development, but as time went on he became critical of Hahn&#x27;s &quot;despotic, overpowering personality&quot;:
He revealed himself as having a fierce temper, a strong hand with the cane, and a temperament which hated being crossed. Especially damaging to my very English view, was his dislike of being defeated at any game. Hahn was an avid tennis player. But was it an easily forgiveable weakness that his opponents had to be chosen for being his inferiors or else, if their form was unknown, instructed not to let themselves win?
Hahn&#x27;s behaviour came to seem to Worsley &quot;so ineffably, so Germanically silly&quot; that he was unable to share the clear adulation of the teaching staff:

We were going through the classrooms when, in one, he suddenly stopped, gripped my arm, raised his nostrils in the air, and then, in his marked German accent, he solemnly pronounced:

&#x27;Somevon has been talking dirt in this room. I can smell it.&#x27;
Hahn&#x27;s views on Shakespeare led to an open disagreement:

He had what I have since learned to be a common German belief that Shakespeare was better in German than in English. I refused to allow this. I argued that the German translation might indeed be very good, but that the English original must be &quot;better&quot;. No, he assured me, the German was &quot;better&quot;; and as I didn&#x27;t know German and he did know English, he must be right. We grew absurdly heated.
==The Kurt Hahn Expeditionary Learning School==
In the fall of 2007, The Kurt Hahn Expeditionary Learning School opened in Brooklyn, New York.

==In popular culture==
In the television series &quot;The Crown&quot;, Hahn is played by German actor Burghart Klaußner.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
* Knoll, Michael (2011). School reform through experiential therapy: Kurt Hahn – an efficious educator.
* Knoll, Michael, ed. (1998). &quot;Kurt Hahn: Reform mit Augenmaß. Ausgewählte Schriften eines Politikers und Pädagogen&quot;. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
* Veevers, Nick; Pete, Allison (2011). &quot;Kurt Hahn: Inspirational, Visionary, Outdoor and Experiential Educator&quot;. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
* Wilhelm Henze, ed. (1991): &quot;Bernhard Zimmermann – Hermann Nohl – Kurt Hahn. Ein Beitrag zur Reformpädagogik&quot;. 1991. 
* David Sutcliffe, Kurt Hahn and the United World Colleges with other Founding Figures. 2012. 

==External links==

* KurtHahn.org
* Kurt Hahn Trust
* Outward Bound
* Outward Bound International
* Kurt Hahn – a bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61146" start="0" end="32" title="Kurt Hahn" label="Kurt Matthias Robert Martin Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q468080" start="117" end="137" title="Stiftung Louisenlund" label="Stiftung Louisenlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q537352" start="139" end="159" title="Schule Schloss Salem" label="Schule Schloss Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538148" start="161" end="172" title="Gordonstoun" label="Gordonstoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411901" start="174" end="187" title="Outward Bound" label="Outward Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q462004" start="193" end="223" title="Duke of Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Duke of Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786" start="246" end="267" title="United World Colleges" label="United World Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q756361" start="269" end="285" title="Atlantic College" label="Atlantic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="327" end="333" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="337" end="343" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="408" end="414" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="416" end="426" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153987" start="428" end="436" title="University of Freiburg" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="441" end="450" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="459" end="470" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="491" end="528" title="Federal Foreign Office" label="German Department for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="576" end="597" title="German Foreign Office" label="German Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q76908" start="639" end="652" title="Max von Baden" label="Max von Baden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="663" end="693" title="Chancellor of Germany#Chancellor of the German Reich" label="Imperial Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="748" end="770" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q213622" start="853" end="876" title="Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau" label="Graf Brockdorff-Rantzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="911" end="931" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q537352" start="970" end="990" title="Schule Schloss Salem" label="Schule Schloss Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="1021" end="1038" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1112" end="1124" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578660" start="1231" end="1253" title="Potempa murder of 1932" label="Potempa murder of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="1260" end="1273" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Stormtroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="1729" end="1745" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538148" start="1913" end="1924" title="Gordonstoun" label="Gordonstoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1995" end="2007" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2044" end="2061" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="2090" end="2108" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411901" start="2159" end="2185" title="Outward Bound" label="Outward Bound Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504008" start="2191" end="2204" title="Lawrence Durning Holt" label="Lawrence Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q756361" start="2206" end="2222" title="Atlantic College" label="Atlantic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786" start="2246" end="2266" title="United World Colleges" label="United World College"/>
<link wikidata="Q462004" start="2285" end="2315" title="Duke of Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Duke of Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371128" start="2473" end="2485" title="Round Square (educational organisation)" label="Round Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2520" end="2532" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q537352" start="2680" end="2685" title="Schule Schloss Salem" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752415" start="2703" end="2711" title="Anavryta Experimental Lyceum" label="Anavryta"/>
<link wikidata="Q468080" start="2728" end="2739" title="Louisenlund" label="Louisenlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293403" start="2788" end="2802" title="Rannoch School" label="Rannoch School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951539" start="2821" end="2836" title="Box Hill School" label="Box Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052876" start="2854" end="2881" title="International School Ibadan" label="International School Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714784" start="2903" end="2922" title="The athenian school" label="The Athenian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q509155" start="3030" end="3042" title="Heiligenberg" label="Heiligenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508666" start="3538" end="3555" title="outdoor education" label="outdoor adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3643" end="3663" title="Göttingen University" label="Göttingen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q537352" start="3998" end="4018" title="Schule Schloss Salem" label="Schule Schloss Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="4118" end="4126" title="Schiller" label="Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714239" start="4989" end="5002" title="Alec Peterson" label="Alec Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q756361" start="5058" end="5074" title="Atlantic College" label="Atlantic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="5097" end="5124" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336315" start="5984" end="5998" title="William Temple (bishop)" label="William Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892996" start="6866" end="6890" title="Beatrice Ensor" label="New Education Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463572" start="6920" end="6933" title="T. C. Worsley" label="T. C. Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="7027" end="7037" title="consultant" label="consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457428" start="7059" end="7109" title="Flannelled Fool" label="Flannelled Fool: A Slice of a Life in the Thirties"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="8227" end="8238" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744995" start="8757" end="8800" title="The Kurt Hahn Expeditionary Learning School" label="The Kurt Hahn Expeditionary Learning School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="8811" end="8819" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707362" start="8886" end="8895" title="The Crown (TV series)" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q74886" start="8934" end="8951" title="Burghart Klaußner" label="Burghart Klaußner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481918" wikidata="Q7653338" url="?curid=481918" title="Swamp Ophelia">
<text>Swamp Ophelia is the fifth studio album by the Indigo Girls, released in 1994.

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
;Indigo Girls
*Amy Ray - vocals, acoustic and electric guitar (lead on Fugitive, rhythm elsewhere)
*Emily Saliers - vocals, acoustic, classical and electric guitar (rhythm and lead), bouzouki
;Musicians
*Jerry Marotta - drums (all except 10 &amp; 11), percussion, bongos, African drums, marimba
*Sara Lee - bass (all except 9–11)
*Michael Lorant - drums (11), guest/backing vocals (1, 2, 4, 8, 11)
*Jan Dykes - bass (6, 11)
*Danny Thompson - acoustic bass (4, 5, 7, 8)
*Tony Levin - Chapman stick (9)
*Chuck Leavell - piano (1, 3, 5), chimes (1)
*John Mark Painter - baritone guitar (1), flugelhorn (1, 5, 6), accordion (2), string arrangement (6, 11), electric guitar (11)
*Mike Batt - string and woodwind arrangement, conductor on &quot;The Wood Song&quot;
*Connie Grauer - melodica, bass synthesizer (9)
*Kim Zick - triangle, snare, tom tom, timpani (9)
*Lisa Germano - penny whistle (1), mandolin (1, 4, 5), violin (4, 7, 8)
*Jane Scarpantoni, Anthony Lamarchina - cello
*Jo-El Sonnier - accordion (2)
*Bill Newton - chromatic harmonica (5)
*James Hall - trumpet (1, 6)
*David Davidson, Sheila Doyle, Christian Teal - violin
*Kristin Wilkinson - viola
*Jane Siberry (3), The Roches (4, 8), Sam &quot;Shake&quot; Anderson (5), Larry Ray Sr. (9) - backing vocals

==Reception==
The Allmusic review noted that &quot;Amy Ray and Emily Saliers continue to hone their signature lush melodies ... The Indigo Girls are no longer afraid to hit upon past relationships and personal emotion. Saliers and Ray&#x27;s incredible harmonies are most stylish ... [b]ut the duo also move beyond the sweet and tender by dipping into darker realms ... This album is another humanistic effort from the Indigo Girls&#x27; deep and indwelling passions and ideas.&quot;

In 2015, the Indigo Girls were invited by Justin Vernon of Bon Iver to perform &quot;Swamp Ophelia&quot; in its entirety at the inaugural Eaux Claires festival, which Vernon founded. Vernon has written that &quot;Swamp Ophelia&quot; was one of his sister Kim&#x27;s favorite albums, and after she urged him to listen to it, it became one of his as well.
==Commercial performance==
The album debuted at number nine on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and it spent 26 weeks on the chart. It was certified Platinum in the Us with sales of 1 million copies.

==Covers==
David Crosby covered &quot;Fare Thee Well&quot; on the B-side to his 1993 single Hero.

The British mother-and-daughter folk duo Chris and Kellie While covered &quot;Power of Two&quot; on their self-titled 2004 album.

In 2009, Michael Feinstein covered &quot;Power of Two&quot; in his nightclub act and studio album &quot;The Power of Two&quot; with Cheyenne Jackson, using the song&#x27;s title for both the album and act as well.

In 2010, Filipino pop rock singer Aiza Seguerra also covered the song. In 2012, Filipino acoustic pop singer Nyoy Volante and his acoustic band, &quot;Rhythmic Circle&quot; also covered the song on the OPM pop compilation album &quot;90&#x27;s Music Comes Alive&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="47" end="59" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844575" start="128" end="135" title="Amy Ray" label="Amy Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q256038" start="213" end="226" title="Emily Saliers" label="Emily Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q386311" start="317" end="330" title="Jerry Marotta" label="Jerry Marotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421687" start="409" end="417" title="Sara Lee (musician)" label="Sara Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164775" start="538" end="552" title="Danny Thompson" label="Danny Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216986" start="583" end="593" title="Tony Levin" label="Tony Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q499033" start="615" end="628" title="Chuck Leavell" label="Chuck Leavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q705596" start="788" end="797" title="Mike Batt" label="Mike Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q270469" start="971" end="983" title="Lisa Germano" label="Lisa Germano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152723" start="1043" end="1059" title="Jane Scarpantoni" label="Jane Scarpantoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179352" start="1089" end="1102" title="Jo-El Sonnier" label="Jo-El Sonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q275535" start="1270" end="1282" title="Jane Siberry" label="Jane Siberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413972" start="1288" end="1298" title="The Roches" label="The Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1397" end="1405" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432151" start="1906" end="1919" title="Justin Vernon" label="Justin Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357340" start="1923" end="1931" title="Bon Iver" label="Bon Iver"/>
<link wikidata="Q34083976" start="2002" end="2014" title="Eaux Claires" label="Eaux Claires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742591" start="2511" end="2515" title="Hero (David Crosby song)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q454353" start="2658" end="2675" title="Michael Feinstein" label="Michael Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757967" start="2753" end="2769" title="The Power of Two" label="The Power of Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q935217" start="2781" end="2797" title="Cheyenne Jackson" label="Cheyenne Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543670" start="2898" end="2911" title="Aiza Seguerra" label="Aiza Seguerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12968778" start="2973" end="2985" title="Nyoy Volante" label="Nyoy Volante"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481920" wikidata="Q374808" url="?curid=481920" title="East Suffolk (county)">
<text>East Suffolk, along with West Suffolk, was created in 1888 as an administrative county of England. The administrative county was based on the eastern quarter sessions division of Suffolk. East Suffolk County Council&#x27;s headquarters were at East Suffolk County Hall in Ipswich.

In 1974, most of the county reunified with West Suffolk and the county borough of Ipswich to form the non-metropolitan county of Suffolk.

==Subdivisions==
From 1894 the administrative county was divided into municipal boroughs, urban districts and rural districts:
*Boroughs: Aldeburgh, Beccles, Eye, Lowestoft, Southwold
*Urban districts: Bungay (created 1910), Felixstowe and Walton, (renamed Felixstowe 1914), Halesworth (created 1900), Leiston-cum-Sizewell (created 1895), Oulton Broad (created 1904, abolished 1919), Saxmundham (created 1900), Stowmarket, Woodbridge
*Rural districts created in 1894: Blything, Bosmere and Claydon, East Stow, Hartismere, Hoxne, Mutford and Lothingland, Plomesgate, Samford, Wangford, Woodbridge
**The Rural Districts were completely reorganised by a County Review Order in 1934, and reduced to seven in number: Blyth, Deben, Gipping, Hartismere, Lothingland, Samford, Wainford

The rural districts were further subdivided into civil parishes.

==District Council==
On 1 April 2019 a new East Suffolk district was created by the abolition and merger of Waveney and Suffolk Coastal districts. The new district, covers a smaller area than the pre-1974 East Suffolk county council.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374808" start="0" end="12" title="East Suffolk (county)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q371272" start="25" end="37" title="West Suffolk (county)" label="West Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560047" start="65" end="86" title="administrative county" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="90" end="97" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="150" end="166" title="quarter sessions" label="quarter sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329452" start="244" end="268" title="East Suffolk County Hall" label="East Suffolk County Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="272" end="279" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="346" end="371" title="county borough of Ipswich" label="county borough of Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="384" end="407" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="411" end="418" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="491" end="508" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="511" end="525" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754946" start="531" end="545" title="rural district" label="rural district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077402" start="559" end="568" title="Aldeburgh" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q813574" start="570" end="577" title="Beccles" label="Beccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q777509" start="579" end="582" title="Eye, Suffolk" label="Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q986007" start="584" end="593" title="Lowestoft" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854554" start="595" end="604" title="Southwold" label="Southwold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009468" start="623" end="629" title="Bungay, Suffolk" label="Bungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000656" start="678" end="688" title="Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570884" start="696" end="706" title="Halesworth" label="Halesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519667" start="723" end="743" title="Leiston-cum-Sizewell" label="Leiston-cum-Sizewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110475" start="760" end="772" title="Oulton Broad" label="Oulton Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450421" start="805" end="815" title="Saxmundham" label="Saxmundham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454255" start="832" end="842" title="Stowmarket" label="Stowmarket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="844" end="854" title="Woodbridge Urban District" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250883" start="889" end="897" title="Blything Rural District" label="Blything"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250884" start="899" end="918" title="Bosmere and Claydon Rural District" label="Bosmere and Claydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329432" start="920" end="929" title="East Stow Rural District" label="East Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674672" start="931" end="941" title="Hartismere Rural District" label="Hartismere"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250890" start="943" end="948" title="Hoxne Rural District" label="Hoxne"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250903" start="950" end="973" title="Mutford and Lothingland Rural District" label="Mutford and Lothingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250906" start="975" end="985" title="Plomesgate Rural District" label="Plomesgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250908" start="987" end="994" title="Samford Rural District" label="Samford"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250909" start="996" end="1004" title="Wangford Rural District" label="Wangford"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250913" start="1006" end="1016" title="Woodbridge Rural District" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664061" start="1072" end="1091" title="Local Government Act 1929" label="County Review Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250923" start="1133" end="1138" title="Blyth Rural District" label="Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248054" start="1140" end="1145" title="Deben Rural District" label="Deben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564052" start="1147" end="1154" title="Gipping Rural District" label="Gipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674672" start="1156" end="1166" title="Hartismere Rural District" label="Hartismere"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242946" start="1168" end="1179" title="Lothingland Rural District" label="Lothingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250908" start="1181" end="1188" title="Samford Rural District" label="Samford"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250924" start="1190" end="1198" title="Wainford Rural District" label="Wainford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="1249" end="1261" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554266" start="1309" end="1321" title="East Suffolk District" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q642424" start="1374" end="1381" title="Waveney District" label="Waveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116371" start="1386" end="1401" title="Suffolk Coastal" label="Suffolk Coastal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481923" wikidata="Q371272" url="?curid=481923" title="West Suffolk (county)">
<text>West Suffolk was an administrative county of England created in 1889 from part of the county of Suffolk. It survived until 1974 when it was rejoined with East Suffolk. Its county town was Bury St Edmunds.

Before the introduction of county councils, Suffolk had been divided into eastern and western divisions, each with their own quarter sessions. The western division corresponded to the Liberty of Saint Edmund. This area had been established by Edward the Confessor in 1044 and was a separate jurisdiction under the control of the abbot of Bury St Edmunds Abbey until the dissolution of the monasteries.

This history was reflected in the coat of arms of the county council. The council initially adopted the attributed arms of Edward the Confessor: a cross patonce between five martlets. When the council received an official grant of arms from the College of Arms in 1959, abbots&#x27; mitres and the emblem of St Edmund: crossed arrows through an open crown were added. The motto adopted was &quot;For King, Law and People&quot;, referring to the association of Magna Carta with Bury.

Shortly before its abolition the West Suffolk County Council commissioned Elisabeth Frink to sculpt a statue of St Edmund to commemorate the end of 970 years of independent administration of the area. The statue, in the grounds of the abbey of Bury St Edmunds, was completed in 1976.

==Subdivisions==
From 1894 the administrative county was divided into municipal boroughs, urban districts and rural districts:
*Boroughs: Bury St Edmunds, Sudbury
*Urban districts: Glemsford (created 1896, abolished 1935), Hadleigh, Haverhill, Newmarket
*Rural districts: Brandon (abolished 1935), Clare, Cosford, Melford, Mildenhall, Moulton (abolished 1935), Thedwastre, Thingoe

The rural districts were further subdivided into civil parishes.

==District Council==
On 1 April 2019 a West Suffolk district was established by the merger of Forest Heath district and St Edmundsbury borough. The new district covers a smaller area than the pre-1974 West Suffolk county council.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371272" start="0" end="12" title="West Suffolk (county)" label="West Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560047" start="20" end="41" title="administrative county" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="45" end="52" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="96" end="103" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q374808" start="154" end="166" title="East Suffolk (county)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q764754" start="188" end="203" title="Bury St Edmunds" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="233" end="248" title="county councils" label="county councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="250" end="257" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="331" end="347" title="quarter sessions" label="quarter sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045371" start="390" end="413" title="Liberty_of_St_Edmund" label="Liberty of Saint Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="449" end="469" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q334286" start="544" end="565" title="Bury St Edmunds Abbey" label="Bury St Edmunds Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="576" end="606" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="643" end="655" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061741" start="783" end="790" title="martlet" label="martlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="854" end="869" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="981" end="986" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="1069" end="1080" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575649" start="1167" end="1182" title="Elisabeth Frink" label="Elisabeth Frink"/>
<link wikidata="Q381815" start="1205" end="1214" title="Edmund the Martyr" label="St Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="1448" end="1465" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="1468" end="1482" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754946" start="1488" end="1502" title="rural district" label="rural district"/>
<link wikidata="Q764754" start="1516" end="1531" title="Bury St Edmunds" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021319" start="1533" end="1540" title="Sudbury, Suffolk" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524180" start="1559" end="1568" title="Glemsford" label="Glemsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013608" start="1601" end="1609" title="Hadleigh, Suffolk" label="Hadleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q262092" start="1611" end="1620" title="Haverhill, Suffolk" label="Haverhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382713" start="1622" end="1631" title="Newmarket, Suffolk" label="Newmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250855" start="1650" end="1657" title="Brandon Rural District" label="Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126247" start="1676" end="1681" title="Clare Rural District" label="Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053823" start="1683" end="1690" title="Cosford Rural District" label="Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812227" start="1692" end="1699" title="Melford Rural District" label="Melford"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053831" start="1701" end="1711" title="Mildenhall Rural District" label="Mildenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919058" start="1713" end="1720" title="Moulton Rural District" label="Moulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777693" start="1739" end="1749" title="Thedwastre Rural District" label="Thedwastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784349" start="1751" end="1758" title="Thingoe Rural District" label="Thingoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="1809" end="1821" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554272" start="1865" end="1877" title="West Suffolk (district)" label="West Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296758" start="1920" end="1932" title="Forest Heath" label="Forest Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q588518" start="1946" end="1960" title="Borough of St Edmundsbury" label="St Edmundsbury"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481924" wikidata="Q363903" url="?curid=481924" title="Carnarvon">
<text>Carnarvon and Caernarvon are forms of the name [[Caernarfon]] which are no longer used for the town in north Wales, but remain in use in other contexts. The first two forms are in English orthography and the third is the Welsh spelling, adopted in English since the 1970s. Most places and things named after Caernarfon use one of the former spellings.
==Places==
===Australia===
;Queensland
* Carnarvon Range
* Carnarvon Highway, state highway 
* Carnarvon National Park
** Carnarvon Gorge
* Carnarvon Park, Queensland, a locality in the Central Highlands Region
* Carnarvon Station Reserve

;South Australia
*County of Carnarvon (South Australia), a cadastral unit of land administration on Kangaroo Island

;Western Australia
* Carnarvon (biogeographic region), IBRA region
* Carnarvon, Western Australia, coastal town 
** Carnarvon Airport (Australia)
* Carnarvon County, Western Australia
* Carnarvon Range (Western Australia)
* Carnarvon Tracking Station
* Carnarvon xeric shrublands, deserts and xeric shrublands ecoregion
* OTC Earth Station Carnarvon
* Shire of Carnarvon, local government area

===Canada===
* Caernarvon (Edmonton), residential neighbourhood in Edmonton, Alberta
* Carnarvon Avenue, Upper Lonsdale, District of North Vancouver, British Columbia
* Carnarvon Elementary School, Vancouver, British Columbia
* Carnarvon Park (next to Carnarvon Elementary School), Vancouver, British Columbia
* Carnarvon Park, District of Oak Bay, Vancouver Island, British Columbia
* Carnarvon Street, City of Victoria and District of Oak Bay, Vancouver Island, British Columbia
* Carnarvon (Ontario), hamlet in Minden Hills, Haliburton County, Ontario
* Mount Carnarvon, Yoho National Park, Kootenay Land District, British Columbia

===Hong Kong===
* Carnarvon Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon

===New Zealand===
* Carnarvon, former name of the small town of Himatangi

===South Africa===
* Carnarvon, Northern Cape, town in the Karoo region
** Carnarvon Airport (South Africa)

===United Kingdom (Wales)===
* Caernarfon, town in Gwynedd, north-west Wales
** Caernarfon Airport
** Caernarfon Castle, castle constructed by King Edward I of England
** Caernarvon railway station (closed 1970, originally spelled &quot;Carnarvon&quot;)
** Caernarfon railway station (Welsh Highland Railway, opened 1997)
** Carnarvon (Pant) railway station a temporary terminus on the town&#x27;s southern outskirts in the late 1860s
** Carnarvon (Morfa) railway station a temporary terminus on the town&#x27;s southern edge in the late 1860s
** Carnarvon Castle railway station, northern passenger terminus of the Nantlle Railway in the mid-nineteenth century
** Caernarfon Town F.C., football team in the League of Wales
** CR Caernarfon, rugby union team in the Welsh Rugby Union Division Four North League
* Caernarfon Bay, inlet of the Irish Sea defined by the Llŷn peninsula and Anglesey
* Caernarfon (National Assembly for Wales constituency)
* Caernarfon (UK Parliament constituency)
* Caernarfonshire, also spelt Caernarvonshire or Carnarvonshire, one of thirteen historic counties of Wales

===United States of America===
* Carnarvon, Iowa
* Caernarvon, Louisiana
* Caernarvon Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania
* Caernarvon Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania

==People==
* Earl of Carnarvon, a title created more than once
** Robert Dormer, 1st Earl of Carnarvon (1610–1643)
** Charles Dormer, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon (1632–1709)
** James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos, 1st Earl of Carnarvon (1673–1744)
** Henry Herbert, 1st Earl of Carnarvon (1741–1811)
** Henry Herbert, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon (1772–1833)
** Henry Herbert, 3rd Earl of Carnarvon (1800–1849)
** Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon (1831–1890)
** George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon (1866–1923), financed the excavations which discovered Tutankhamun&#x27;s tomb
** Henry Herbert, 6th Earl of Carnarvon (1898–1987)
** Henry Herbert, 7th Earl of Carnarvon (1924–2001)
** George Herbert, 8th Earl of Carnarvon (born 1956)

==Ships==
* , Royal Navy cruiser
* , Royal Navy frigate, launched 1945

==Other==
* Carnarvonshire Railway
* 1945 Caernarvon Boroughs by-election
* Caernarvon tank, a developmental UK heavy tank of 1952
* Carnarvonia (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q363903" start="0" end="9" title="Carnarvon" label="Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q363903" start="14" end="24" title="Carnarvon" label="Caernarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q363903" start="47" end="61" title="Carnarvon" label="[[Caernarfon]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491268" start="180" end="199" title="English orthography" label="English orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q56435730" start="221" end="226" title="Welsh orthography" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043900" start="393" end="408" title="Carnarvon Range" label="Carnarvon Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043895" start="411" end="428" title="Carnarvon Highway" label="Carnarvon Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043894" start="447" end="470" title="Carnarvon National Park" label="Carnarvon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043790" start="474" end="489" title="Carnarvon Gorge" label="Carnarvon Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453175" start="492" end="518" title="Carnarvon Park, Queensland" label="Carnarvon Park, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043793" start="565" end="590" title="Carnarvon Station Reserve" label="Carnarvon Station Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241000" start="610" end="647" title="County of Carnarvon (South Australia)" label="County of Carnarvon (South Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043795" start="730" end="762" title="Carnarvon (biogeographic region)" label="Carnarvon (biogeographic region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021880" start="778" end="806" title="Carnarvon, Western Australia" label="Carnarvon, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215518" start="825" end="854" title="Carnarvon Airport (Australia)" label="Carnarvon Airport (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043791" start="857" end="892" title="Carnarvon County, Western Australia" label="Carnarvon County, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076" start="895" end="930" title="Carnarvon Range (Western Australia)" label="Carnarvon Range (Western Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043794" start="933" end="959" title="Carnarvon Tracking Station" label="Carnarvon Tracking Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043795" start="962" end="988" title="Carnarvon xeric shrublands" label="Carnarvon xeric shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073081" start="1031" end="1058" title="OTC Earth Station Carnarvon" label="OTC Earth Station Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043909" start="1061" end="1079" title="Shire of Carnarvon" label="Shire of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016916" start="1119" end="1140" title="Caernarvon (Edmonton)" label="Caernarvon (Edmonton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898754" start="1209" end="1223" title="Upper Lonsdale" label="Upper Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000891" start="1225" end="1252" title="North Vancouver (district municipality)" label="District of North Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189835" start="1273" end="1300" title="Carnarvon Elementary School" label="Carnarvon Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189835" start="1356" end="1383" title="Vancouver School Board" label="Carnarvon Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1386" end="1395" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073424" start="1432" end="1451" title="Oak Bay, British Columbia" label="District of Oak Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="1453" end="1469" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="1508" end="1524" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="City of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073424" start="1529" end="1548" title="Oak Bay, British Columbia" label="District of Oak Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="1550" end="1566" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q641228" start="1618" end="1630" title="Minden Hills" label="Minden Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q22420705" start="1661" end="1676" title="Mount Carnarvon" label="Mount Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15022" start="1774" end="1787" title="Tsim Sha Tsui" label="Tsim Sha Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765132" start="1862" end="1871" title="Himatangi" label="Himatangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q625378" start="1894" end="1918" title="Carnarvon, Northern Cape" label="Carnarvon, Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043787" start="1948" end="1980" title="Carnarvon Airport (South Africa)" label="Carnarvon Airport (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="2013" end="2023" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402235" start="2062" end="2080" title="Caernarfon Airport" label="Caernarfon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="2084" end="2101" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016920" start="2153" end="2179" title="Caernarvon railway station" label="Caernarvon railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016915" start="2239" end="2265" title="Caernarfon railway station" label="Caernarfon railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825942" start="2307" end="2339" title="Carnarvon (Pant) railway station" label="Carnarvon (Pant) railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825941" start="2420" end="2453" title="Carnarvon (Morfa) railway station" label="Carnarvon (Morfa) railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825937" start="2529" end="2561" title="Carnarvon Castle railway station" label="Carnarvon Castle railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q950480" start="2647" end="2667" title="Caernarfon Town F.C." label="Caernarfon Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5016913" start="2709" end="2722" title="CR Caernarfon" label="CR Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879616" start="2795" end="2809" title="Caernarfon Bay" label="Caernarfon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016911" start="2879" end="2932" title="Caernarfon (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Caernarfon (National Assembly for Wales constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399026" start="2935" end="2974" title="Caernarfon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caernarfon (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q731669" start="2977" end="2992" title="Caernarfonshire" label="Caernarfonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600668" start="3117" end="3132" title="Carnarvon, Iowa" label="Carnarvon, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016917" start="3135" end="3156" title="Caernarvon, Louisiana" label="Caernarvon, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894777" start="3159" end="3206" title="Caernarvon Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania" label="Caernarvon Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016922" start="3209" end="3260" title="Caernarvon Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Caernarvon Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277228" start="3275" end="3292" title="Earl of Carnarvon" label="Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938254" start="3328" end="3364" title="Robert Dormer, 1st Earl of Carnarvon" label="Robert Dormer, 1st Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666382" start="3380" end="3417" title="Charles Dormer, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon" label="Charles Dormer, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333238" start="3433" end="3467" title="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos" label="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784941" start="3506" end="3542" title="Henry Herbert, 1st Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 1st Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784940" start="3558" end="3594" title="Henry Herbert, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 2nd Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606850" start="3610" end="3646" title="Henry Herbert, 3rd Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 3rd Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335845" start="3662" end="3698" title="Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158765" start="3714" end="3751" title="George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon" label="George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011858" start="3834" end="3870" title="Henry Herbert, 6th Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 6th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722880" start="3886" end="3922" title="Henry Herbert, 7th Earl of Carnarvon" label="Henry Herbert, 7th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540514" start="3938" end="3975" title="George Herbert, 8th Earl of Carnarvon" label="George Herbert, 8th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043801" start="4073" end="4095" title="Carnarvonshire Railway" label="Carnarvonshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016919" start="4098" end="4134" title="1945 Caernarvon Boroughs by-election" label="1945 Caernarvon Boroughs by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q672117" start="4137" end="4152" title="Caernarvon tank" label="Caernarvon tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q115020394" start="4194" end="4222" title="Carnarvonia (disambiguation)" label="Carnarvonia (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481925" wikidata="Q143636" url="?curid=481925" title="Anecdotal evidence">
<text>Anecdotal evidence (or anecdata) is evidence based on descriptions and reports of individual, personal experiences, or observations, collected in a non-systematic manner.

The term &quot;anecdotal&quot; encompasses a variety of forms of evidence. This word refers to personal experiences, self-reported claims, or eyewitness accounts of others, including those from fictional sources, making it a broad category that can lead to confusion due to its varied interpretations.

Anecdotal evidence can be true or false but is not usually subjected to the methodology of scholarly method, the scientific method, or the rules of legal, historical, academic, or intellectual rigor, meaning that there are little or no safeguards against fabrication or inaccuracy. However, the use of anecdotal reports in advertising or promotion of a product, service, or idea may be considered a testimonial, which is highly regulated in certain jurisdictions.

The persuasiveness of anecdotal evidence compared to that of statistical evidence has been a subject of debate; some studies have argued for the presence a generalized tendency to overvalue anecdotal evidence, whereas others have emphasized the types of argument as a prerequisite or rejected the conclusion altogether.

== Scientific context ==

In science, definitions of anecdotal evidence include:

* &quot;casual observations/indications rather than rigorous or scientific analysis&quot;
* &quot;information passed along by word-of-mouth but not documented scientifically&quot;
*&quot;evidence that comes from an individual experience. This may be the experience of a person with an illness or the experience of a practitioner based on one or more patients outside a formal research study&quot;
*&quot;the report of an experience by one or more persons that is not objectively documented or an experience or outcome that occurred outside of a controlled environment&quot;

Anecdotal evidence may be considered within the scope of scientific method as some anecdotal evidence can be both empirical and verifiable, e.g. in the use of case studies in medicine. Other anecdotal evidence, however, does not qualify as scientific evidence, because its nature prevents it from being investigated by the scientific method, for instance, in that of folklore or in the case of intentionally fictional anecdotes. Where only one or a few anecdotes are presented, there is a chance that they may be unreliable due to cherry-picked or otherwise non-representative samples of typical cases. Similarly, psychologists have found that due to cognitive bias people are more likely to remember notable or unusual examples rather than typical examples. Thus, even when accurate, anecdotal evidence is not necessarily representative of a typical experience. Accurate determination of whether an anecdote is typical requires statistical evidence. Misuse of anecdotal evidence in the form of argument from anecdote is an informal fallacy and is sometimes referred to as the &quot;person who&quot; fallacy (&quot;I know a person who...&quot;; &quot;I know of a case where...&quot; etc.) which places undue weight on experiences of close peers which may not be typical.

Anecdotal evidence can have varying degrees of formality. For instance, in medicine, published anecdotal evidence by a trained observer (a doctor) is called a case report, and is subjected to formal peer review. Although such evidence is not seen as conclusive, researchers may sometimes regard it as an invitation to more rigorous scientific study of the phenomenon in question. For instance, one study found that 35 of 47 anecdotal reports of drug side-effects were later sustained as &quot;clearly correct.&quot;

Anecdotal evidence is considered the least certain type of scientific information. Researchers may use anecdotal evidence for suggesting new hypotheses, but never as validating evidence.

If an anecdote illustrates a desired conclusion rather than a logical conclusion, it is considered a faulty or hasty generalization.

In any case where some factor affects the probability of an outcome, rather than uniquely determining it, selected individual cases prove nothing; e.g. &quot;my grandfather smoked two packs a day until he died at 90&quot; and &quot;my sister never smoked but died of lung cancer&quot;. Anecdotes often refer to the exception, rather than the rule: &quot;Anecdotes are useless precisely because they may point to idiosyncratic responses.&quot;

In medicine, anecdotal evidence may also be subject to placebo effects.

== Legal ==
In the legal sphere, anecdotal evidence, if it passes certain legal requirements and is admitted as testimony, is a common form of evidence used in a court of law. In many cases, anecdotal evidence is the only evidence presented at trial. Scientific evidence in a court of law is called physical evidence, but this is much rarer. Anecdotal evidence, with a few safeguards, represents the bulk of evidence in court.

The legal rigors applied to testimony for it to be considered evidence is that it must be given under oath, that the person is only testifying to their own words and actions, and that someone intentionally lying under oath is subject to perjury. However, these rigors do not make testimony in a court of law equal to scientific evidence as there are far less legal rigors. Testimony about another person&#x27;s experiences or words is called hearsay and is usually not admissible, though there are certain exceptions. However, any hearsay that is not objected to or thrown out by a judge is considered evidence for a jury. This means that trials contain quite a bit of anecdotal evidence, which is considered as relevant evidence by a jury. Eyewitness testimony (which is a form of anecdotal evidence) is considered the most compelling form of evidence by a jury.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143636" start="0" end="18" title="Anecdotal evidence" label="Anecdotal evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q143636" start="23" end="31" title="Anecdotal evidence" label="anecdata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="36" end="44" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="152" end="162" title="Systematic review" label="systematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079481" start="566" end="582" title="scholarly method" label="scholarly method"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="588" end="605" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="655" end="673" title="intellectual rigor" label="intellectual rigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="798" end="809" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795654" start="874" end="885" title="testimonial" label="testimonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="1975" end="1992" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q155207" start="2077" end="2089" title="case studies" label="case studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="2158" end="2177" title="scientific evidence" label="scientific evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="2285" end="2293" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="2449" end="2462" title="Cherry picking" label="cherry-picked"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="2476" end="2494" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="non-representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="2569" end="2583" title="cognitive bias" label="cognitive bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="2847" end="2858" title="statistical" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q106103212" start="2913" end="2935" title="argument from anecdote" label="argument from anecdote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312438" start="2942" end="2958" title="informal fallacy" label="informal fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782326" start="3349" end="3360" title="case report" label="case report"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="3389" end="3400" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="3848" end="3858" title="hypothesis" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890850" start="3996" end="4002" title="faulty generalization" label="faulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890850" start="4006" end="4026" title="hasty generalization" label="hasty generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="4528" end="4542" title="placebo effect" label="placebo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="4658" end="4667" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581386" start="4845" end="4862" title="physical evidence" label="physical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q381045" start="5070" end="5080" title="under oath" label="under oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="5211" end="5218" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="5254" end="5263" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="5291" end="5310" title="scientific evidence" label="scientific evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211464" start="5416" end="5423" title="hearsay" label="hearsay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481929" wikidata="Q7062279" url="?curid=481929" title="Not a typewriter">
<text>In computing, &quot;Not a [[typewriter]]&quot; or ENOTTY is an error code defined in the errno.h found on many Unix systems. This code is now used to indicate that an invalid ioctl (input/output control) number was specified in an ioctl system call.

== Details ==
This error originated in early UNIX. In Version 6 UNIX and earlier, I/O control was limited to serial-connected terminal devices, typically a teletype (abbreviated TTY), through the gtty and stty system calls. If an attempt was made to use these calls on a non-terminal device, the error generated was &quot;ENOTTY&quot;. When the stty/gtty system calls were replaced with the more general ioctl (I/O control) call, the &quot;ENOTTY&quot; error code was retained.

Early computers and Unix systems used electromechanical typewriters as terminals. The abbreviation TTY, which occurs widely in modern UNIX systems, stands for &quot;Teletypewriter.&quot; For example, the original meaning of the SIGHUP signal is that it &quot;Hangs UP&quot; the phone line on the teletypewriter which uses it. The generic term &quot;typewriter&quot; was probably used because &quot;Teletype&quot; was a registered trademark of AT&amp;T subsidiary Teletype Corporation and was too specific. The name &quot;Teletype&quot; was derived from the more general term, &quot;teletypewriter&quot;; using &quot;typewriter&quot; was a different contraction of the same original term.

POSIX sidesteps this issue by describing &quot;ENOTTY&quot; as meaning &quot;not a terminal&quot;.

Because ioctl is now supported on other devices than terminals, some systems display a different message such as &quot;Inappropriate ioctl for device&quot; instead.

== Occurrence ==
In some cases, this message will occur even when no ioctl has been issued by the program. This is due to the way the isatty() library routine works. The error code errno is only set when a system call fails. One of the first system calls made by the C standard I/O library is in an isatty() call used to determine if the program is being run interactively by a human (in which case isatty() will succeed and the library will write its output a line at a time so the user sees a regular flow of text) or as part of a pipeline (in which case it writes a block at a time for efficiency). If a library routine fails for some reason unrelated to a system call (for example, because a user name wasn&#x27;t found in the password file) and a naïve programmer blindly calls the normal error reporting routine perror() on every failure, the leftover ENOTTY will result in an utterly inappropriate &quot;Not a typewriter&quot; (or &quot;Not a teletype&quot;, or &quot;Inappropriate ioctl for device&quot;) being delivered to the user.

For many years the UNIX mail program sendmail contained this bug: when mail was delivered from another system, the mail program was being run non-interactively. If the destination address was local, but referred to a user name not found in the local password file, the message sent back to the originator of the email was the announcement that the person they were attempting to communicate with was not a typewriter.

==See also==

* lp0 on fire

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3" end="12" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062279" start="20" end="40" title="Not a typewriter" label="Not a [[typewriter]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062279" start="50" end="56" title="Not a typewriter" label="ENOTTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q306452" start="89" end="96" title="errno.h" label="errno.h"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="111" end="115" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q837975" start="175" end="180" title="ioctl" label="ioctl"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="237" end="248" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="296" end="300" title="Unix" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="377" end="385" title="Computer terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="407" end="415" title="Teleprinter" label="teletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q837975" start="655" end="660" title="ioctl" label="ioctl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="750" end="754" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="786" end="796" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="801" end="810" title="Computer terminal" label="terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="895" end="909" title="Teleprinter" label="Teletypewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048754" start="958" end="964" title="SIGHUP" label="SIGHUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="965" end="971" title="Signal (IPC)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="1008" end="1018" title="Landline" label="phone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="1173" end="1181" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696897" start="1193" end="1213" title="Teletype Corporation" label="Teletype Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837975" start="1652" end="1657" title="ioctl" label="ioctl"/>
<link wikidata="Q837975" start="1754" end="1759" title="ioctl" label="ioctl"/>
<link wikidata="Q859477" start="2752" end="2764" title="Mail transfer agent" label="mail program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342790" start="2765" end="2773" title="sendmail" label="sendmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694723" start="3163" end="3174" title="lp0 on fire" label="lp0 on fire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481931" wikidata="Q5115379" url="?curid=481931" title="Chuck Bueche">
<text>Chuck Bueche (also known as Chuckles) is a video game programmer best known for co-founding Origin Systems and his involvement with the &quot;Ultima&quot; video game series.

Bueche was a high school friend and university roommate of Richard Garriott in Austin, Texas. After being introduced to computers by Garriott in 1981, Bueche founded his own company, Craniac Entertainment. Shortly thereafter, three of Bueche&#x27;s games, &quot;Lunar Leepers&quot;, &quot;Jawbreaker II&quot;, and &quot;Laf Pak&quot;, were published by Sierra On-Line.

In 1983, Bueche, along with Richard Garriott, Robert Garriott, and Owen Garriott, founded the software company Origin Systems. Origin became the publisher of Richard&#x27;s &quot;Ultima&quot; series; Bueche ported many of the original Apple II games to the Commodore 64 and Atari 8-bit computers. He designed and programmed other Origin games, including &quot;Autoduel&quot; and &quot;2400 A.D.&quot;

The last original game Chuck developed at Origin was &quot;2500 A.D.&quot;, but was halted in production in 1988 due to poor sales of &quot;2400 A.D.&quot;

Bueche left Origin in 1988 to obtain a bachelor&#x27;s degree in electrical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin (1990). He later held executive positions at Velocity Incorporated, Xatrix Entertainment, and Dell Computer.

In the &quot;Ultima&quot; series, Bueche is represented by Lord British&#x27;s court jester, also named Chuckles. In later games in the series, Chuckles taunts the main character, the Avatar, with silly riddles and games.

==References==
==External links==
*Craniac Entertainment (Bueche&#x27;s company)
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5115379" start="0" end="12" title="Chuck Bueche" label="Chuck Bueche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115379" start="28" end="36" title="Chuck Bueche" label="Chuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q863368" start="43" end="64" title="video game programmer" label="video game programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193678" start="92" end="106" title="Origin Systems" label="Origin Systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142" end="148" title="Ultima (series)#Games" label="Ultima"/>
<link wikidata="Q319269" start="234" end="250" title="Richard Garriott" label="Richard Garriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="254" end="267" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043259" start="437" end="450" title="Lunar Leepers" label="Lunar Leepers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="464" end="477" title="Jawbreaker II" label="Jawbreaker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707273" start="495" end="502" title="Laf Pak" label="Laf Pak"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="528" end="542" title="Sierra On-Line" label="Sierra On-Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344680" start="591" end="606" title="Robert Garriott" label="Robert Garriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q507046" start="612" end="625" title="Owen Garriott" label="Owen Garriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="752" end="758" title="porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="780" end="788" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="802" end="814" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="819" end="840" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034619" start="905" end="913" title="Autoduel" label="Autoduel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030289" start="930" end="939" title="2400 A.D." label="2400 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1143" end="1165" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="1169" end="1191" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1201" end="1230" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1276" end="1297" title="Velocity Incorporated" label="Velocity Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q947583" start="1299" end="1319" title="Xatrix Entertainment" label="Xatrix Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="1325" end="1338" title="Dell" label="Dell Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402460" start="1400" end="1412" title="Lord British" label="Lord British"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="1426" end="1432" title="jester" label="jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601360" start="1525" end="1531" title="Avatar (Ultima)" label="Avatar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481934" wikidata="Q5021015" url="?curid=481934" title="California State Controller">
<text>The state controller of California is a constitutional office in the executive branch of the government of the U.S. state of California. Thirty-three individuals have held the office of state controller since statehood. The incumbent is Malia Cohen, a Democrat. The state controller&#x27;s main office is located at 300 Capitol Mall in Sacramento.

==Election and term of office==
The state controller assumes office by way of election. The term of office is four years, renewable once. Elections for state controller are held on a four-year basis concurrently with elections for the offices of governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of state, state treasurer, insurance commissioner, and superintendent of public instruction.

==Powers and duties==
As California&#x27;s chief fiscal officer, the state controller has broad superintending authority over the accounting and disbursement of state and local government finances. As such, the state controller:
* Acts as the state&#x27;s accountant. This entails maintaining the statewide accounting system, issuing reports on the financial condition of the state, approving claims against the state, administering payroll for state employees, ordering deposits into the state treasury, and drawing checks and approving electronic fund transfers.
* Administers California&#x27;s unclaimed property laws. As such, the state controller audits holders of unclaimed property, safeguards unclaimed property reported to the office, and works to return unclaimed property to its rightful owners.
* Audits public funds spent by state agencies. The state controller is the internal auditor of California state government, examining the internal controls of state agencies, the state lottery, and oil and gas lease royalties to assure operational effectiveness and efficiency, reliable financial reporting, and legal compliance. A separate state auditor serves as the external auditor for the whole of state government and reports exclusively to the state legislature on state agency financial management and performance.
* Supervises local government finances. As part of this function, the state controller has broad discretion to audit state funds spent by local governments and prescribes uniform accounting, budgeting, and financial reporting systems applicable to nearly 5,000 counties, cities, towns, school districts, local housing authorities, rural development authorities, and all other political subdivisions of the state. Likewise, the state controller reviews the annual financial and single audits performed by external auditors on behalf of California&#x27;s local governments for conformity with the law and government auditing standards. Separately, the state controller collects, apportions, and distributes property taxes and other state aids among the many counties, cities, towns, and school districts.

Aside from the office&#x27;s functional responsibilities, the state controller serves on over 70 boards and commissions, including the California State Lands Commission, California State Teachers’ Retirement System, California Public Employees’ Retirement System, California Board of Equalization, California Franchise Tax Board, California Pollution Control Financing Authority, the California Debt Limit Allocation Commission, California Alternative Energy Source Financing Authority, the California Education Facilities Authority, and the California Victim Compensation Board, among others.

==Staff==
The Office has a staff of Deputy State Controllers that help the State Controller fulfill her elected duties, including sitting on the Board of Equalization and other boards for the State Controller in absentia. Noted former Deputy State Controllers include Barrett McInerney, James Burton, and Laurette Healey.

==List of California state controllers==

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5021015" start="4" end="34" title="California State Controller" label="state controller of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="69" end="85" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="93" end="103" title="Government of California" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="111" end="121" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="125" end="135" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562240" start="237" end="248" title="Malia Cohen" label="Malia Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020399" start="252" end="260" title="California Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="336" end="346" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="595" end="603" title="Governor of California" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238284" start="605" end="624" title="Lieutenant Governor of California" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406489" start="626" end="642" title="Attorney General of California" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024182" start="644" end="662" title="Secretary of State of California" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021097" start="664" end="679" title="California State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191175" start="681" end="703" title="California Insurance Commissioner" label="insurance commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021095" start="709" end="745" title="California Superintendent of Public Instruction" label="superintendent of public instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="791" end="811" title="chief financial officer" label="chief fiscal officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021097" start="1237" end="1251" title="California State Treasurer" label="state treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020292" start="1896" end="1909" title="California State Auditor" label="state auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="2006" end="2023" title="California State Legislature" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021030" start="3017" end="3050" title="California State Lands Commission" label="California State Lands Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681677" start="3052" end="3096" title="CalSTRS" label="California State Teachers’ Retirement System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933412" start="3098" end="3144" title="CalPERS" label="California Public Employees’ Retirement System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10900732" start="3146" end="3178" title="California Board of Equalization" label="California Board of Equalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020495" start="3180" end="3210" title="California Franchise Tax Board" label="California Franchise Tax Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021166" start="3424" end="3460" title="California Victim Compensation Board" label="California Victim Compensation Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q10900732" start="3622" end="3643" title="California Board of Equalization" label="Board of Equalization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3745" end="3762" title="Barrett McInerney" label="Barrett McInerney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3764" end="3776" title="California Strategies" label="James Burton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3782" end="3797" title="Laurette Healey" label="Laurette Healey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481941" wikidata="Q105937" url="?curid=481941" title="Wendell Meredith Stanley">
<text>Wendell Meredith Stanley (August 16, 1904June 15, 1971) was an American biochemist, virologist and Nobel laureate.

==Biography==
Stanley was born in Ridgeville, Indiana, and earned a BSc in chemistry at Earlham College in Richmond, Indiana. He then studied at the University of Illinois, gaining an MS in science in 1927 followed by a PhD in chemistry two years later. His later accomplishments include writing the book &quot;Chemistry: A Beautiful Thing&quot; and being a Pulitzer Prize nominee.

===Research===
Although a member of National Research Council, he moved to Munich for temporarily academic work with Heinrich Wieland before he returned to the United States in 1931. On return he was approved as an assistant at The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research. He remained with the Institute until 1948, becoming an Associate Member in 1937, and a Member in 1940. In 1948, he became Professor of Biochemistry at the University of California, Berkeley and built the Virus Laboratory and a free-standing Department of Biochemistry building, which is now called Stanley Hall.

Stanley&#x27;s work contributed to on lepracidal compounds, diphenyl stereochemistry and the chemistry of the sterols. His research on the virus causing the mosaic disease in tobacco plants led to the isolation of a nucleoprotein which displayed tobacco mosaic virus activity.

Stanley was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1940 and the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1941. He was awarded a ¼ share in the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1946. In 1949, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. His other notable awards included the Rosenburger Medal, Alder Prize, Scott Award, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement and the AMA Scientific Achievement Award. He was also awarded honorary degrees by many universities both American and foreign, including Harvard, Yale, Princeton and the University of Paris. Most of the conclusions Stanley had presented in his Nobel-winning research were soon shown to be incorrect (in particular, that the crystals of mosaic virus he had isolated were pure protein, and assembled by autocatalysis).

===Personal life===
Stanley married Marian Staples (1905–1984) in 1929 and had three daughters (Marjorie, Dorothy and Janet) and a son (Wendell Meredith Junior). Stanley Hall at UC Berkeley (now Stanley Biosciences and Bioengineering Facility) and Stanley Hall at Earlham College are named in his honor. His daughter, Marjorie, married Robert Albo, physician to the Golden State Warriors basketball team as well as the Oakland Raiders football team. He died in Salamanca, Spain on June 15, 1971.

==References==
==External links==

* including the Nobel Lecture on December 12, 1946 &quot;The Isolation and Properties of Crystalline Tobacco Mosaic Virus&quot;
*Wendell Meredith Stanley and the birth of biochemistry at UC Berkeley
*Guide to the Wendell M. Stanley Papers at The Bancroft Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105937" start="0" end="24" title="Wendell Meredith Stanley" label="Wendell Meredith Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="72" end="82" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="84" end="94" title="virology" label="virologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="99" end="113" title="Nobel laureate" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805012" start="150" end="169" title="Ridgeville, Indiana" label="Ridgeville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326502" start="204" end="219" title="Earlham College" label="Earlham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="223" end="240" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="265" end="287" title="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="336" end="339" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="474" end="488" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="535" end="560" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="574" end="580" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q76610" start="616" end="632" title="Heinrich Wieland" label="Heinrich Wieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="659" end="672" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q270272" start="727" end="773" title="Rockefeller University" label="The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="930" end="964" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1126" end="1146" title="lepracidal compounds" label="lepracidal compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q186011" start="1157" end="1172" title="stereochemistry" label="stereochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="1227" end="1232" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332874" start="1245" end="1259" title="mosaic disease" label="mosaic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1263" end="1270" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q419245" start="1304" end="1317" title="nucleoprotein" label="nucleoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q332874" start="1334" end="1354" title="tobacco mosaic virus" label="tobacco mosaic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1393" end="1423" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1454" end="1482" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="1524" end="1548" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1590" end="1627" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="1742" end="1773" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590608" start="1782" end="1814" title="AMA Scientific Achievement Award" label="AMA Scientific Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="1836" end="1851" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1911" end="1918" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1920" end="1924" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1926" end="1935" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1944" end="1963" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="2098" end="2106" title="crystallization" label="crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212305" start="2130" end="2138" title="isolation (microbiology)" label="isolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q786897" start="2175" end="2188" title="autocatalysis" label="autocatalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45760326" start="2528" end="2539" title="Robert Albo" label="Robert Albo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="2558" end="2579" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="2611" end="2626" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="2653" end="2662" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="2966" end="2986" title="The Bancroft Library" label="The Bancroft Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481946" wikidata="Q551729" url="?curid=481946" title="Clay-colored sparrow">
<text>The clay-colored sparrow or clay-coloured sparrow (Spizella pallida) is a small New World sparrow of North America.

Adults have light brown upperparts and pale underparts, with darker streaks on the back. They have a pale crown stripe on a dark brown crown, a white line over the eyes, a dark line through the eyes, a light brown cheek patch and brown wings with wing bars. The short bill is pale with a dark tip and the back of the neck is grey; they have a long tail. Non-breeding adults and immature resemble chipping sparrows and Brewer&#x27;s sparrows; they often form flocks with these birds outside the nesting season.

Their breeding habitat is shrubby open areas and jack pine woods across central Canada and central northern United States east to the Great Lakes, and is expanding further eastward. The nest is an open cup on the ground or low in a shrub.

These birds migrate in flocks to southern Texas and Mexico.

They forage on the ground, mainly eating seeds and insects. Outside the nesting season, they often feed in small flocks. While nesting, these birds may feed far from the nest; feeding areas are not defended.

The male sings from an open perch to indicate his ownership of the nesting territory. The song is a &quot;Bzzzz bzzzz za za&quot;.

This bird&#x27;s nests are made of grasses and lined with fine materials or hair. Three to five splotched blue-green eggs are laid and incubated for 11 days. They are often parasitized by the brown-headed cowbird; the nest may be abandoned when this happens.
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Clay-colored sparrow - &quot;Spizella pallida&quot; - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q551729" start="4" end="24" title="Clay-colored sparrow" label="clay-colored sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q551729" start="28" end="49" title="Clay-colored sparrow" label="clay-coloured sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425706" start="80" end="97" title="New World sparrow" label="New World sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="101" end="114" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q645203" start="513" end="529" title="chipping sparrow" label="chipping sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q659632" start="535" end="556" title="Brewer&amp;#x27;s sparrow" label="Brewer&amp;#x27;s sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q806838" start="677" end="686" title="jack pine" label="jack pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="708" end="714" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="762" end="773" title="Great Lakes (North America)" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="830" end="833" title="cup nest" label="cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="880" end="887" title="bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="910" end="915" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="920" end="926" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="1443" end="1454" title="parasite" label="parasitized"/>
<link wikidata="Q901568" start="1462" end="1482" title="brown-headed cowbird" label="brown-headed cowbird"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481957" wikidata="Q5338" url="?curid=481957" title="Orenburg Oblast">
<text>Orenburg Oblast is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast), mainly located in Eastern Europe. Its administrative center is the city of Orenburg. From 1938 to 1957, it bore the name Chkalov Oblast in honor of Valery Chkalov. As of the 2021 Census, the oblast had a population of 1,862,767, down from 2,033,072 in the 2010 Census.
==Geography==
Orenburg Oblast&#x27;s internal borders are with the republics of Bashkortostan and Tatarstan to the north, Chelyabinsk Oblast to the north-east, and with Samara and Saratov oblasts to the west. Orenburg Oblast also shares an international border with Kazakhstan to the east and south. The oblast is situated on the boundary between Europe and Asia. The majority of its territory lies west of the continental divide in European Russia and smaller sections in the east situated on the Asian side of the divide. The most important river of the oblast is the Ural and the largest lake Shalkar-Yega-Kara. Orenburg is traversed by the northeasterly line of equal latitude and longitude. The highest point of the oblast is the -high Nakas.

==History==
In the first half of the 18th century, the Russian Empire constructed the , a series of 46 forts, including Orenburg, to prevent Kazakh and Dzungar nomads from raiding Russian territory. 

Orenburg played a major role in Pugachev&#x27;s Rebellion (1773–1774), the largest peasant revolt in Russian history. 

During the Russian Civil War, the region was heavily affected by the Russian famine of 1921–1922.

During World War II in 1941, the command and staff of the newly formed Polish Anders&#x27; Army was based in Buzuluk, and in 1942, the First Czechoslovak Independent Field Battalion was based there. Both formations afterwards fought against Nazi Germany.

On 26 May 2024, a Ukrainian drone attacked the Voronezh M long-range radar station near Orsk.

==Administrative divisions==
==Demographics==

Population: 

Ethnic composition (2021)
Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 15,366 (8.4 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 26,368 (14.5 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024):
1.47 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): 
Total — 68.21 years (male — 63.91, female — 72.48)

===Settlements===

===Religion===
As of a 2012 survey, 40.2% of the population of Orenburg Oblast adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 3% declare themselves to be generic nondenominational Christians (excluding the Protestant definition), 2% are Orthodox Christian believers who do not belong to any church or belong to non-Russian Orthodox churches. Muslims constitute 13% of the population. 3% of the population are followers of the Slavic native faith (Rodnovery), 6.8% are followers of other religions or did not give an answer to the survey. In addition, 20% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot; and 12% to be atheist.
==Economy==
Orenburg Oblast is one of the major agricultural areas of Russia. Its climate is favorable to farming with a humid spring, dry summer and many sunny days, which make perfect conditions for cultivating hard wheat and rye, sunflowers, potatoes, peas, beans, corn, and gourds.

The range of the oblast&#x27;s export commodities includes oil and oil products, gas and gas produced products, rolled ferrous and non-ferrous metals, nickel, asbestos, chromium compounds, rough copper, electric engines, and radiators, which are used to make products from the machine-building industry.

==See also==

*Ashchebutak (air base)
*List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Orenburg Oblast
*Black Dolphin Prison

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5338" start="0" end="15" title="Orenburg Oblast" label="Orenburg Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="21" end="36" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="40" end="46" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="51" end="57" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="78" end="92" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="98" end="119" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="127" end="131" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337" start="135" end="143" title="Orenburg" label="Orenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338" start="181" end="195" title="Orenburg Oblast" label="Chkalov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q498098" start="208" end="222" title="Valery Chkalov" label="Valery Chkalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="234" end="245" title="2021 Russian census" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="316" end="327" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="409" end="422" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="427" end="436" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="451" end="469" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="498" end="504" title="Samara Oblast" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334" start="509" end="516" title="Saratov Oblast" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="595" end="605" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14007781" start="659" end="691" title="boundary between Europe and Asia" label="boundary between Europe and Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80240" start="899" end="903" title="Ural River" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519724" start="925" end="942" title="Shalkar-Yega-Kara" label="Shalkar-Yega-Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q31549177" start="1070" end="1075" title="Nakas (mountain)" label="Nakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433867" start="1219" end="1225" title="Kazakh Khanate" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="1230" end="1237" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154100" start="1311" end="1336" title="Pugachev&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Pugachev&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="1410" end="1427" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172846" start="1468" end="1495" title="Russian famine of 1921–1922" label="Russian famine of 1921–1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1505" end="1517" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000653" start="1576" end="1593" title="Anders&amp;#x27; Army" label="Anders&amp;#x27; Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q42234" start="1607" end="1614" title="Buzuluk, Orenburg Oblast" label="Buzuluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590639" start="1633" end="1679" title="First Czechoslovak Independent Field Battalion" label="First Czechoslovak Independent Field Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1739" end="1751" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="1772" end="1781" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260809" start="1801" end="1811" title="Voronezh radar" label="Voronezh M"/>
<link wikidata="Q47166" start="1842" end="1846" title="Orsk" label="Orsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="2273" end="2296" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="2334" end="2362" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="nondenominational Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="2495" end="2512" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2514" end="2520" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="2598" end="2617" title="Slavic native faith" label="Slavic native faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493578" start="2766" end="2793" title="spiritual but not religious" label="spiritual but not religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="2814" end="2821" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="3041" end="3046" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="3051" end="3054" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="3056" end="3065" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="3068" end="3074" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="3078" end="3081" title="pea" label="pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="3084" end="3089" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3091" end="3095" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="3101" end="3106" title="gourd" label="gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="3261" end="3267" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="3269" end="3277" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="3279" end="3287" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903213" start="3430" end="3452" title="Ashchebutak (air base)" label="Ashchebutak (air base)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566570" start="3454" end="3517" title="List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Orenburg Oblast" label="List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Orenburg Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4518872" start="3519" end="3539" title="Black Dolphin Prison" label="Black Dolphin Prison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481959" wikidata="Q5545" url="?curid=481959" title="Penza Oblast">
<text>Penza Oblast () is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast). Its administrative center is the city of Penza. As of the 2010 Census, its population was 1,266,348. It was formed in 1939 on the territory detached from neighboring Tambov Oblast.

==Geography==
The highest point of Penza Oblast is an unnamed hill of the Khvalynsk Mountains reaching above sea level located at the southeastern end, near Neverkino. 
===Main rivers===
Penza Oblast has over 3000 rivers; the overall length is 15,458 km. The biggest rivers are:
*Sura;
*Moksha;
*Khopyor.
*Penza River gave its name to the city of Penza.

===Fauna===
There are 316 species of vertebrates within the region, including:
*about 10 species of amphibians;
*about 200 species of birds;
*about 8 species of reptiles;
*about 68 species of mammals (fox, rabbit, ferret, badger, squirrel).

Seven existing species of mammals were already acclimatized on land: the American mink, muskrat, raccoon dog, wild boar, Siberian roe deer, red deer and Sika deer. In parallel, work has been carried out to reintroduce the Forest-steppe marmot, the Eurasian beaver and the Russian desman (a species of mole that resembles a muskrat).

In the waters of Penza Oblast, there are about 50 species of fish. The largest body of water – the Sursko reservoir – is home to around 30 species. Commercial species include bream, silver bream, pikeperch, ide, and catfish. In the rivers and smalls pond dwell roach, perch, carp, and pike. The most valuable fish to be found in the natural waters is the sterlet.

===Climate===
==History==
The regional center of Penza was built in 1663 as a Russian fortress on the border of the Wild Fields, although evidence of the presence of more ancient settlements has been found in the modern city.

Penza Province was established within Kazan Governorate in 1718. It became a separate Penza Governorate on September 15, 1780, which existed until March 5, 1797, when it was dissolved and merged into Saratov Governorate. Penza Governorate was re-established on September 9, 1801 and existed until 1928. Between 1928 and 1937, the territory of the former governorate underwent a number of administrative transformations, ending up as a part of Tambov Oblast in 1937. On February 4, 1939, modern Penza Oblast was established by splitting it out of Tambov Oblast. In March 1939, the Penza Oblast Committee of the CPSU was formed, the first secretary of the committee being Alexander Kabanov.

==Administrative divisions==
==Economy==
Penza Oblast is part of the Volga economic region. The oblast is one of Russia&#x27;s leading producers of wheat, rye, oats, millet, buckwheat, cereal and forage crops, vegetables, potatoes, mustard, and meat.

==Politics==

During the Soviet period, the high authority in the oblast was shared among three persons: The first secretary of the Penza CPSU Committee (who in reality had the biggest authority), the chairman of the oblast Soviet (legislative power), and the Chairman of the oblast Executive Committee (executive power). Since 1991, CPSU lost all the power, and the head of the Oblast administration, and eventually the governor was appointed/elected alongside elected regional parliament.

The Charter of Penza Oblast is the fundamental law of the region. The Legislative Assembly of Penza Oblast is the province&#x27;s standing legislative (representative) body. The Legislative Assembly exercises its authority by passing laws, resolutions, and other legal acts and by supervising the implementation and observance of the laws and other legal acts passed by it. The highest executive body is the Oblast Government, which includes territorial executive bodies such as district administrations, committees, and commissions that facilitate development and run the day to day matters of the province. The Oblast administration supports the activities of the Governor who is the highest official and acts as guarantor of the observance of the oblast Charter in accordance with the Constitution of Russia.

==Demographics==
Population: 

Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 7,736 (6.3 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 19,234 (15.6 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024):
1.15 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): 
Total — 69.97 years (male — 65.17, female — 74.75)

Ethnic composition (2010):
*Russians: 86.8%
*Tatars: 6.4%
*Mordvins: 4.1%
*Ukrainians: 0.7%
*Chuvash: 0.4%
*Armenians: 0.3%
*Others ethnicities: 1.3%
*Additionally, 43,283 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.
*Births: 7,962 (Jan-July 2008)
*Deaths: 13,608 (Jan-July 2008)

===Religion===
According to a 2012 survey, 62.9% of the population of Penza Oblast adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 2% are unaffiliated generic Christians, 1% are Orthodox Christian believers without belonging to churches or members of non-Russian Orthodox churches, and 7% are Muslims. In addition, 15% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot;, 9% is atheist, and 3.1% follows other religions or did not give an answer to the question.


==Culture and recreation==
===Tourism===
*Troitse-Scanov Convent
*State Lermontov Museum and Reserve of Tarkhany

==Notable people==
* Vasily Klyuchevsky (1841–1911) — a leading Russian historian of the late imperial period.
* Aristarkh Lentulov (1882–1943) – a Russian avant-garde artist of Cubist orientation who also worked on set designs for the theatre.
* Yevgeny Rodionov (1977–1996) – a Russian soldier who was murdered in Chechen captivity for his refusal to convert to Islam and defect to the enemy side.
* Victor Skumin (1948–) – a Russian scientist first describes &quot;cardioprosthetic psychopathological syndrome&quot;, later known as Skumin syndrome, a form of anxiety suffered by recipients of artificial heart valves.
*Natalya Starovoyt, actress of Penza Oblast Drama Theatre

==See also==
*List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Penza Oblast

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
*

==External links==
*Official website of Penza Oblast Government
*Official website of Penza Oblast 
*&quot;PenzaNews&quot; news agency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5545" start="0" end="12" title="Penza Oblast" label="Penza Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="21" end="36" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="51" end="57" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="64" end="85" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="93" end="97" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="101" end="106" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="118" end="129" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550" start="226" end="239" title="Tambov Oblast" label="Tambov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496814" start="316" end="335" title="Khvalynsk Mountains" label="Khvalynsk Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323402" start="399" end="408" title="Neverkino" label="Neverkino"/>
<link wikidata="Q209891" start="522" end="526" title="Sura River" label="Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q595213" start="529" end="535" title="Moksha River" label="Moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q647052" start="538" end="545" title="Khopyor River" label="Khopyor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="548" end="559" title=":ru:Пенза (река)" label="Penza River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="589" end="594" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="798" end="801" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="803" end="809" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="811" end="817" title="ferret" label="ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="819" end="825" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9482" start="827" end="835" title="squirrel" label="squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="912" end="925" title="American mink" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="927" end="934" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900104" start="936" end="947" title="raccoon dog" label="raccoon dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="949" end="958" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q501491" start="960" end="977" title="Siberian roe deer" label="Siberian roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="979" end="987" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="992" end="1001" title="Sika deer" label="Sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="1075" end="1081" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="1087" end="1102" title="Eurasian beaver" label="Eurasian beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q381760" start="1111" end="1125" title="Russian desman" label="Russian desman"/>
<link wikidata="Q144534" start="1348" end="1353" title="Common bream" label="bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q183407" start="1355" end="1367" title="Blicca bjoerkna" label="silver bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q847041" start="1369" end="1378" title="Volga pikeperch" label="pikeperch"/>
<link wikidata="Q144497" start="1380" end="1383" title="Ide (fish)" label="ide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159323" start="1389" end="1396" title="Wels catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q182976" start="1434" end="1439" title="Common roach" label="roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q166812" start="1441" end="1446" title="European perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="1448" end="1452" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="1458" end="1462" title="Northern pike" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q211316" start="1528" end="1535" title="sterlet" label="sterlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="1587" end="1592" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q672600" start="1654" end="1665" title="Wild Fields" label="Wild Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="1765" end="1779" title="Penza Province" label="Penza Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425322" start="1803" end="1820" title="Kazan Governorate" label="Kazan Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424567" start="1851" end="1868" title="Penza Governorate" label="Penza Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540303" start="1965" end="1984" title="Saratov Governorate" label="Saratov Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550" start="2208" end="2221" title="Tambov Oblast" label="Tambov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="2375" end="2379" title="CPSU" label="CPSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q918026" start="2524" end="2545" title="Volga economic region" label="Volga economic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="2603" end="2608" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="2610" end="2613" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="2615" end="2619" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="2621" end="2627" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="2629" end="2638" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="2640" end="2646" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377214" start="2651" end="2657" title="forage" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2665" end="2674" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="2677" end="2683" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="2687" end="2694" title="Mustard plant" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="2700" end="2704" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2732" end="2738" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="3177" end="3196" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="3987" end="4009" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4294" end="4302" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="4311" end="4317" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q33543" start="4325" end="4333" title="Mordvins" label="Mordvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="4341" end="4351" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q253410" start="4359" end="4366" title="Chuvash people" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="4374" end="4383" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="4798" end="4821" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="4830" end="4842" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="4851" end="4861" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4955" end="4970" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4985" end="4991" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="5091" end="5098" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463419" start="5220" end="5242" title="Troitse-Scanov Convent" label="Troitse-Scanov Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027307" start="5244" end="5290" title="Tarkhany" label="State Lermontov Museum and Reserve of Tarkhany"/>
<link wikidata="Q379584" start="5313" end="5331" title="Vasily Klyuchevsky" label="Vasily Klyuchevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="5356" end="5363" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q664360" start="5405" end="5423" title="Aristarkh Lentulov" label="Aristarkh Lentulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401605" start="5440" end="5459" title="Russian avant-garde" label="Russian avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="5470" end="5476" title="Cubism" label="Cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q977234" start="5539" end="5555" title="Yevgeny Rodionov" label="Yevgeny Rodionov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="5608" end="5615" title="Chechnya" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5656" end="5661" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557581" start="5694" end="5707" title="Victor Skumin" label="Victor Skumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q624758" start="5777" end="5795" title="psychopathology" label="psychopathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="5796" end="5804" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5827" end="5842" title=":fr: Syndrome de Skumin" label="Skumin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="5854" end="5861" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q282454" start="5888" end="5910" title="artificial heart valve" label="artificial heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440155" start="5914" end="5931" title="Natalya Starovoyt" label="Natalya Starovoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566571" start="5986" end="6046" title="List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Penza Oblast" label="List of Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly of Penza Oblast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481960" wikidata="Q2464837" url="?curid=481960" title="Anamorphosée">
<text>Anamorphosée is the fourth studio album by Mylène Farmer, released on 17 October 1995. Led by the number-one single &quot;XXL&quot;, the album was something of a departure from her previous work. Although it received mixed reviews from critics, the album was very successful, peaking at no.1 and staying on the French album chart for almost two years.

== Background and writing ==
The movie &quot;Giorgino&quot;, produced by Laurent Boutonnat and in which Mylène Farmer starred, was both a critical and financial failure. Released on 5 October 1994, it was seen by barely 25,000 spectators in the first week and was the first setback in Farmer&#x27;s career. As a result, the musical duo separated on bad terms, Boutonnat making Farmer responsible for this failure. The singer decided to go to Los Angeles, California, where she fell into anonymity and changed hairstyle (she became blond with long hair). There she composed a new album, drawing inspiration from a Sogyal Rinpoche&#x27;s book, &quot;Le Livre tibétain de la Vie et de la Mort&quot;. The singer&#x27;s perception of life changed through her travels, and she confided in an interview that she was no longer afraid of death; so, she was more optimistic. Finally, she called Boutonnat who joined her in Los Angeles for the recording.

Jeff Dahlgren, who performed the role of Giorgio Volli in &quot;Giorgino&quot;, had a great influence in the early composition of this album and was part of the musical team involved in preparing it. Boutonnat later came and the three finished the project. The album was recorded in the A&amp;M studios and Record One in Los Angeles, and Boutonnat, who oversaw the production, chose the best American musicians at the time. Bertrand Châtenet, who had previously worked with Vanessa Paradis, was selected to mix the album.

== Lyrics and music ==
The album&#x27;s title, &quot;Anamorphosée&quot; is a neologism in French-language (the noun exists, but not the past participle of the anamorphoser (denominative verb from anamorphose + -er infinitive suffix)). The Hachette dictionary defines &quot;anamorphose&quot; as an &quot;image of an object, distorted by certain optical devices (cylindrical mirrors, for example).&quot; That word thus refers to the new music style of the singer.

This album represents a departure from her previous work, in that the music is much more rock oriented. Five of the twelve tracks are ballads with melancholy text punctuated by American R&amp;B-inspired arrangements. The lyrics are easier to understand and less cryptic than her previous albums. Although some themes dear to the artist are addressed in &quot;Anamorphosée&quot;, sadness and pain are much less present in this album which is more about the spirituality (Buddhism).

For the first time, Farmer wrote a song completely by herself, &quot;Tomber 7 fois...&quot;

== Critical reception ==

The album was sometimes well received in media that have mainly noted the change in musical style. For example: &quot;Farmer has moved away from the images that she stuck to the skin just to keep a sensuality remained intact&quot; (&quot;Dernières Nouvelles d&#x27;Alsace&quot;). The singer &quot;has abandoned her eternal pessimism: the Mylène of 2000 is arrived, turned towards humanity with a big H and spirituality, via Lao Tzeu&quot; (&quot;Double Face&quot;). &quot;It is a shift announced by the new disc&quot; (&quot;La Dernière Heure&quot;). With this album, &quot;Farmer excels but against the current&quot;. &quot;The tonic music have a hope in its infancy, words less drawn by the taste of nothing&quot; (&quot;Télérama&quot;). &quot;&quot;Anamorphosée&quot; has filled all hopes&quot; (&quot;Vamp Canada&quot;). &quot;The production is, as always, impeccable&quot; (&quot;Platine&quot;).

However, some musical critics were very virulent to this album. For example, &quot;Le Monde&quot; stated that &quot;the diversion of melodies from the band Nirvana makes hesitate between indignation and open laughs&quot;, while &quot;L&#x27;Evènement du jeudi&quot; concluded its article saying it should better &quot;to avoid&quot; this album.

A Victoire de la Musique was awarded to this album, which was regarded as the French album the most exported in 1996.

== Commercial performance ==
The album went straight to #2 on French Album Chart on 15 October 1995, behind Céline Dion&#x27;s &quot;D&#x27;eux&quot;. It stayed at this place on the following chart edition, before dropping. However, it re-reached the #2 in its 13th week and for four other non-consecutive weeks. Surprisingly, the album became number one for two weeks on 18 and 25 January 1997, about one year and a half after its release. It remained on the Top ten for 34 weeks and on the chart (Top 50) for a total of 77 weeks. The album was also charted for four weeks on the Top Mid&#x27;Price, from 20 March to 10 April 2005, because it was re-released in a digipack version by Polydor. The album was certified Double platinum disc by the SNEP in 1996, then diamond in 2009.

In Belgium Wallonia, the album was charted for 71 weeks, from 4 November 1995 to 12 April 1997. It peaked at number two in its three first weeks, but was unable to reach number one (the chart was topped then by Céline Dion&#x27;s &quot;D&#x27;eux&quot;); it appeared for 25 weeks in the top ten.

In Switzerland, the album entered the chart at #25, its highest position, on 12 November 1995, before dropping. It left the chart after its sixth week.

== Track listing ==
All tracks written by Mylène Farmer and produced by Laurent Boutonnat.

== Personnel ==

* Fred Attal – programming
* Laurent Boutonnat – arranger, clavier, keyboards, producer
* Bertrand Châtenet – mixing
* Jeff Dahlgren – guitar
* Pol Ramirez del Piu – flute
* Mylène Farmer – vocals
* Denny Fongheiser – drums
* Bernie Grundman – mastering
* Abraham Laboriel, Sr. – bass
* Kate Markowitz – background vocals
* Chad Munsey – engineer, sound recording
* Henry Neu – design
* André Perriat – mastering
* Herb Ritts – photography
* Thierry Rogen – engineer, mixing, sound recording
* Larry Schalit – assistant, mixing
* Mike Scotella – assistant, mixing
* Paul Van Parys – executive producer
* Ken Villeneuve – assistant, mixing
* Shelly Yakus – engineer, sound recording
== Charts ==

=== Weekly charts ===



=== Year-end charts ===

== Certifications and sales ==


== Formats ==
* CD – Crystal case
* CD – Digipack
* Casket – Format : 12&quot; – Numbered – Limited edition (5,000)
* Promotional casket – Format : 12&quot;
* 12&quot;
* Cassette
* CD – Japan1
* CD – Taïwan

1 + &quot;Alice&quot; (new mix), &quot;XXL&quot; (extra large remix)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185002" start="43" end="56" title="Mylène Farmer" label="Mylène Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961215" start="122" end="125" title="XXL (Mylène Farmer song)" label="XXL"/>
<link wikidata="Q592788" start="398" end="406" title="Giorgino" label="Giorgino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580403" start="426" end="443" title="Laurent Boutonnat" label="Laurent Boutonnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q185002" start="457" end="470" title="Mylène Farmer" label="Mylène Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="795" end="806" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="808" end="818" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q205242" start="966" end="981" title="Sogyal Rinpoche" label="Sogyal Rinpoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q592788" start="1362" end="1370" title="Giorgino" label="Giorgino"/>
<link wikidata="Q51023" start="1772" end="1787" title="Vanessa Paradis" label="Vanessa Paradis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="1898" end="1907" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1911" end="1926" title="French-language" label="French-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16830098" start="1994" end="2011" title="denominative verb" label="denominative verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="2035" end="2045" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="2046" end="2052" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="2373" end="2377" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="2418" end="2424" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="2740" end="2752" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2754" end="2762" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="3870" end="3878" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="3943" end="3950" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445029" start="4135" end="4157" title="Victoires de la Musique" label="Victoire de la Musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4211" end="4217" title="French-language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q831044" start="4314" end="4332" title="SNEP" label="French Album Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="4360" end="4371" title="Céline Dion" label="Céline Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q987317" start="4385" end="4395" title="D&amp;#x27;eux" label="D&amp;#x27;eux"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="4937" end="4944" title="Polydor" label="Polydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="4970" end="4990" title="Music recording sales certification" label="Double platinum disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q831044" start="4998" end="5002" title="SNEP" label="SNEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="5246" end="5257" title="Céline Dion" label="Céline Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q987317" start="5271" end="5281" title="D&amp;#x27;eux" label="D&amp;#x27;eux"/>
<link wikidata="Q185002" start="5527" end="5540" title="Mylène Farmer" label="Mylène Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580403" start="5557" end="5574" title="Laurent Boutonnat" label="Laurent Boutonnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894402" start="5820" end="5835" title="Bernie Grundman" label="Bernie Grundman"/>
<link wikidata="Q384866" start="6009" end="6019" title="Herb Ritts" label="Herb Ritts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493920" start="6235" end="6247" title="Shelly Yakus" label="Shelly Yakus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6591" end="6596" title="L&amp;#x27;Instant X#Alice" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q961215" start="6620" end="6623" title="XXL (Mylène Farmer song)" label="XXL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481962" wikidata="Q1727" url="?curid=481962" title="Samara Oblast">
<text>Samara Oblast (, ) is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast). Its administrative center is the city of Samara. From 1935 to 1991, it was known as Kuybyshev Oblast. As of the 2021 Census, the population of the oblast was 3,172,925.

The oblast borders Tatarstan in the north, Orenburg Oblast in the east, Kazakhstan (West Kazakhstan Province) in the south, Saratov Oblast in the southwest and Ulyanovsk Oblast in the west.

It is located in 3 natural landscape zones: the forest zone (coniferous and broad-leaved forests), the basis of which is pine-oak forests, pine forests and broad-leaved forests with the participation of oak and maple. Spruce occasionally joins them. Areas of the southern taiga are found on the coast of the region. The forest-steppe zone occupies the central regions of the region and is represented by a combination of areas of broad-leaved forests, most often oak and meadow steppes. Red deer, roe deer, elk, and sometimes bears are found in these forests. The south of the region is occupied by steppes consisting of typchak and sagebrush.

== History ==
The Samara region contains a remarkable succession of archaeological cultures from 7000 BC to 4000 BC. These sites have revealed Europe&#x27;s earliest pottery (Elshanka culture), the world&#x27;s oldest horse burial and signs of horse worship (the Syezzheye cemetery of Samara culture) and the earliest kurgans associated with Proto-Indo-Europeans (e.g., Krivoluchye assigned to Khvalynsk culture).

The Russian Empire established the Samara Governorate as a &quot;guberniya&quot; in the area in 1851. It was administered from the city of Samara. During the Revolution of 1905, a rebellion took place in November that year at the village of Novaya Tsarevshchina (now Volzhsky) and spread to the village of Stary Buyan, leading to the formation of the short-lived separatist state, the Stary Buyan Republic, within the governorate. There was little local opposition to the new state, and after the failure of local police to end the rebellion, it was successfully suppressed by a punitive expedition of Cossacks and gendarmes led by the vice-governor of the governorate in Samara.

After the decree of Tsar Nicholas II on religious tolerance the Old Believers were forced to pay taxes in favour to the Orthodox Church that they believed to be heretical. The then Ministry of Interior forbade Samara&#x27;s public officials to prosecute in this practice, which was contrary to the spirit of the decree.

During the Russian Civil War, the region was heavily affected by the Russian famine of 1921–1922.

Under Soviet rule most of the governorate&#x27;s territory was transformed into the Middle Volga Oblast, which was established on May 14, 1928, and a year later on October 20, 1929, it was again transformed into Middle Volga Krai. On January 27, 1935, Samara and the Middle Volga Krai were renamed Kuybyshev and Kuybyshev Krai, respectively, in honor of the Bolshevik leader Valerian Kuybyshev. On December 5, 1936, Kuybyshev Krai was transformed into Kuybyshev Oblast upon the adoption of the 1936 Soviet Constitution. On January 25, 1991 by the Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR, the Kuibyshev Oblast was renamed the Samara Oblast. On April 21, 1992, the Congress of People&#x27;s Deputies of Russia approved the decision of the presidium of the parliament to rename the region, amending Art. 71 of the Constitution of the RSFSR of 1978, which entered into force on May 16, 1992.

On 1 August 1997 Samara Oblast signed a power-sharing agreement with the federal government, granting it autonomy. This agreement would be abolished on 22 February 2002.

Tolyatti is the largest city in Russia which does not serve as the administrative center of a federal subject.

==Administrative divisions==
==Demographics==
Population: 

Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 22,992 (7.4 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 43,273 (13.9 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024):1.31 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): Total — 69.33 years (male — 64.62, female — 73.86)

Ethnic groups:
According to the 2010 Census, the ethnic makeup of the oblast was:
*2,645,124 Russians (85.6%)
*126,124 Tatars (4.1%)
*84,105 Chuvash (2.7%)
*65,447 Mordvins (2.1%)
*42,169 Ukrainians (1.4%)
*22,981 Armenians (0.7%)
*123,691 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.

;Religion
According to a 2012 survey 35% of the population of Samara Oblast adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 7% are unaffiliated generic Christians, 1% are Orthodox Christian believers who do not belong to any church or are members of non-Russian Orthodox churches, 3% are Muslims, and 1% of the population are adherents of Rodnovery (Slavic folk religion). In addition, 30% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot;, 13% is atheist, and a further 10% follows other religions or did not give an answer to the question.
==Economy==
In 1997, Samara Oblast became one of the few federal subjects to receive the approval of the President of Russia to implement external bonded loans (Presidential decree No. 1212, dated 12.10.1997 &quot;On Creating Conditions to Conduct Loans Operations on the Internal and External Capital Markets&quot;).

Samara Oblast (or Samara Region) has several special investment sites which are built to implement new plants, industries, factories, create new jobs and increase investments in the Samara Region. 
* Special economic zone of industrial-production type «Togliatti»
* Industrial Park «Preobrazhenka»
* Industrial Park «Chapaevsk»
* Technopark in the sphere of high technologies &quot;Zhiguli Valley&quot;
* Industrial Park «Togliattisyntez»
* Industrial Park «Stavropolskiy»
In order to help Russian and foreign investors to select a site for project implementation, to provide consulting services free of charge Ministry for Economic Development, Investments and Trade of the Samara Region organized a Non-Profit Unitary Organization – Fund &quot;Investment Promotion Agency of the Samara Region&quot;.

The Agency cooperates with investors on the &quot;one-stop-shop&quot; principle, as well as:
* Searches for foreign partners according to the companies&#x27; priorities;
* Provides investment consulting services and monitors the implementation of investment projects;
* Promotes the investment opportunities of the Samara Region in Russia and foreign countries by participation in conferences, exhibitions, forums and other events.

==Politics==
During the Soviet period, the high authority in the oblast was shared between three persons: The first secretary of the Samara CPSU Committee (who in reality had the biggest authority), the chairman of the oblast Soviet (legislative power), and the Chairman of the oblast Executive Committee (executive power). After the abolition of Article 6 of the Constitution of the USSR in March 1990, the CPSU lost its monopoly on power. The head of the Oblast administration, and eventually the governor was appointed/elected alongside elected regional parliament.

The Charter of Samara Oblast is the fundamental law of the oblast. The Legislative Assembly of Samara Oblast is the province&#x27;s standing legislative (representative) body. The Legislative Assembly exercises its authority by passing laws, resolutions, and other legal acts and by supervising the implementation and observance of the laws and other legal acts passed by it. The highest executive body is the Oblast Government, which includes territorial executive bodies such as district administrations, committees, and commissions that facilitate development and run the day to day matters of the province. The Oblast administration supports the activities of the Governor who is the highest official and acts as guarantor of the observance of the oblast Charter in accordance with the Constitution of Russia.

Governors:
*Konstantin Titov (1991–2007)
*Vladimir Artyakov (2007–2012)
*Nikolay Merkushkin (2012–2017)
*Dmitry Azarov (2017–2024)
*Vyacheslav Fedorishchev (2024–)

===Legislature===

The current 7th convocation was elected in September 2021 until 2026. All 50 deputies were elected from parties: 36 from United Russia, 10 from the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, 2 from A Just Russia - For Truth, 1 from the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, 1 from New People. Gennady Kotelnikov (United Russia) was elected chairman of the Duma.

Andrey Kislov (United Russia) was elected as the representative of the Samara provincial Duma in the Federation Council until 2026.

===Executive===

Since September 2017, the position of Governor of Samara Oblast has been held by Dmitry Azarov. On 25 September 2017, he was appointed acting governor by President Putin after the early resignation of Nikolay Merkushkin, and on 9 September 2018, he was elected by the United Russia party in early elections. Farit Mukhametshin has been appointed representative in the Federation Council of the Government of the Samara Region until 2023.

== Geography ==
The region is located in the southeastern part of the European territory of Russia, in the middle reaches of the Volga, on both sides of it. This is the fifth largest region of the Volga region — it occupies an area of 53.6 thousand km2, which is 0.31% of the territory of Russia. The region stretches from north to south for 335 km, and from west to east for 315 km. The southernmost point of the region lies on the border with Kazakhstan (51°47&#x27; s. w. and 50°47&#x27; v. d.), the northernmost point is on the border with the Republic of Tatarstan (54°41&#x27;s. w. and 51°23&#x27; v. d.). The westernmost point lies on the border with the Ulyanovsk region (53°22&#x27; s. w. and 47°55&#x27; v. d.), and the extreme eastern one is on the border with the Orenburg region (54°20&#x27;s. w. and 52°35&#x27; v. d.). Due to the proximity of the West Kazakhstan region of Kazakhstan, part of the Bolshechnigovsky district has the status of a border territory.

== Nature reserves and parks ==

At the end of 2012, there are protected areas of the following categories in the Samara region: state nature reserve, national parks, biosphere reserves, protected areas of regional importance, botanical gardens, therapeutic areas. At the moment, a unique network of various protected natural areas has been formed in the Samara region. It is based on protected areas of federal significance: the I. I. Sprygin Zhiguli State Nature Reserve (23,157 thousand hectares) and the Samarskaya Luka National Park (127,186 thousand hectares). 

General forest cover of the region:

The Sergievsky Mineral Waters resort area operates on the basis of the Sernovodsk mineral spring.

==Sister relations==
* Győr-Moson-Sopron County, Hungary

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
*

==External links==
* 
*Official website of Samara Oblast 
*Central Eurasian Information Resource: Images of Samara Oblast, University of Washington Digital Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="0" end="13" title="Samara Oblast" label="Samara Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="24" end="39" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="43" end="49" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="54" end="60" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="67" end="88" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="96" end="100" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q894" start="104" end="110" title="Samara" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="147" end="163" title="Samara Oblast" label="Kuybyshev Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="175" end="186" title="Russian Census (2021)" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="252" end="261" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338" start="276" end="291" title="Orenburg Oblast" label="Orenburg Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="305" end="315" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q486007" start="317" end="341" title="West Kazakhstan Province" label="West Kazakhstan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334" start="357" end="371" title="Saratov Oblast" label="Saratov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634" start="393" end="409" title="Ulyanovsk Oblast" label="Ulyanovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="472" end="483" title="forest zone" label="forest zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q840819" start="744" end="757" title="forest-steppe" label="forest-steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="911" end="919" title="Red deer" label="Red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="921" end="929" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="931" end="934" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q163349" start="1045" end="1052" title="Festuca valesiaca" label="typchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="1057" end="1066" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175160" start="1244" end="1260" title="Elshanka culture" label="Elshanka culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905588" start="1287" end="1299" title="horse burial" label="horse burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246592" start="1313" end="1326" title="horse worship" label="horse worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q80641" start="1354" end="1368" title="Samara culture" label="Samara culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737" start="1387" end="1393" title="kurgan" label="kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="1411" end="1431" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Proto-Indo-Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q113965" start="1463" end="1480" title="Khvalynsk culture" label="Khvalynsk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1488" end="1502" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746" start="1519" end="1537" title="Samara Governorate" label="Samara Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q86622" start="1543" end="1564" title="Governorate (Russia)" label="&amp;quot;guberniya&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q894" start="1623" end="1629" title="Samara" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="1642" end="1660" title="Revolution of 1905" label="Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992175" start="1869" end="1889" title="Stary Buyan Republic" label="Stary Buyan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582956" start="2063" end="2082" title="punitive expedition" label="punitive expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="2086" end="2094" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416089" start="2099" end="2108" title="Special Corps of Gendarmes" label="gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="2185" end="2201" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2205" end="2224" title="Religion in Russia#History" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="2229" end="2242" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="2497" end="2514" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172846" start="2555" end="2582" title="Russian famine of 1921–1922" label="Russian famine of 1921–1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2591" end="2597" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="2943" end="2952" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q443703" start="2960" end="2978" title="Valerian Kuybyshev" label="Valerian Kuybyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q31631" start="3079" end="3103" title="1936 Soviet Constitution" label="1936 Soviet Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341" start="3664" end="3672" title="Tolyatti" label="Tolyatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4151" end="4159" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="4177" end="4183" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q253410" start="4199" end="4206" title="Chuvash people" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q33543" start="4222" end="4230" title="Mordvins" label="Mordvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="4246" end="4256" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="4272" end="4281" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="4588" end="4611" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="4620" end="4632" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="4641" end="4651" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4751" end="4766" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4777" end="4783" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="4828" end="4837" title="Rodnovery" label="Rodnovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="4960" end="4967" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="5159" end="5178" title="President of Russia" label="President of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6633" end="6639" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="7157" end="7176" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="7969" end="7991" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367193" start="8006" end="8022" title="Konstantin Titov" label="Konstantin Titov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325734" start="8067" end="8085" title="Nikolay Merkushkin" label="Nikolay Merkushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058145" start="8099" end="8112" title="Dmitry Azarov" label="Dmitry Azarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q126207710" start="8126" end="8149" title="Vyacheslav Fedorishchev" label="Vyacheslav Fedorishchev"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8210" end="8235" title=":ru:Выборы в Самарскую губернскую думу (2021)" label="elected in September 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="8299" end="8312" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="8326" end="8367" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210692" start="8376" end="8401" title="A Just Russia - For Truth" label="A Just Russia - For Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212115" start="8414" end="8448" title="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia" label="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98842815" start="8457" end="8467" title="New People (political party)" label="New People"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8469" end="8487" title=":ru:Котельников, Геннадий Петрович" label="Gennady Kotelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q108736966" start="8539" end="8552" title="Andrey Kislov" label="Andrey Kislov"/>
<link wikidata="Q186473" start="8640" end="8658" title="Federation Council (Russia)" label="Federation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139236" start="8727" end="8752" title="Governor of Samara Oblast" label="Governor of Samara Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058145" start="8770" end="8783" title="Dmitry Azarov" label="Dmitry Azarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325734" start="8890" end="8908" title="Nikolay Merkushkin" label="Nikolay Merkushkin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8980" end="8995" title=":ru:Выборы губернатора Самарской области (2018)" label="early elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308760" start="8997" end="9015" title="Farit Mukhametshin" label="Farit Mukhametshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="9257" end="9262" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634214" start="9325" end="9337" title="Volga region" label="Volga region"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="10016" end="10026" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="10256" end="10270" title="National park" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="10332" end="10349" title="Botanical garden" label="botanical gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q187753" start="10833" end="10857" title="Győr-Moson-Sopron County" label="Győr-Moson-Sopron County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="10859" end="10866" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481963" wikidata="Q954591" url="?curid=481963" title="Walter Short">
<text>Walter Campbell Short (March 30, 1880 – September 3, 1949) was a lieutenant general (temporary rank) and major general of the United States Army and the U.S. military commander responsible for the defense of U.S. military installations in Hawaii at the time of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.

==Early life==
Short was born in 1880 in Fillmore, Illinois. The son of a doctor, he graduated from the University of Illinois in 1901. He then taught mathematics for a year at a military academy. 

==Military career==
===Pre-World War II service===
He was commissioned as a second lieutenant of infantry in the U.S. Army on March 13, 1902, and assigned duty at the Presidio of San Francisco. He served in the Philippines and later Alaska, and took part in the expedition into Mexico with the 16th Infantry Regiment in 1916. 

During World War I, he served on the general staff of the 1st Division and as assistant chief of staff for the 3rd Army. He was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal for his efforts during the war. The citation for the medal reads:

After the war, Short became a member of the War Department General staff and served with the Far Eastern section of the Military Intelligence Division until 1924. He then attended the Army War College and after graduation served as a staff school instructor. He commanded 1st Infantry Division from 1938 to 1940 and I Corps from January 1940 to January 1941. 

===Hawaii===

General George C. Marshall, the U.S. Army Chief of Staff, appointed Short to command the Army&#x27;s Hawaiian Department on February 8, 1941 and promoted him to the temporary rank of lieutenant general. He earned the Distinguished Service Medal, and was considered to have had a successful career at that time, especially in light of his promotions during peacetime.

====Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor====

On December 17, 1941, Short was removed from command of the Hawaiian Department as a result of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, and was ordered back to Washington, D.C. by General Marshall. He reverted to his permanent rank of major general, as his temporary rank of lieutenant general had been contingent on his command. 

On February 28, 1942, he retired from the Army, later heading the traffic department at a Ford Motor Company plant in Dallas, Texas. He briefly returned to active duty from October 3, 1945 to February 28, 1946. He retired for the final time in 1946, and died in 1949 in Dallas of a chronic heart ailment.

=====Roberts Commission=====
The Roberts Commission, headed by U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Owen J. Roberts, was formed soon after the Japanese attack on the Hawaiian Islands. General Short, along with Navy Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet and Pacific Fleet, Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, were accused of being unprepared and charged with dereliction of duty. The report charged that Short and Kimmel did not take seriously enough an earlier war warning. and did not prepare for an air attack on Pearl Harbor.

In a letter dated January 24, 1941, Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox advised the Secretary of War, Henry L. Stimson, that the increased gravity of the foreign policy situation with Japan had prompted a re-study of the problem of the security of the Pacific Fleet while in Pearl Harbor. Knox wrote: &quot;If war eventuates with Japan, it is believed easily possible that hostilities would be initiated by a surprise attack upon the fleet or the naval base at Pearl Harbor.&quot; The letter proceeded: &quot;The dangers envisaged in their order of importance and probability are considered to be: (1) Air bombing attack (2) Air torpedo plane attack, (3) Sabotage, (4) Submarine attack, (5) Mining, (6) Bombardment by gunfire.&quot;

Knox&#x27;s letter stated the defenses against all but the first two were satisfactory, described the probable character of an air attack, and urged the Army to prepare for such an attack. It concluded with recommendations for the revision of joint defense plans with special emphasis on the coordination of Army and Navy operations against surprise aircraft raids. It also urged the conduct of joint exercises to train the forces to meet such raids.

Stimson replied on February 7, 1941, that a copy of the letter was being forwarded to Short, with directions to him to cooperate with the local naval authorities in making the suggested measures effective. Admiral Kimmel and General Short received copies of these letters at about the time they assumed their commands.

The report found that, had the orders been complied with:
*the aircraft warning system of the Army should have been operating;
*the distant reconnaissance of the inshore air patrol of the Army should have been maintained;
*the antiaircraft batteries of the Army should have been manned and supplied with ammunition; and
*a high state of readiness of aircraft should have been in effect.

In fact, none of these conditions was in fact inaugurated or maintained, for the reason that the responsible commanders had failed to consult and cooperate as to necessary actions based upon the warnings and adopt measures enjoined by the orders given to them by the chiefs of the Army and Navy commands in Washington.

The Roberts Commission was not a court-martial proceeding nor a judicial tribunal. Rather, the investigations were for fact-finding. There is generally no right to &quot;due process&quot;, in the sense of a right to counsel and to cross-examine witnesses at a fact-finding investigation.

Admiral William Harrison Standley, who served as a member of the Roberts Commission, later disavowed the report, maintaining that &quot;these two officers were martyred&quot; and &quot;if they had been brought to trial, both would have been cleared of the charge.&quot;

=====Short&#x27;s defense=====
In 1946 Short testified on his own behalf before Congress about the 1941 attack. Unlike some of his predecessors in Hawaii, Short was more concerned with sabotage from Japanese-Americans on Oahu. This led to Army planes being parked outside of their hangars so they could be more easily guarded. However, this made them easy targets for aerial attack, and many were subsequently destroyed on the morning of the attack. In explaining his reasons for his instituting an alert against sabotage only (local &quot;Alert One&quot; level), General Short stated:
* that the war warning message he received on November 27 contained nothing directing him to be prepared to meet an air raid or an all-out attack on Hawaii (&quot;Alert Two&quot; and &quot;Three&quot;);
* that he received other messages after the November 27 dispatch emphasizing measures against sabotage and subversive activities;
* that the dispatch was a &quot;do-don&#x27;t&quot; message which conveyed to him the impression that the avoidance of war was paramount and the greatest fear of the War Department was that some international incident might occur in Hawaii which Japan would regard as an overt act;
* that he was looking to the Navy to provide him adequate warning of the approach of a hostile force, particularly through distant reconnaissance which was a Navy responsibility; and
* that instituting higher level alerts would have seriously interfered with the training mission of the Hawaiian Department.

He also declared that he did not receive adequate warning and suffered from a lack of resources. He and his family attempted to get the Army to restore his rank of lieutenant general on the retired list, on the basis that warnings from the War Department prior to the attack were vague and in conflict. He requested, but did not receive, a formal court-martial.

==1999 Senate resolution==
On May 25, 1999, the United States Senate passed a non-binding resolution exonerating Kimmel and Short by a 52 to 47 vote. The resolution stated they had performed their duties &quot;competently and professionally&quot; and that the Japanese attacks were &quot;not a result of dereliction of duty.&quot; &quot;They were denied vital intelligence that was available in Washington,&quot; said Senator William V. Roth, Jr. (R-DE), contending they had been made scapegoats by the Pentagon. Senator Strom Thurmond (R-SC) called Kimmel and Short &quot;the two final victims of Pearl Harbor.&quot; The resolution was originally attached as an amendment to the Department of Defense spending bill for FY2000 (S.1059) and cleared the Congress as a whole in October 1999, urging President Bill Clinton to restore Kimmel and Short to their full wartime ranks. However, neither Clinton nor any of his successors acted on the resolution.

==Movie portrayal==
Short was portrayed by Jason Robards in &quot;Tora! Tora! Tora!&quot;.

==Awards==


==Dates of rank==
==References==
==External links==

*Arlington National Cemetery
*Generals of World War II</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954591" start="0" end="21" title="Walter Short" label="Walter Campbell Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="65" end="83" title="Major general (United States)" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="126" end="144" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="153" end="166" title="U.S. military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="239" end="245" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="274" end="296" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q979626" start="360" end="378" title="Fillmore, Illinois" label="Fillmore, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="423" end="445" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="685" end="710" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="Presidio of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="780" end="802" title="Pancho Villa Expedition" label="expedition into Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552168" start="812" end="834" title="16th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="16th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="986" end="1018" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Army Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852061" start="1206" end="1236" title="Military Intelligence Division" label="Military Intelligence Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="1270" end="1286" title="United States Army War College" label="Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="1358" end="1379" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652977" start="1402" end="1409" title="I Corps (United States)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="1469" end="1487" title="George C. Marshall" label="George C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="1493" end="1517" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="U.S. Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q875037" start="1562" end="1581" title="Hawaiian Department" label="Hawaiian Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1969" end="2000" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2288" end="2306" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2316" end="2329" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2537" end="2555" title="Roberts Commissions#First Roberts Commission" label="Roberts Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q703968" start="2604" end="2619" title="Owen J. Roberts" label="Owen J. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2714" end="2718" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="2719" end="2737" title="Commander in Chief" label="Commander in Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="2754" end="2767" title="United States Pacific Fleet" label="Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q353110" start="2777" end="2794" title="Husband E. Kimmel" label="Husband E. Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262522" start="2846" end="2865" title="dereliction of duty" label="dereliction of duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q526220" start="3076" end="3086" title="Frank Knox" label="Frank Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q314826" start="3117" end="3133" title="Henry L. Stimson" label="Henry L. Stimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982544" start="5526" end="5551" title="William Harrison Standley" label="William Harrison Standley"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7710" end="7730" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400609" start="8088" end="8108" title="William V. Roth, Jr." label="William V. Roth, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="8183" end="8197" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="8468" end="8480" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="8658" end="8671" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q258092" start="8681" end="8698" title="Tora! Tora! Tora!" label="Tora! Tora! Tora!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481965" wikidata="Q5634" url="?curid=481965" title="Ulyanovsk Oblast">
<text>Ulyanovsk Oblast () is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast). It is located in the Volga Federal District. Its administrative center is the city of Ulyanovsk. It has a population of 1,292,799 (2010 Census).

==Geography==
Ulyanovsk Oblast borders with Chuvashia (N), Tatarstan (NE), Samara Oblast (E), Saratov Oblast (S), Penza Oblast (W), and Mordovia (NW).

It is located on the northern edge of Central Steppes. A quarter of its territory is covered with deciduous forests; the rest is covered with steppes and meadows. The oblast is divided in half by the Volga River. Hilly areas to the west of the Volga are known as Volga Upland (elevations up to 358 m (1,175 ft) ). Eastern part of the oblast is mostly flat. The water table occupies about 6% of territory. 
Ulyanovsk Oblast has moderately continental, highly volatile climate. Temperature averages at +19 °C (66 °F) in July, and −11 °C (12 °F) in January. As weather systems move in and out of the area, average daily temperatures often change more than +25 °C (77 °F) in the matter of days. Fixed snow cover is typically present from November to the beginning of April. Overnight frosts occur until late May, restricting agriculture to cold-resistant plants such as rye and winter wheat. Annual precipitation drops out 400 mm (16 inches) a year. 

===Nature===
Ulyanovsk Oblast is located in the zones of wooded plain and broad-leaved scaffolding.

Soils are predominantly chernozem.

Forests occupy 1/4 of its territories. In the northwest — large massifs of oak forest with the participation of linden, maple; in the Transvolga region — meadow steppes, separate pine borons.

The area is inhabited by moose, marten, squirrel, hare (white and other) as well as numerous planktonic and marshy- coastal birds. Kuybyshev Reservoir  is home to fish such as bream, pike-perch, carp and others. Ulyanovsk Oblast also has a concentrated wasp population.

These protected areas are found on the territory of the region: the national park Sengiley Mountains, the guarding zone of the state preserved “Volga wooded plain”, the monuments of nature Undory mineral source, relict forests etc.

==History==
The first settlements of Middle Volga people were established in this area of Volga more than 100,000 years ago, according to archaeological science. The presence of human groups in the Ulyanovsk Volga region in the Paleolithic show separate parking and location of stone tools and bones found in the estuary. Cheremshan Tunguz on the peninsula, on the shores of the Volga in the region of Undory resort.

In the 8th and 9th centuries Ulyanovsk Volga region became a part of the early Volga Bulgaria, as a union of nomadic Turkic and sedentary Finno-Ugric tribes.

In the late 14th and early 15th century, the devastating Central Asian ruler Tamerlane made desolation of Volga Ulyanovsk. in the late 1430s the region was made a part of the Kazan Khanate. After the pacification of the territory of the future of his governorship Simbirsk gradually settled by Russians, who mingled with the local Tatars.

In the late 1640s, under the leadership of Bogdan Hitrovo, construction of the Karsunsky-Simbirsk defense line began (1647-1654 biennium).

Twenty-two years after its founding, the city of Simbirsk had to withstand a siege of the Cossacks, led by Ataman Stepan Razin.

In the 18th century in connection with the expansion of the territory of the Russian state, in particular, to the east, and began to develop intensively populated southern regions of the present territory of the Ulyanovsk region. Simbirsk began to lose its status of strategic military importance, but remained the provincial center.

===Russian revolution===
The Bolsheviks took power in Simbirsk one and a half month after the October Revolution—December 10, 1917. In 1918, the province was at the heart of the Russian Civil War. In July 1918 Simbirsk was captured by troops of the Komuch army led by White Russian tsarist General Vladimir Kappel. But on September 12 the Bolsheviks recaptured the city, resulting in the restoration of communism. The Red Army victory was led by the &quot;Iron Division&quot;. Simbirsk was the headquarters of the Revolutionary Military Council of the eastern front. The ammunition factory in Simbirsk was essential to ensuring the Red Army victory.

In 1924 Simbirsk was renamed Ulyanovsk. On May 14, 1928, the Ulyanovsk Governorate of the RSFSR was abolished. The Province, together with Penza, Samara and Orenburg became part of the newly formed Middle Volga region.

===World War II===
Since the beginning of the Great Patriotic War in Ulyanovsk, being the rear, the evacuated enterprises, institutions and people from the western regions of the country, from Moscow and Leningrad. January 19, 1943 from several districts of Kuybyshev and Penza Oblasts formed Ulyanovsk Oblast.

===Post-war development===
In the 1950 and 1960s, new enterprises were created in the region (factory of heavy and unique machines, mechanical plant, Dimitrovgrad Research Institute of Atomic Reactors, etc.), and infrastructure was built, including aroad bridge over the Volga River and Ulyanovsk Airport. In 1970, the then General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leonid Brezhnev, inaugurated memorial museum of Lenin. On 30 October 1997, Ulyanovsk, alongside Astrakhan, Kirov, Murmansk, and Yaroslavl signed a power-sharing agreement with the government of Russia, granting it autonomy. The agreement was abolished on 31 December 2001.

==Politics==
During the Soviet period, the high authority in the oblast was shared between three persons: The first secretary of the Ulyanovsk CPSU Committee (who in reality had the biggest authority), the chairman of the oblast Soviet (legislative power), and the chairman of the oblast Executive Committee (executive power). Since 1991, CPSU lost all the power, and the head of the Oblast administration, and eventually the governor was appointed/elected alongside elected regional parliament.

The Charter of Ulyanovsk Oblast is the fundamental law of the region. The Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast is the province&#x27;s standing legislative (representative) body. The Legislative Assembly exercises its authority by passing laws, resolutions, and other legal acts and by supervising the implementation and observance of the laws and other legal acts passed by it. The highest executive body is the Oblast Administration, which includes territorial executive bodies such as district administrations, committees, and commissions that facilitate development and run the day to day matters of the province. The Oblast administration supports the activities of the Governor who is the highest official and acts as guarantor of the observance of the oblast Charter in accordance with the Constitution of Russia.

===Legislative===
Since 1995, the legislature in the region has been represented by a unicameral parliament - the Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast. The leader is the chairman of the Legislative Assembly. The Legislative Assembly is elected by popular vote every five years. The first two convocations were elected by the majority system - from 25 districts, one deputy each. The current fifth, fourth and third convocations were elected by the majority-list system. One half (18) of the deputies are from party lists and the other half are from 18 constituencies.

Chairmen of the Legislative Assembly: Sergey Ryabukhin (1/1996 - 6/2001), Boris Zotov (7/2001 - 2013), Anatoly Bakayev (14/09/2013 - 2018), Valery Malyshev (19/09/2018–present).

In the 2003 elections to the Legislative Assembly of the third convocation, 3 parties and 1 bloc passed (overcame the 5% barrier):
* United Russia — 27.42%
* People for Frolych — 12.75%
* Communist Party of the Russian Federation — 11.25%
* Liberal Democratic Party of Russia — 11.1%
* Independent — 12.75%

In the 2008 elections to the Legislative Assembly, 4 parties passed (overcame the 7% threshold):
* United Russia — 66.36%
* CPRF — 15.95%
* A Just Russia — 7.77%
* LDPR — 7.39

14 representatives of United Russia and 1 representative of A Just Russia passed through single-mandate constituencies.

In the 2013 elections to the Legislative Assembly, 3 parties passed:
* United Russia
* CPRF
* LDPR

Total deputies in parliament:
* United Russia — 31
* CPRF — 4
* LDPR — 1

===Federal elections in the region===
Until 2000, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation invariably won the federal elections in the Ulyanovsk region: for example, in 1995 and 1999, the Communists won the parliamentary elections with a result of more than 40%; in 1996, Gennady Zyuganov won both rounds of the presidential elections. The turning point occurred in 2000: Vladimir Putin won the March presidential elections in the region. The 2003, 2007 and 2011 State Duma elections were won by the United Russia party, and Dmitry Medvedev won the 2008 presidential election. On 4 March 2012, Vladimir Putin won again, gaining 58.18% of the votes of the Oblast&#x27;s voters.

==Administrative divisions==
== Demographics ==
Population: 

55% of residents of Ulyanovsk Oblast live in two cities with population above 25,000—Ulyanovsk and Dimitrovgrad.

The ethnic composition is as follows:
*73.6% Russian
*12.2% Tatar
*7.7% Chuvash
*3.2% Mordva
*3.3% others
*67,890 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.
Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 8,216 (7.0 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 17,685 (15.1 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024): 
1.27 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): 
Total — 69.05 years (male — 64.21, female — 73.90)

===Religion===
===Education===

*Ulyanovsk State University, established in 1988 as a branch of Moscow State University. At the present time, UlSU is one of the largest higher educational institutions in the Volga region, comprising 6 institutes, 6 independent faculties, 2 affiliates, 5 junior colleges, 6 learning centers. UlSU enrolls about 15 thousand students annually, among them 125 foreign citizens from 20 countries of the world.
*Ulyanovsk State Technical University, established in 1957 as Ulyanovsk Polytech University. Today Ulyanovsk State Technical University features over 14,000 students on different education programs at 10 faculties and 48 departments.
*Ulyanovsk State Pedagogical University, established in 1932.
*Ulyanovsk State Agricultural Academy, established in 1943.
*Ulyanovsk Higher Civil Aviation School, founded in 1935 as a training center, designed for training and retraining of flight crews of civil aircraft. In 1992, raised its status to the present. Has branches in Krasny Kut, Saratov Oblast and Sasovo, Ryazan Oblast. When it has Main industry museum of civil aviation history (Ulyanovsk aircraft museum), established in 1983.

There is also a number of technical and medical colleges in Ulyanovsk.

==Economy==
Ulyanovsk Oblast is part of the Volga economic region.

Ulyanovsk Oblast has an abundance of land, water, forest, and mineral resources. Ulyanovsk Region also has substantial reserves of other raw materials used in industry, such as various kinds of sand, cement materials, clays, and peat. One of the largest quartz sand deposits in the CIS, the Tashlinskoe deposit, is located in the region.

Ulyanovsk and Dimitrovgrad are industrial cities and contain a number of large plants and factories. Rural part of Ulyanovsk Oblast is agricultural and is focused primarily on animal husbandry, to the lesser extent on crop farming. There are two resorts in Ulyanovsk Oblast territory - &quot;Bely Yar&quot; and &quot;Dubki&quot;.
City of Ulyanovsk is a major, diversified, industrial hub for aircraft and auto industries.

The UAZ automobile manufacturing plant, now a subsidiary of Sollers JSC; Aviastar-SP Aircraft Company, now a part of United Aircraft Corporation; Scientific and Production Association &quot;Mars&quot; (manufactures industrial control systems for the Russian Navy), now part of state-owned conglomerate Agat; Ulyanovsk Cartridge Works (manufactures ammunition for firearms); Ulyanovsk Motor Plant (russian.Ульяновский моторный завод, UMZ) and Ulyanovsk Mechanical Plant (russian.Ульяновский механический завод, UMZ, subsidiary of JSC Almaz-Antey) are based in the city along with a variety of light industry and food-processing enterprises. Other developed sectors include the flour-milling, meat, butter-making, starch and molasses, distilling, building material, and woodworking industries.

In addition, a global, international airline for unique and heavy cargo, Volga-Dnepr Airlines is based in the city too.

There are many manufacturing facilities of foreign corporations such as Legrand (company), Mars, Incorporated, Takata-Petri, Anadolu Efes S.K., ALFA (Mexico) and others.

Banking is mostly represented by national banks such as Sberbank, VTB Bank, Alfa-Bank, Bin Bank, Ak Bars Bank, MDM Bank, Trust Bank and also regional banks from Ulyanovsk Oblast.

Ulyanovsk has also a strong military base presence in town. The 31st Airborne Brigade of the Russian Airborne Troops of the armed forces is based in Ulyanovsk.

===Tourism and Hospitality Industry===
Tourism is a growing industry in this region because of Volga micro-climate and historical significance of Simbirsk. Hilton Hotel Group and Marriott Hotels &amp; Resorts are building their hotels in the downtown area.

The region of Undory, a driving distance from Ulyanovsk is famous for its spas and mineral water. The city offers many options for sports enthusiasts. The countryside is ideal for outdoor and water sports. The springs of Undory have been known for more than 200 years. The water at spa is rich in sodium chloride, and comes from artesian wells.

==Sports==

Bandy is traditionally the most popular sport in Ulyanovsk Oblast.Volga plays in the Russian Bandy Super League. The other club Simbirsk plays in the 2nd division. An indoor arena for bandy, Volga-Sport-Arena, has been built, as one of the first in Russia. It has a capacity of 5 000. The outdoor stadium will be modernised and have a capacity of 18 000. The 2016 Bandy World Championship is being played in Ulyanovsk. and Dimitrovgrad.

In association football, FC Volga plays in &quot;Urals-Volga&quot; zone of the Russian Second Division.

Ulyanovsk also hosted matches of first qualifying round UEFA Women&#x27;s Under-17 Championship 2014. Matches were held at &quot;Trud&quot; Football Stadium in the downtown Ulyanovsk.

Overall sports get a lot of support from the Ulyanovsk Oblast government.

==Sister relationships==
* Nghệ An Province, Vietnam

==See also==
*List of Chairmen of the Ulyanovsk Oblast Duma

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5634" start="0" end="16" title="Ulyanovsk Oblast" label="Ulyanovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="25" end="40" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="44" end="50" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="55" end="61" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q202317" start="85" end="107" title="Volga Federal District" label="Volga Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="113" end="134" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="142" end="146" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="150" end="159" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="195" end="206" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466" start="254" end="263" title="Chuvashia" label="Chuvashia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="269" end="278" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="285" end="298" title="Samara Oblast" label="Samara Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334" start="304" end="318" title="Saratov Oblast" label="Saratov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545" start="324" end="336" title="Penza Oblast" label="Penza Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340" start="346" end="354" title="Mordovia" label="Mordovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="408" end="415" title="Steppes" label="Steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="460" end="476" title="deciduous forest" label="deciduous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="562" end="573" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414064" start="625" end="637" title="Volga Upland" label="Volga Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="800" end="811" title="Continental climate" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="1435" end="1444" title="chernozem" label="chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817282" start="1581" end="1591" title="Transvolga" label="Transvolga"/>
<link wikidata="Q745937" start="1771" end="1790" title="Kuybyshev Reservoir" label="Kuybyshev Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435577" start="1917" end="1932" title="Protected areas of Ulyanovsk Oblast" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416109" start="1993" end="2011" title="Sengiley Mountains" label="Sengiley Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2100" end="2121" title="Undory mineral source" label="Undory mineral source"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2123" end="2137" title="relict forests" label="relict forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="2234" end="2239" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2466" end="2483" title="Cheremshan Tunguz" label="Cheremshan Tunguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q185488" start="2641" end="2655" title="Volga Bulgaria" label="Volga Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="2798" end="2807" title="Tamerlane" label="Tamerlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q186537" start="2896" end="2909" title="Kazan Khanate" label="Kazan Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3015" end="3023" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="3250" end="3258" title="Simbirsk" label="Simbirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q193175" start="3315" end="3327" title="Stepan Razin" label="Stepan Razin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="3694" end="3704" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="3759" end="3777" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="3843" end="3860" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313230" start="3914" end="3925" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Komuch" label="Komuch army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495529" start="3963" end="3978" title="Vladimir Kappel" label="Vladimir Kappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q862079" start="4377" end="4398" title="Simbirsk Governorate" label="Ulyanovsk Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="4406" end="4411" title="Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic" label="RSFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="4582" end="4601" title="Great Patriotic War" label="Great Patriotic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="4794" end="4803" title="Samara Oblast" label="Kuybyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545" start="4808" end="4820" title="Penza Oblast" label="Penza Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q135285" start="4998" end="5010" title="Dimitrovgrad, Russia" label="Dimitrovgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="5119" end="5130" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989502" start="5135" end="5152" title="Ulyanovsk Baratayevka Airport" label="Ulyanovsk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="5172" end="5232" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="5233" end="5248" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941" start="5329" end="5338" title="Astrakhan Oblast" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387" start="5340" end="5345" title="Kirov Oblast" label="Kirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759" start="5347" end="5355" title="Murmansk Oblast" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="5361" end="5370" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5531" end="5537" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="5982" end="6001" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184933" start="6078" end="6118" title="Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast" label="Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="6151" end="6162" title="legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="6804" end="6826" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184933" start="6943" end="6983" title="Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast" label="Legislative Assembly of Ulyanovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105935" start="7440" end="7456" title="Sergey Ryabukhin" label="Sergey Ryabukhin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7476" end="7487" title=":ru:Зотов, Борис Иванович" label="Boris Zotov"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7505" end="7520" title=":ru:Бакаев, Анатолий Александрович" label="Anatoly Bakayev"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7542" end="7557" title=":ru:Малышев, Валерий Васильевич" label="Valery Malyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="7714" end="7727" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7739" end="7757" title=":ru:Горячев, Юрий Фролович" label="People for Frolych"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="7769" end="7810" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212115" start="7822" end="7856" title="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia" label="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210692" start="8029" end="8042" title="A Just Russia" label="A Just Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="8415" end="8456" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182452" start="8638" end="8654" title="Gennady Zyuganov" label="Gennady Zyuganov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="8738" end="8752" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="8866" end="8879" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="8891" end="8906" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120096" start="8915" end="8941" title="2008 Russian presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="9191" end="9200" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q135285" start="9205" end="9217" title="Dimitrovgrad, Russia" label="Dimitrovgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="9265" end="9272" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="9280" end="9285" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q253410" start="9292" end="9299" title="Chuvash people" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q33543" start="9306" end="9312" title="Mordva" label="Mordva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437166" start="9789" end="9815" title="Ulyanovsk State University" label="Ulyanovsk State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="9852" end="9875" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349268" start="10196" end="10232" title="Ulyanovsk State Technical University" label="Ulyanovsk State Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q982376" start="10430" end="10468" title="Ulyanovsk State Pedagogical University" label="Ulyanovsk State Pedagogical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4475180" start="10492" end="10528" title="Ulyanovsk State Agricultural Academy" label="Ulyanovsk State Agricultural Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154432" start="10552" end="10590" title="Ulyanovsk Higher Civil Aviation School" label="Ulyanovsk Higher Civil Aviation School"/>
<link wikidata="Q155797" start="10761" end="10787" title="Krasny Kut, Saratov Oblast" label="Krasny Kut, Saratov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q193557" start="10792" end="10813" title="Sasovo, Ryazan Oblast" label="Sasovo, Ryazan Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="11259" end="11263" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="11283" end="11287" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="11294" end="11298" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="11319" end="11325" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="11347" end="11350" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q135285" start="11418" end="11430" title="Dimitrovgrad, Russia" label="Dimitrovgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="11580" end="11596" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="11622" end="11634" title="crop farming" label="crop farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q658242" start="11831" end="11834" title="UAZ" label="UAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q692440" start="11887" end="11898" title="Sollers JSC" label="Sollers JSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055810" start="11900" end="11911" title="Aviastar-SP" label="Aviastar-SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136226" start="11944" end="11971" title="United Aircraft Corporation" label="United Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513962" start="12042" end="12067" title="industrial control system" label="industrial control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="12077" end="12089" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12224" end="12231" title="Russian language" label="russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12297" end="12304" title="Russian language" label="russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981626" start="12337" end="12340" title="Ulyanovsk Mechanical Plant" label="UMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331507" start="12360" end="12371" title="Almaz-Antey" label="Almaz-Antey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="12509" end="12516" title="milling (grinding)" label="milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="12518" end="12522" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="12524" end="12530" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="12539" end="12545" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="12550" end="12558" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="12560" end="12570" title="distilling" label="distilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="12595" end="12606" title="woodworking" label="woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="12686" end="12691" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q765297" start="12693" end="12713" title="Volga-Dnepr Airlines" label="Volga-Dnepr Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q636755" start="12813" end="12830" title="Legrand (company)" label="Legrand (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="12832" end="12850" title="Mars, Incorporated" label="Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q833986" start="12852" end="12864" title="Takata-Petri" label="Takata-Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q483738" start="12866" end="12883" title="Anadolu Efes S.K." label="Anadolu Efes S.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q917701" start="12885" end="12898" title="ALFA (Mexico)" label="ALFA (Mexico)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205012" start="12968" end="12976" title="Sberbank" label="Sberbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549389" start="12978" end="12981" title="VTB" label="VTB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377835" start="12988" end="12997" title="Alfa-Bank" label="Alfa-Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273386" start="13023" end="13031" title="MDM Bank" label="MDM Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q977436" start="13185" end="13208" title="Russian Airborne Troops" label="Russian Airborne Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="13348" end="13353" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="13354" end="13367" title="micro-climate" label="micro-climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="13399" end="13407" title="Simbirsk" label="Simbirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="13409" end="13421" title="Hilton Hotel" label="Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918608" start="13432" end="13461" title="Marriott Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Marriott Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13525" end="13531" title="Undory" label="Undory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13732" end="13738" title="Undory" label="Undory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="13869" end="13874" title="Bandy" label="Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122899" start="13935" end="13940" title="Volga Bandy Club" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100676" start="13954" end="13980" title="Russian Bandy Super League" label="Russian Bandy Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15661746" start="14228" end="14257" title="2016 Bandy World Championship" label="2016 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q135285" start="14292" end="14304" title="Dimitrovgrad, Russia" label="Dimitrovgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631577" start="14332" end="14340" title="FC Volga Ulyanovsk" label="FC Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q209955" start="14386" end="14409" title="Russian Second Division" label="Russian Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14468" end="14512" title="2014 UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Under-17 Championship qualification#Group 4" label="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Under-17 Championship 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q36587" start="14699" end="14715" title="Nghệ An Province" label="Nghệ An Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="14717" end="14724" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184933" start="14740" end="14785" title="List of Chairmen of the Ulyanovsk Oblast Duma" label="List of Chairmen of the Ulyanovsk Oblast Duma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481971" wikidata="Q5741" url="?curid=481971" title="Kurgan Oblast">
<text>Kurgan Oblast () is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast). Its administrative center is the city of Kurgan. According to the 2021 Census, the population was 776,661, down from 910,807 recorded in the 2010 Census.

==History==
Formed by Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR of February 6, 1943. The region included 32 districts of the eastern part of the Chelyabinsk region and 4 districts of the Omsk region with a total population of 975,000.
Recipient of the Order of Lenin (1959).

==Geography==
Kurgan Oblast is located in Southern Russia and is part of the Urals Federal District. It shares borders with Chelyabinsk Oblast to the west, Sverdlovsk Oblast to the north-west, Tyumen Oblast to the north-east, and Kazakhstan (Kostanay and North Kazakhstan Region) to the south. Lakes Medvezhye and Filatovo are located in the district.

===Climate===
The oblast has a severe continental climate with long cold winters and warm summers with regular droughts. The average January temperature is , and the average temperature in the warmest month (July) is . Annual precipitation is about .

==Politics==
During the Soviet period, the high authority in the oblast was shared between three persons: The first secretary of the Kurgan CPSU Committee (who in reality had the biggest authority), the chairman of the oblast Soviet (legislative power), and the Chairman of the oblast Executive Committee (executive power). Since 1991, CPSU lost all the power, and the head of the Oblast administration, and eventually the governor was appointed/elected alongside elected regional parliament.

The Charter of Kurgan Oblast is the fundamental law of the region. The Kurgan Oblast Duma is the province&#x27;s standing legislative (representative) body. The Oblast Duma consists of 34 members and exercises its authority by passing laws, resolutions, and other legal acts and by supervising the implementation and observance of the laws and other legal acts passed by it. The highest executive body is the Oblast Government, which includes territorial executive bodies such as district administrations, committees, and commissions that facilitate development and run the day to day matters of the province. The Oblast administration supports the activities of the Governor who is the highest official and acts as guarantor of the observance of the oblast Charter in accordance with the Constitution of Russia.

After the last elections held in 2015 the United Russia Party currently holds the majority of seats in the Oblast Duma. Elections of deputies of the Kurgan Regional Duma of the VII convocation are scheduled for 2020.

==Administrative divisions==
==Economy==
Kurgan Oblast borders on the oil- and gas-bearing districts of Tyumen Oblast and is also close to similar districts in Tomsk Oblast. Large oil and gas pipelines pass through its territory, and Ural and Siberian oil refineries are fairly close. The main industrial centers are Kurgan, and Shadrinsk.

The oblast does not have large economic mineral reserves; therefore, it has developed mainly on the basis of subindustries associated with processing of agricultural production and assembly and packaging of finished products. The food industry is well developed here, with meat-packing plants, mills, creameries, and powdered milk factories.

Modern large-scale industry began developing during World War II, when sixteen enterprises from western regions of the country were evacuated here in 1941–1942.

==Demographics==
Population: 

Russians (823,722) are the largest ethnic group in the Kurgan Oblast, making up 92.5% of the population. Other prominent ethnic groups in the oblast include Tatars (17,017) at 1.9%, Bashkirs (12,257) at 1.4%, Kazakhs (11,939) 1.3%, and Ukrainians (7,080) at 0.8%. Other ethnicities are 2.1%. Additionally, 20,017 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.

Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 5,508 (7.4 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 12,871 (17.2 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024):
1.55 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): 
Total — 68.29 years (male — 63.29, female — 73.48)

===Settlements===
===Religion===
According to a 2012 survey 28.4% of the population of Kurgan Oblast adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 6% are nondenominational Christians (with the exclusion of such-defined Protestant churches), 2% are adherents of Islam, 1% are adherents of the Slavic native faith (Rodnovery), and 0.4% are adherents of forms of Hinduism (Vedism, Krishnaism or Tantrism). In addition, 36% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot;, 14% is atheist, and 12.2% follows other religions or did not give an answer to the question.

==Notable people==
*Yuri Balashov (born March 12, 1949), chess grandmaster
*Oleg Bogomolov (born October 4, 1950), former Governor of Kurgan Oblast
*Fyodor Bronnikov (1827–1902), painter
*Dmitri Bushmanov (born September 30, 1978), association football player
*Aleksandr Cherepanov (November 21, 1895 – July 6, 1984), lieutenant-general
*Dumitru Diacov (born February 10, 1952), Moldovan politician
*Viktor Dubynin (February 1, 1943 – November 22, 1992), Army General
*Maxim Fadeev (born May 6, 1968), singer-songwriter, composer and producer
*Pavel Fitin (December 28, 1907 – December 24, 1971), director of Soviet intelligence
*Filipp Golikov (July 30, 1900 – July 29, 1980), Marshal of the Soviet Union
*Sergey Gritsevets (July 19, 1909 – September 16, 1939), major, pilot and twice recipient of the honorary title of Hero of the Soviet Union.
*Gavriil Ilizarov (June 15, 1921 – July 24, 1992), physician
*Vyacheslav Kamoltsev (born December 14, 1971), association football player
*Svetlana Kapanina (born December 22, 1968), aerobatic pilot
*Anatoly Karelin (July 16, 1922 – January 3, 1974), Major General of aviation
*Leonid Khabarov (born May 8, 1947), Colonel
*Larisa Korobeynikova (born March 26, 1987), fencer
*Evgeni Krasilnikov (born April 7, 1965), volleyball player
*Leonid Krasin (July 3 (15), 1870 – November 24, 1926), politician and diplomat
*Ivan Kurpishev (born March 2, 1969), powerlifter
*Dmitri Loskov (born February 12, 1974), association football player
*Aleksey Merzlyakov (March 22, 1778 - August 7, 1830), poet, critic, translator, and professor
*Yana Romanova (born May 11, 1983), biathlete
*Sergei Rublevsky (born October 15, 1974), chess grandmaster
*Mikhail Ryumin (September 1, 1913 – July 22, 1954), Deputy Head of the Ministry for State Security (Soviet Union)
*Yulia Savicheva (born 14 February 1987), singer
*Ivan Shadr (February 11, 1887 – April 3, 1941), sculptor and medalist
*Alexander Solonik (October 16, 1960 – January 31, 1997), hitman
*Elena Temnikova (born April 18, 1985), singer
*Alla Vazhenina (born May 29, 1983), weightlifter
*Aleksandr Vinogradov (September 9, 1930 – June 14, 2011), journalist and writer
*Sergei Vinogradov (April 16, 1958 – December 16, 2010), journalist, translator and writer
*Kirill A. Yevstigneyev (February 17, 1917 – August 29, 1996), Major General of aviation

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===

==External links==
*Official website of the Oblast Duma 
*News portal </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5741" start="0" end="13" title="Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="22" end="37" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="41" end="47" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="52" end="58" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="65" end="86" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="94" end="98" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q13379" start="102" end="108" title="Kurgan, Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="127" end="138" title="Russian Census (2021)" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="202" end="213" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q185493" start="484" end="498" title="Order of Lenin" label="Order of Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41964" start="585" end="607" title="Urals Federal District" label="Urals Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="632" end="650" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462" start="664" end="681" title="Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Sverdlovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824" start="701" end="714" title="Tyumen Oblast" label="Tyumen Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="738" end="748" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485605" start="750" end="758" title="Kostanay Region" label="Kostanay"/>
<link wikidata="Q485088" start="763" end="786" title="North Kazakhstan Region" label="North Kazakhstan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225868" start="808" end="817" title="Medvezhye (Kurgan Oblast)" label="Medvezhye"/>
<link wikidata="Q37927486" start="822" end="830" title="Filatovo (lake)" label="Filatovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1137" end="1143" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="1585" end="1604" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445912" start="1678" end="1696" title="Kurgan Oblast Duma" label="Kurgan Oblast Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="2396" end="2418" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="2463" end="2476" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824" start="2743" end="2756" title="Tyumen Oblast" label="Tyumen Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884" start="2799" end="2811" title="Tomsk Oblast" label="Tomsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="2819" end="2822" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="2827" end="2830" title="Natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322976" start="2873" end="2877" title="Ural (region)" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q13379" start="2956" end="2962" title="Kurgan, Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q198155" start="2968" end="2977" title="Shadrinsk" label="Shadrinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3133" end="3156" title="agricultural production" label="agricultural production"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="3210" end="3223" title="food industry" label="food industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="3253" end="3257" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="3274" end="3278" title="Mill (grinding)" label="mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q61140231" start="3281" end="3291" title="creameries" label="creameries"/>
<link wikidata="Q496696" start="3297" end="3310" title="powdered milk" label="powdered milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="3375" end="3387" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3516" end="3524" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="3673" end="3679" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="3698" end="3706" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="3725" end="3732" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="3752" end="3762" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="4367" end="4390" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="4399" end="4427" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="nondenominational Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="4506" end="4511" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="4537" end="4556" title="Slavic native faith" label="Slavic native faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="4605" end="4613" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="4615" end="4621" title="Vedism" label="Vedism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135778" start="4623" end="4633" title="Krishnaism" label="Krishnaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="4637" end="4645" title="Tantrism" label="Tantrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="4746" end="4753" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713930" start="4853" end="4866" title="Yuri Balashov" label="Yuri Balashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089628" start="4909" end="4923" title="Oleg Bogomolov" label="Oleg Bogomolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097027" start="4982" end="4998" title="Fyodor Bronnikov" label="Fyodor Bronnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100685" start="5021" end="5037" title="Dmitri Bushmanov" label="Dmitri Bushmanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512838" start="5094" end="5114" title="Aleksandr Cherepanov (general)" label="Aleksandr Cherepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171809" start="5171" end="5185" title="Dumitru Diacov" label="Dumitru Diacov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169932" start="5233" end="5247" title="Viktor Dubynin" label="Viktor Dubynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393147" start="5302" end="5314" title="Maxim Fadeev" label="Maxim Fadeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042983" start="5377" end="5388" title="Pavel Fitin" label="Pavel Fitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48074" start="5463" end="5477" title="Filipp Golikov" label="Filipp Golikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349898" start="5540" end="5557" title="Sergey Gritsevets" label="Sergey Gritsevets"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="5654" end="5678" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q370260" start="5681" end="5697" title="Gavriil Ilizarov" label="Gavriil Ilizarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211678" start="5742" end="5762" title="Vyacheslav Kamoltsev" label="Vyacheslav Kamoltsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995819" start="5818" end="5835" title="Svetlana Kapanina" label="Svetlana Kapanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214883" start="5879" end="5894" title="Anatoly Karelin" label="Anatoly Karelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q467564" start="5957" end="5972" title="Leonid Khabarov" label="Leonid Khabarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347220" start="6002" end="6022" title="Larisa Korobeynikova" label="Larisa Korobeynikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237805" start="6054" end="6072" title="Evgeni Krasilnikov" label="Evgeni Krasilnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q373421" start="6114" end="6127" title="Leonid Krasin" label="Leonid Krasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11054388" start="6194" end="6208" title="Ivan Kurpishev" label="Ivan Kurpishev"/>
<link wikidata="Q372568" start="6244" end="6257" title="Dmitri Loskov" label="Dmitri Loskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290883" start="6313" end="6331" title="Aleksey Merzlyakov" label="Aleksey Merzlyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q461555" start="6408" end="6421" title="Yana Romanova" label="Yana Romanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q727947" start="6454" end="6470" title="Sergei Rublevsky" label="Sergei Rublevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q946906" start="6515" end="6529" title="Mikhail Ryumin" label="Mikhail Ryumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420727" start="6586" end="6628" title="Ministry for State Security (Soviet Union)" label="Ministry for State Security (Soviet Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q466411" start="6630" end="6645" title="Yulia Savicheva" label="Yulia Savicheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065242" start="6679" end="6689" title="Ivan Shadr" label="Ivan Shadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428359" start="6750" end="6767" title="Alexander Solonik" label="Alexander Solonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q973066" start="6815" end="6830" title="Elena Temnikova" label="Elena Temnikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q291857" start="6862" end="6876" title="Alla Vazhenina" label="Alla Vazhenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111706" start="6912" end="6932" title="Aleksandr Vinogradov (writer)" label="Aleksandr Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111807" start="6993" end="7010" title="Sergei Vinogradov (journalist)" label="Sergei Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q247252" start="7084" end="7106" title="Kirill A. Yevstigneyev" label="Kirill A. Yevstigneyev"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="481973" wikidata="Q5462" url="?curid=481973" title="Sverdlovsk Oblast">
<text>Sverdlovsk Oblast () is a federal subject (an oblast) of Russia located in the Ural Federal District. Its administrative center is the city of Yekaterinburg, formerly known as &quot;Sverdlovsk&quot;. Its population is 4,268,998 (according to the 2021 Census).

==Geography==

Most of the oblast is spread over the eastern slopes of the Middle and North Urals and the Western Siberian Plain. Only in the southwest does the oblast stretch onto the western slopes of the Ural Mountains.

The highest mountains all rise in the North Urals, Konzhakovsky Kamen at and Denezhkin Kamen at . The Middle Urals is mostly hilly country with no discernible peaks; the mean elevation is closer to above sea level. Principal rivers include the Tavda, the Tura, the Chusovaya, and the Ufa, the latter two being tributaries of the Kama.

Sverdlovsk Oblast borders with, clockwise from the west, Perm Krai, the Komi Republic, Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug, Tyumen Oblast, Kurgan Oblast, Chelyabinsk Oblast, and the Republic of Bashkortostan.

The area is traversed by the northeasterly line of equal latitude and longitude.

===Natural resources===
Rich in natural resources, the oblast is especially famous for metals (iron, copper, gold, platinum), minerals (asbestos, gemstones, talcum), marble and coal. It is mostly here that the bulk of Russian industry was concentrated in the 18th and 19th centuries.

===Climate===
The area has continental climate patterns, with long cold winters (average temperatures reaching to on the Western Siberian Plain) and short warm summers. Only in the southeast of the oblast do temperatures reach in July.

==History==
===Early history===

The territory of the region has been inhabited since ancient times. Numerous sites of ancient people were discovered, dating from the Paleolithic to the Iron Age. The Upper Paleolithic includes the Garinsky site on the right bank of the Sosva river near the village of Gari, the site in the Shaitansky grotto, and the site in the Bezymyanny cave (X millennium BC). In 1890, the 11 thousand years old (Mesolithic) Shigir idol was discovered.

A settlement and a burial ground in the Kalmatsky Brod tract are located on the right bank of the Iset river and date back to the Sarmatian time (from the 3rd century BC to the 2nd century AD). They belong to the Kalmak archaeological culture. In the Kalmatsky Brod burial ground, the skeletal skulls were strongly deformed by tight bandaging in early childhood, which indicates the penetration of steppe ethnic elements to the north.
There are numerous pictograms on the Koptelovsky stone, on the Oblique stone, on the Two-eyed stone, Starichnaya, Serginskaya, the rock paintings of the Bronze Age on the Neyva River, Tagil River (villages Brekhovaya, Gaevaya, Komelskaya), rock carvings on Shaitan-Kamen on the right bank of the Rezh river tied to indigenous Ural population, possibly speakers of a Ugric language. The Gostkovskaya Pisanitsa refers to the Middle Ages.

===Medieval history and Russian expansion===
Before the first Russian colonists arrived to the region, it was populated by various Turkic and Ugrian tribes. By the 16th century, when the Middle Urals were under influence of various Tatar khanates, the strongest local state was the Vogul Pelym principality with its center in Pelym.

The Russian conquest of the Khanate of Kazan in the 1550s paved the way further east, which was now free from Tatar depredations (see Yermak Timofeyevich). The first surviving Russian settlements in the area date back to the late 16thearly 17th centuries (Verkhoturye, 1598; Turinsk, 1600; Irbit, 1633; Alapayevsk, 1639). At that time, those small trading posts were governed under Siberian administration in Tobolsk. After the 1708 administrative reform, Verkhoturye, Pelym and Turinsk became a part of the new Siberian Governorate, in 1737 their territories were assigned to the Kazan Governorate. 

===Rise of the mining-metallurgical era===
During the 18th century, rich resources of iron and coal made Ural an industrial heartland of Russia. After getting control over Ural mines, the Demidov family put the region in the forefront of Russian industrialization. Yekaterinburg, Nevyansk and Tagil ironworks, founded in the 1700s to 1720s, soon joined the ranks of the major producers in Europe. Throughout the 18th and 19th century those newly founded factory towns enjoyed a status of special mining-metallurgical districts allowed to have a certain rate of financial and proprietary autonomy. During the 1781 reform middle Ural finally got its own regional administration in the form of the Perm Governorate.

When in 1812 the Russian government legalized gold digging for its citizens, Middle Ural became a center of gold mining. Entrepreneurs of the Perm Governorate also started the gold rush in West Siberia, soon Yekaterinburgers began to dominate the Russian market of precious metals and gemstones.

After the emancipation reform of 1861, major Middle Uralian industries that were heavily dependent on serf labor entered decline, although it also allowed light industry to thrive. In 1878, Perm and Yekaterinburg were connected with a railroad, in 1888, railroads reached Tyumen, and ultimately, in 1897, Yekaterinburg joined the Trans-Siberian network. Emergence of railroad transportation helped to revitalize economy of Ural.

===Soviet Ural===
The Bolsheviks established their power in Yekaterinburg and Perm during the first days of the October Revolution of 1917. In early 1918 the dethroned Czar Nicholas II and his family were transferred under custody to Yekaterinburg. Local Bolsheviks decided autonomously to execute the royal family on July 17, 1918, to prevent its rescue by the approaching White Army forces. Ten days later Yekaterinburg was captured by the Czechoslovak troops of Sergei Wojciechowski. For the next year the anti-Bolshevik forces took control over the region. On 19 August 1918, Provisional Government of Ural was formed in Yekaterinburg by a coalition of liberal and democratic socialist parties, it was supposed to serve as a buffer between the Komuch and Provisional Siberian governments. After the Kolchak coup d&#x27;état in Omsk in November 1918, the Government of Ural was disbanded.

In July 1919, in the course of the Yekaterinburg offensive, Yekaterinburg and the surrounding areas were recaptured by the Red Army forces under command of Vasily Shorin. On July 15th the Perm Governorate was split by the Soviets and the east, for the first time in history, became a separate region, the Yekaterinburg Governorate. It was soon abolished and replaced by the Ural Oblast (1923-1934).
In the 1930s many industrial enterprises were established and built with the help of forced labour. Local industry received another impetus during World War II, when important producing facilities were relocated here from the European part of Russia to safeguard them from the advancing Germans (for example, IMZ-Ural, Kamensk-Uralsky Metallurgical Works). In the postwar period much of the region was off-limits to foreigners. It was over Sverdlovsk that the American U-2 spy plane pilot Gary Powers was shot down on May 1, 1960, while on a reconnaissance mission.

In 1979, there was an anthrax outbreak caused by an accident in a facility to develop biological weapons.

===Post-Soviet transition===
In 1993, Governor Eduard Rossel responded to perceived economic inequality by attempting to create a &quot;Ural Republic.&quot; Sverdlovsk led the &quot;Urals Five&quot; (Kurgan Oblast, Orenburg Oblast, Perm Krai, Chelyabinsk Oblast and Sverdlovsk) in a call for greater regional power. They argued that the oblasts deserved as much power as the ethnic homeland republics. The Urals Republic Constitution went into effect on October 27, 1993. Then Russian President Boris Yeltsin dissolved the Urals Republic and the Sverdlovsk Parliament 10 days later (on November 9).

==Administrative divisions==



==Demographics==

Population: 

Vital statistics for 2024:
*Births: 36,948 (8.8 per 1,000)
*Deaths: 57,874 (13.7 per 1,000)

Total fertility rate (2024):
1.52 children per woman

Life expectancy (2021): 
Total — 68.79 years (male — 63.72, female — 73.80)

===Settlements===

=== Ethnic groups ===
There were twenty-one recognized ethnic groups of more than two thousand persons each in the oblast. Residents identified themselves as belonging to a total of 148 different ethnic groups, including:
*3,684,843 Russians (90.6%);
*143,803 Tatars (3.5%);
*35,563 Ukrainians (0.9%);
*31,183 Bashkirs (0.8%);
*23,801 Mari (0.6%);
*14,914 Germans (0.4%);
*14,215 Azerbaijanis (0.3%);
*13,789 Udmurts (0.3%);
*11,670 Belarusians (0.3%);
*11,510 Chuvash (0.26%);
*11,501 Armenians (0.3%);
*11,138 Tajiks (0.3%);
*9,702 Mordovians (0.22%);
*9,358 Uzbeks (0.2%);

232,978 people were registered from administrative databases, and could not declare an ethnicity. It is estimated that the proportion of ethnicities in this group is the same as that of the declared group.

===Religion===
Christianity is the largest religion in Sverdlovsk Oblast. According to a 2012 survey 43% of the population of Sverdlovsk Oblast adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 5% are nondenominational Christians (excluding Protestant churches), 3% are Muslims, 2% are Orthodox Christian believers without belonging to any Church or are members of other Orthodox churches, 1% are adherents of the Slavic native faith (Rodnovery), and 0.3% are adherents of forms of Hinduism (Vedism, Krishnaism or Tantrism). In addition, 36% of the population declares to be &quot;spiritual but not religious&quot;, and 9.7% is atheist.
=== Education ===

The most important institutions of higher education include Ural Federal University, Ural State Medical University, Ural State University of Economics, Ural State Law University, Ural State Mining University and Ural State Academy of Architecture and Arts, all located in the capital Yekaterinburg.

==Politics==

The oblast&#x27;s Charter, adopted on 17 December 1994, with subsequent amendments, establishes the oblast government. The Governor is the chief executive, who appoints the Government, consisting of ministries and departments. The Chairman of the Government, commonly referred to as the Prime Minister, is appointed with the consent of the lower house of the legislature, a process similar to the appointment of the federal Prime Minister. But the Governor cannot nominate the same candidate more than twice, yet he/she can dismiss the house after three failed attempts to appoint the Premier.

The Legislative Assembly is the regional parliament of Sverdlovsk Oblast. Until 2011, it was a bicameral legislature consisting of the Oblast Duma, the lower house, and the House of Representatives, the upper house. Before the reform, members of the legislature served four-year terms with half of the Duma re-elected every two years. The Duma (28 members) was elected in party lists. The 21 members of the House of Representatives were elected in single-seat districts in a first-past-the-post system. The Legislative Assembly was the first bicameral legislature outside an autonomous republic, and the first regional legislature in Russia to elect members based on both party lists and single-seat districts. As of 2021, the Legislative Assembly is a unicameral legislature with a total of 50 seats, with half of the members elected by single-mandate constituencies and the other half elected in party lists for five-year terms. 

Compliance with the Charter is enforced by the Charter Court. The existence of such regional courts in Russia, formed and functioning outside the federal judiciary, although challenged, has been upheld and persisted successfully in most constituent members of the Federation where they were established.

Until President Putin&#x27;s reforms of 2004, the Governor was elected by direct vote for terms of four years. Eduard Rossel has been the only elected governor (first elected governor for an oblast in Russia) since 1995 (appointed in 1991 and dismissed in 1993 by President Yeltsin), re-elected in 1999 and 2003.

Since 2012, the oblast&#x27;s Governor is Yevgeny Kuyvashev.

===Chairmen of the Oblast Duma===
===Chairmen of the House of Representatives of the Legislative Assembly===
===Elections===
In the 1990s, the Oblast&#x27;s population was distinguished by relatively high support for parties and candidates of the right and democratic persuasion. In the 1996 presidential election, Boris Yeltsin, a native of the region who lived in Sverdlovsk until the 1980s, won over 70% of the vote. In the regional elections in 2010 in the Sverdlovsk Oblast, United Russia received minimal support relative to other regions - only 39.79% of votes.

==Economy and transportation==

Even though it could do with modernizing, the region&#x27;s industries are quite diverse. 12% of Russia&#x27;s iron and steel industry is still concentrated in Sverdlovsk oblast. Iron and copper are mined and processed here, the logging industry and wood-processing are important, too.

The largest companies in the region include Ural Mining and Metallurgical Company, UralVagonZavod, Enel Russia, Nizhniy Tagil Iron and Steel Works, Federal Freight.

===Transport===
Yekaterinburg is a prominent road, rail and air hub in the Ural region. As the economic slump subsided, several European airlines started or resumed flights to the city. These include Lufthansa, British Airways, CSA, Turkish Airlines, Austrian Airlines and Finnair. Malév Hungarian Airlines used to be among those carriers but they had to drop their flights to SVX (IATA airport code for Sverdlovsk) after a few months.

The Alapaevsk narrow-gauge railway serves the communities around Alapayevsk.

==Sister relationships==
* Bà Rịa–Vũng Tàu province, Vietnam
* Harbin, China

==Notable people==
*Vladik Dzhabarov, Russian cyclist 
*Andrey Fedyaev, Russian cosmonaut

==See also==
* Yakov Sverdlov, a communist revolutionary after whom Sverdlovsk and subsequently Sverdlovsk Oblast were named.
* Church of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a building of regional historical significance in Staropyshminsk village.
* The Church of the Vernicle Image of the Saviour, a building of regional historical significance in Krasnogorskoye village.

==References==
==External links==
* Investment portal of Sverdlovsk Oblast
* Official website of the Government of Sverdlovsk Oblast</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5462" start="0" end="17" title="Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Sverdlovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="26" end="41" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="46" end="52" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="57" end="63" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41964" start="79" end="100" title="Ural Federal District" label="Ural Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="106" end="127" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="135" end="139" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="143" end="156" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573219" start="246" end="257" title="Russian Census (2021)" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q191566" start="367" end="389" title="Western Siberian Plain" label="Western Siberian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="468" end="482" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q83458" start="729" end="734" title="Tavda River" label="Tavda"/>
<link wikidata="Q588242" start="740" end="744" title="Tura River" label="Tura"/>
<link wikidata="Q756091" start="750" end="759" title="Chusovaya River" label="Chusovaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q210870" start="769" end="772" title="Ufa River" label="Ufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79082" start="814" end="818" title="Kama River" label="Kama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400" start="878" end="887" title="Perm Krai" label="Perm Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073" start="893" end="906" title="Komi Republic" label="Komi Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6320" start="908" end="937" title="Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug" label="Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824" start="939" end="952" title="Tyumen Oblast" label="Tyumen Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741" start="954" end="967" title="Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="969" end="987" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="997" end="1022" title="Republic of Bashkortostan" label="Republic of Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1202" end="1206" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1208" end="1214" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1216" end="1220" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="1222" end="1230" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="1243" end="1251" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="1253" end="1261" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="1264" end="1270" title="talcum" label="talcum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="1273" end="1279" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1284" end="1288" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="1419" end="1438" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q615083" start="1899" end="1910" title="Sosva (river)" label="Sosva river"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332298" start="1931" end="1935" title="Gari, Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Gari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523656" start="2075" end="2086" title="Shigir idol" label="Shigir idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q874369" start="2202" end="2212" title="Iset (river)" label="Iset river"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476738" start="2558" end="2568" title="Ural pictograms" label="pictograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q156631" start="2905" end="2919" title="Ugric language" label="Ugric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="3107" end="3113" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580934" start="3118" end="3124" title="Ugrian" label="Ugrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="3208" end="3213" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q467790" start="3258" end="3263" title="Vogul" label="Vogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400212" start="3302" end="3307" title="Pelym, Garinsky District, Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Pelym"/>
<link wikidata="Q186537" start="3338" end="3354" title="Khanate of Kazan" label="Khanate of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q297047" start="3444" end="3463" title="Yermak Timofeyevich" label="Yermak Timofeyevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q133052" start="3566" end="3577" title="Verkhoturye" label="Verkhoturye"/>
<link wikidata="Q196711" start="3585" end="3592" title="Turinsk" label="Turinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q143079" start="3600" end="3605" title="Irbit" label="Irbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q103212" start="3613" end="3623" title="Alapayevsk" label="Alapayevsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="3692" end="3699" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168782" start="3719" end="3726" title="Tobolsk" label="Tobolsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q391979" start="3822" end="3842" title="Siberian Governorate" label="Siberian Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425322" start="3891" end="3908" title="Kazan Governorate" label="Kazan Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029291" start="4100" end="4107" title="Demidov" label="Demidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="4177" end="4190" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165844" start="4192" end="4200" title="Nevyansk" label="Nevyansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q98967" start="4205" end="4210" title="Nizhny Tagil" label="Tagil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124098" start="4607" end="4623" title="Perm Governorate" label="Perm Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="4933" end="4960" title="emancipation reform of 1861" label="emancipation reform of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="5113" end="5117" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815" start="5195" end="5201" title="Tyumen" label="Tyumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="5253" end="5275" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian network"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5375" end="5385" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="5465" end="5483" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5526" end="5537" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="5643" end="5667" title="Shooting of the Romanov family" label="execute the royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="5727" end="5737" title="White movement" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q605324" start="5795" end="5814" title="Czechoslovak Legion" label="Czechoslovak troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995327" start="5818" end="5838" title="Sergei Wojciechowski" label="Sergei Wojciechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q164628" start="6101" end="6107" title="Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly" label="Komuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330800" start="6112" end="6132" title="Provisional Siberian Government (Omsk)" label="Provisional Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185718" start="6156" end="6163" title="Alexander Kolchak" label="Kolchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="6369" end="6377" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526168" start="6402" end="6415" title="Vasily Shorin" label="Vasily Shorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996962" start="6620" end="6631" title="Ural Oblast (1923–1934)" label="Ural Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543724" start="6954" end="6962" title="IMZ-Ural" label="IMZ-Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211318" start="6964" end="6999" title="Kamensk-Uralsky Metallurgical Works" label="Kamensk-Uralsky Metallurgical Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="7105" end="7127" title="1960 U-2 incident" label="American U-2 spy plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q309840" start="7134" end="7145" title="Gary Powers" label="Gary Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q592810" start="7234" end="7250" title="Sverdlovsk anthrax leak" label="anthrax outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q569362" start="7366" end="7379" title="Eduard Rossel" label="Eduard Rossel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476700" start="7455" end="7468" title="Ural Republic" label="Ural Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741" start="7519" end="7532" title="Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338" start="7534" end="7549" title="Orenburg Oblast" label="Orenburg Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400" start="7551" end="7560" title="Perm Krai" label="Perm Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="7562" end="7580" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q835714" start="7656" end="7663" title="Oblasts of Russia" label="oblasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41162" start="7710" end="7719" title="Republics of Russia" label="republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="7814" end="7827" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="8459" end="8467" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="8486" end="8492" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="8509" end="8519" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="8536" end="8544" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214361" start="8561" end="8565" title="Mari people" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312574" start="8582" end="8589" title="Volga Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058280" start="8606" end="8618" title="Azeris in Russia" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184922" start="8635" end="8642" title="Udmurts" label="Udmurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="8659" end="8670" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q253410" start="8687" end="8694" title="Chuvash people" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="8712" end="8721" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="8738" end="8744" title="Tājik people" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33543" start="8760" end="8770" title="Mordovians" label="Mordovians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="8787" end="8793" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="9025" end="9037" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="9169" end="9192" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="9201" end="9229" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="nondenominational Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="9270" end="9276" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9371" end="9386" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="9414" end="9433" title="Slavic native faith" label="Slavic native faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="9482" end="9490" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="9492" end="9498" title="Vedism" label="Vedism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135778" start="9500" end="9510" title="Krishnaism" label="Krishnaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="9514" end="9522" title="Tantrism" label="Tantrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="9628" end="9635" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506552" start="9716" end="9739" title="Ural Federal University" label="Ural Federal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476708" start="9741" end="9770" title="Ural State Medical University" label="Ural State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354119" start="9772" end="9806" title="Ural State University of Economics" label="Ural State University of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476714" start="9808" end="9833" title="Ural State Law University" label="Ural State Law University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135719" start="9835" end="9863" title="Ural State Mining University" label="Ural State Mining University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103656" start="9868" end="9911" title="Ural State Academy of Architecture and Arts" label="Ural State Academy of Architecture and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151343" start="10093" end="10101" title="Governor of Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="10329" end="10340" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q842386" start="10386" end="10408" title="Prime Minister of Russia" label="federal Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184930" start="10569" end="10589" title="Legislative Assembly of Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="10597" end="10616" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="10660" end="10669" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="10717" end="10728" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="10768" end="10779" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="11040" end="11059" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q355844" start="11237" end="11247" title="party list" label="party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="11253" end="11274" title="Single-member district" label="single-seat districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="11318" end="11328" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="11819" end="11824" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q569362" start="11914" end="11927" title="Eduard Rossel" label="Eduard Rossel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="12077" end="12084" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245626" start="12159" end="12176" title="Yevgeny Kuyvashev" label="Yevgeny Kuyvashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="12426" end="12431" title="right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="12436" end="12446" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="12494" end="12507" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="12659" end="12672" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349918" start="13112" end="13149" title="Ural Mining and Metallurgical Company" label="Ural Mining and Metallurgical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762250" start="13151" end="13165" title="UralVagonZavod" label="UralVagonZavod"/>
<link wikidata="Q835518" start="13167" end="13178" title="Enel Russia" label="Enel Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q643133" start="13180" end="13214" title="Nizhniy Tagil Iron and Steel Works" label="Nizhniy Tagil Iron and Steel Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127873" start="13216" end="13231" title="Federal Freight" label="Federal Freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="13250" end="13263" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298537" start="13279" end="13301" title="Transport hub" label="road, rail and air hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="13434" end="13443" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="13445" end="13460" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q192653" start="13462" end="13465" title="Czech Airlines" label="CSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="13467" end="13483" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q781770" start="13485" end="13502" title="Austrian Airlines" label="Austrian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q201821" start="13507" end="13514" title="Finnair" label="Finnair"/>
<link wikidata="Q208372" start="13516" end="13540" title="Malév Hungarian Airlines" label="Malév Hungarian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="13616" end="13633" title="IATA airport code" label="IATA airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060510" start="13675" end="13705" title="Alapaevsk narrow-gauge railway" label="Alapaevsk narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q103212" start="13736" end="13746" title="Alapayevsk" label="Alapayevsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36874" start="13776" end="13800" title="Bà Rịa–Vũng Tàu province" label="Bà Rịa–Vũng Tàu province"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="13812" end="13818" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938220" start="13847" end="13863" title="Vladik Dzhabarov" label="Vladik Dzhabarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q85867505" start="13883" end="13897" title="Andrey Fedyaev" label="Andrey Fedyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q298384" start="13933" end="13947" title="Yakov Sverdlov" label="Yakov Sverdlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="13986" end="13996" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Sverdlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55557532" start="14046" end="14099" title="Church of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Staropyshminsk" label="Church of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55553645" start="14177" end="14224" title="The Church of the Vernicle Image of the Saviour, Krasnogorskoye" label="The Church of the Vernicle Image of the Saviour"/>
</links>
</doc>
