<doc id="476874" wikidata="Q46615" url="?curid=476874" title="Summit Series">
<text>The Summit Series, Super Series 72, Canada–USSR Series (), or Series of the Century (), was an eight-game ice hockey series between the Soviet Union and Canada, held in September 1972. It was the first competition between the Soviet national team and a Canadian team represented by professional players of the National Hockey League (NHL), known as &quot;Team Canada&quot;. It was the first international ice hockey competition for Canada after they had withdrawn from such competitions in a dispute with the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). The series was organized with the intention to create a true best-against-best competition in the sport of ice hockey. The Soviets had become the dominant team in international competitions, in which the Canadian professionals were ineligible to play. Canada had had a long history of dominance of the sport prior to the Soviets&#x27; rise.

The first four games of the series were held in Canada and the final four in Moscow. The Soviet Union surprised the Canadian team and most of the Canadian hockey media with an opening game victory, 7–3. Many Canadian sportswriters had predicted an overwhelming victory for Canada in the series. Canada won the next game 4–1; the third game was a tie. Canada lost the fourth game in Vancouver. The series resumed two weeks later in Moscow. The Soviets won the fifth game to take a two-game lead. The Canadians then won the final three games in Moscow to win the series four games to three, with one tie. The final game was won in dramatic fashion, with the Canadians overcoming a two-goal Soviet lead after two periods. The Canadians scored three times in the third, the final goal scored with 34 seconds left by Paul Henderson.

The series was played during the Cold War, and intense feelings of nationalism were aroused in fans in both Canada and the Soviet Union and players on the ice. The games introduced several talented Soviet players to North America, such as Hockey Hall of Fame inductees Alexander Yakushev, Valeri Kharlamov and goaltender Vladislav Tretiak. Team Canada, the first NHL and professional all-star team formed for international play, was led by Phil Esposito, who led the series in scoring, as well as contributing in other roles. The Canadian line of Bobby Clarke, Ron Ellis and Henderson, which was not expected to start for the team, as none were yet stars, played a surprisingly large role in the Canadian victory, with Henderson scoring the game-winning goal in each of the final three games. The series was filled with controversy, including disputes over officiating, and dirty play on the part of both teams highlighted by the deliberate slash of Kharlamov by Clarke in game six. There was also the exclusion of top Canadian player Bobby Hull, the second leading goalscorer in the NHL the previous season and who had led the league in goalscoring seven times, because he had signed a contract to play in the new World Hockey Association (WHA). A knee injury forced superstar defenceman Bobby Orr, the second leading point scorer in the league the previous season and scoring champion two years prior, to sit out.
==Background==
From the beginning of the IIHF Ice Hockey World Championships in 1920, Canada would send a senior amateur club team, usually the previous year&#x27;s Allan Cup champion, to compete as the Canadian entry. These teams were often university players or unpaid players playing ice hockey while being employed in some other profession full-time. From the 1920s until the 1950s, Canadian amateur club teams won most of the World Championship and Olympic titles. As a career, Canadian players would play instead in the various professional hockey leagues, the best reaching the NHL. Their professional status made them ineligible to play in the World Championships or Olympic Winter Games under the rules of the time. The last Canadian amateur club to win the world championship were the Trail Smoke Eaters in the 1961 championship.

In the earliest days of the Soviet Union, bandy or &quot;Russian hockey&quot; was played, not &quot;Canadian hockey&quot;, and the Soviets did not compete in the Olympics or World Championships for ice hockey, which played the Canadian game. Post-World War II, a goal of the Central Committee of the Soviet Union was world supremacy in sport. The decision was made to transfer resources to the Canadian game. Starting in the 1940s, the Soviet Union started a Soviet hockey league playing the Canadian game. The elite sports societies of the Soviet Union, such as CSKA Moscow (Central Sports Club Army), Dynamo and Spartak, soon became the elite teams of the hockey league and supplied the players for the national team. Ostensibly amateurs, the players played hockey full-time and were paid by the government. The players had other titular professions; for example Moscow Dynamo players became officers of the KGB; CSKA Moscow players became officers in the army. This preserved a player&#x27;s amateur status for Olympic and World Championship eligibility and the players would have a career after their hockey playing days ended.

Entering international play in 1954, the Soviet national team, under the tutelage of Anatoly Tarasov, started to dominate the international competitions, and won nine consecutive championships in the 1960s. In response, Canada developed a national team of its own. But Canada&#x27;s best players usually became professionals and the national team featured mostly university players. The Canadian team did not win any championships and was looked upon as a failure. By 1969, the Government of Canada had formed Hockey Canada, an organization to co-ordinate Canadian international play with its amateur organizations and the NHL. In July 1969, on a trial basis, the inclusion of nine professional players for any event for one year was agreed to by the IIHF. Canada entered a team with five professionals in the Izvestia tournament at Christmas in 1969, and nearly won the tournament. The IIHF then convened an emergency meeting in January 1970, and the rule allowing professionals was rescinded. In response, Canada withdrew from IIHF play. The 1970 IIHF World Championships, scheduled to be held in Canada for the first time, were transferred to Sweden after Canada refused to host the event.

==Organization==
In the early 1970s, the idea of meetings between the national teams of the USSR and Canada began to be actively discussed again. Its main initiator was the Сhairman of the State Committee for Physical Culture and Sports of the USSR, Sergei Pavlov. The Canadian embassy in Moscow learned of the Soviets&#x27; interest in a series initially through reading an article in the Soviet &quot;Izvestia&quot; newspaper in the winter of 1971–1972. Diplomat Gary Smith, responsible for sport and cultural exchanges with the Soviet Union, read In December 1971 that the Soviets were looking for a new challenge in ice hockey. Smith met with &quot;Izvestia&quot; sports editor Boris Fedosov initially, then followed up with a meeting with Soviet hockey boss Andrei Starovoytov and other Soviet officials in January. The Soviets divulged that they were ready to play in a series between its national team and Canadian professionals. After the meetings, Canadian ambassador Robert Ford passed the matter to Ottawa to negotiate a series and Hockey Canada was given the task to nail down the terms for a series. In March, Canada proposed a round-robin tournament including Sweden and Czechoslovakia in September, with a fallback proposal for bilateral games instead. The Soviets agreed in principle with the resumption of ice hockey contacts with Canada, depending on the final conditions to be negotiated in April.

The negotiations for the series were finalized at the Hotel International Prague during the 1972 World Ice Hockey Championships in April 1972. A &quot;Letter of Agreement&quot; was agreed upon and was signed on April 18, 1972, by Joe Kryczka, the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association (CAHA) president, Starovoytov the Soviet Union Ice Hockey Federation general secretary, Bunny Ahearne the president of the IIHF, and former CAHA president Fred Page as the vice-president of the IIHF.

The two sides agreed on the terms: four games in Canada in early September, and four games later in the month in the Soviet Union. Kryczka also announced that two games were to be held in Sweden before the Moscow segment of the series as part of a celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of ice hockey in Sweden. He also announced that Team Canada hoped to play a game or two in Czechoslovakia in return for previous visits by Czechoslovakian teams to Canada. NHL President Clarence Campbell issued a statement that the league fully supported the proposed series.

The two sides agreed to hold the series in September and play the games under international rules. The Canadians agreed to IIHF amateur referees in the Canada part of the series, and European referees in the Moscow games. The refereeing would use the international two referee system, not the one referee, two linesmen system in place in the NHL, and, at the time, being introduced into international play. The Canadian side agreed to the terms under the belief that the Canadians would have no difficulty winning under any set of conditions. Kryczka felt that the Soviets had demanded the concessions for their own benefit, believing that their team was already equal to any NHL team. The agreement stipulated that Soviet players were to be paid per game in Canada, and Canadian players were to be paid 5,000 Rbls per game in Moscow. It also stipulated the choice of referees was acceptable to both parties. Teams were limited to 19 players and a total of 30, including officials, with allowances for changes between the Canadian and Moscow segments.

During the summer, further details were settled. The Canadian games were scheduled for Montreal (Montreal Forum), Toronto (Maple Leaf Gardens), Winnipeg (Winnipeg Arena), and Vancouver (Pacific Coliseum) and the games in the Soviet Union were all to be held in Moscow at the Luzhniki Ice Palace. The NHL players at first objected to the September dates, suggesting dates in October or November when they would be in better shape but the idea was rejected by the Soviets. A game in Prague, at first proposed following the Swedish games and before travel to Moscow, was moved to take place after the Moscow series.

NHL players&#x27; union executive director and Hockey Canada director Alan Eagleson, while not involved in the initial negotiations, became a central figure in the organization of the series. Eagleson, who could call on a personal network of players, NHL owners, Hockey Canada executives and Canadian business, would be involved in most arrangements for the Canadian team. Eagleson would confide to &quot;Toronto Star&quot; reporter Alexander Ross, that he &quot;un-negotiated&quot; much of what had been negotiated between the governments. Eagleson placated the NHL owners by arranging that part of the series&#x27; proceeds would go to the NHL player&#x27;s pension fund, reducing payments from the owners, and threatening to have his player clients play without NHL co-operation. Before the first game, Eagleson personally paid to settle a lawsuit won by a Montreal man, whose car had been destroyed in the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia. The court had ordered the Soviet team&#x27;s hockey equipment seized to guarantee payment, threatening the start of the series.

Former Boston Bruins&#x27; coach Harry Sinden, who had been out of hockey since leaving the Bruins in 1970, was suggested by the media as a good candidate for the job of Team Canada&#x27;s coach. Ron Brown, a sportswriter from Kingston, Ontario called Sinden and in the interview, Sinden admitted that he was available and willing to take the position. After a phone call from Sinden to Alan Eagleson, it was arranged for Sinden to have an interview with Hockey Canada&#x27;s steering committee for the series in June. After the one interview, Hockey Canada selected Sinden for the position. Sinden selected former player John Ferguson as his assistant coach, after initially trying to recruit Ferguson as a player.

The Soviets selected Vsevolod Bobrov as the coach for the series. Bobrov was a former player who had played against Canada in the 1950s and later managed the Soviet national soccer team and the Moscow Spartak ice hockey team. Bobrov had been given the job as the Soviets&#x27; national ice hockey team coach, replacing long-time coach Anatoly Tarasov after the 1972 Winter Olympics. This was his second international assignment; his first was the 1972 World Championship, where Czechoslovakia had defeated the Soviet Union, ending a run of nine consecutive championships by the Soviets.

The Canadian team would be known as &quot;Team Canada&quot; for the first time. The name and sweater design was done by advertising agency Vickers and Benson. Eagleson wanted to call the team the &quot;NHL All-Stars&quot;, but the agency convinced Eagleson otherwise, as the teams were from the USSR and Canada. The name Team Canada was inspired by the contemporary auto-racing team &quot;Team McLaren&quot;. The name is attributed to copy writer Terry Hill, whose first choice &quot;The Dream Team&quot; was rejected. The design of the sweater by designer John Lloyd utilized an enormous stylized maple leaf, like the Canadian flag, that covers the front. No numbers were on the sleeves, only on the back with the wording &quot;CANADA&quot; above the number. The sweater used only two colours: red and white, the maple leaf, numbers and letters in one colour and the rest of the sweater the other. The name, sweater design and a team song were all prepared in 24 hours, in time for a previously scheduled news conference. The series itself was simply known at the time as the Canada-USSR Series, although the name &quot;Friendship Series&quot; had been suggested by the Government of Canada Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

==Preparation==
Along with coaching, Harry Sinden was given the task of selecting Team Canada, which would be the first true &quot;team&quot; composed of NHL all-stars. When Sinden announced the list of 35 Canadian players on July 12, one of the conditions of playing was revealed: players would have to have a signed NHL contract by August 13. His list of players included Bobby Hull, who by that time had already signed with the rival World Hockey Association (WHA) league. Three other players Sinden named—Gerry Cheevers, Derek Sanderson and J. C. Tremblay—had not yet signed with the WHA, but would do so and become ineligible. The condition had been negotiated between the NHL and Hockey Canada, and the NHL would not relent. The condition was widely criticized, including by the NHL&#x27;s own Harold Ballard, the Toronto Maple Leafs owner and a harsh opponent of the WHA. Ballard felt that the series was the &quot;unofficial world series of hockey and we want to win&quot;. Phil Reimer, a governor of Hockey Canada, resigned over the matter. Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau made a personal appeal, but Doug Fisher, chairman of Hockey Canada, refused to re-open the agreement between the NHL and Hockey Canada.

Prior to training camp, there were several changes in the roster. Jacques Laperrière withdrew and Guy Lapointe was selected as his replacement. Dennis Hull, brother of Bobby, considered turning down his invitation, but accepted because Bobby wished him to. Cheevers was replaced by his Boston teammate Eddie Johnston. Stan Mikita replaced Sanderson. Rick Martin replaced Bobby Hull. Bobby Orr, who had been selected although he was injured, remained with the team during the series and practiced with them, but did not play in any games.

Team Canada assembled in Toronto and started training camp on August 13. Sinden named four alternate captains: Esposito, Mikita, Frank Mahovlich and Jean Ratelle. The team trained for three weeks in Toronto and arrived in Montreal on August 31 for the first game. The team held a practice on September 1 at the Montreal Forum. The unheralded line of Bobby Clarke, Ron Ellis and Paul Henderson impressed in camp, enough to earn a place in the starting lineup for game one.

The Soviets named 31 players for its roster on August 11. The roster included four goaltenders, led by 20-year-old Vladislav Tretiak, Olympic and two-time world champion. The defence was led by Alexander Ragulin, who had played in three Olympics and nine world championships. The team was a veteran team with only a handful of players to make their national team debut. Several players were named provisionally, depending on their performance in the Sovietsky Sport tournament being held during August. Boris Kulagin, coach of Krylia Sovietov, was named the assistant coach. Among the forwards, the team did not name Anatoli Firsov, regarded as the &quot;Bobby Hull&quot; of the Soviets, who had reportedly spoken out against his new coach. Most of the players named were from the Soviet &quot;Red Army&quot; team HC CSKA Moscow, the team managed by former national coach Tarasov.

Along with their regular training, Bobrov had the Soviet players take boxing lessons in preparation for the series. The Soviets arrived in Montreal not long before the series, on August 30. Staying at Montreal&#x27;s Queen Elizabeth Hotel, the team began two-a-day workouts at the St. Laurent Arena the next day. They were already acclimatized to the time zone as the team had been training on Montreal time for two weeks before travelling there. They brought 15 forwards, nine defencemen and three goaltenders. Veteran defenceman Vitali Davydov did not accompany the team to Canada. The reason given was injury, but the media questioned if Davydov had fallen out of favour with Bobrov. Firsov was reported as having a knee injury to explain his omission from the team.

During the pre-series period, two observers of the opposing team were allowed to scout the teams. Toronto Maple Leafs&#x27; coach John McLellan and Bob Davidson, the Leafs&#x27; head scout went to the Soviet Union to observe the Soviets in the Sovietsky Sport tournament. McLellan and Davidson observed two games, while Kulagin, along with Arkadi Chernyshev, a former assistant to Tarasov, observed all of the Canadians&#x27; practices in Toronto.

While the Soviet team was in Canada, Rick Noonan, a trainer for the University of British Columbia’s sports teams, was assigned by Hockey Canada to assist the Soviets. Noonan, who would be later be named general manager of Team Canada for the 1980 Winter Olympics, was the only Canadian to have regular access to the Soviets&#x27; locker room, and he was behind the Soviets&#x27; bench during the first four games of the Summit Series.

==Expectations==
At the time, the National Hockey League was considered to be where the best hockey players played, and its best players consisted largely of Canadians. The public consensus of hockey pundits and fans in North America was that other countries, the Soviets in this case, were simply no match for Canada&#x27;s best. The Soviets were not expected to even give the Canadians a challenge, and Canada was going into this series expected to win handily. Sinden opined, &quot;Canada is first in the world in two things: hockey and wheat.&quot; Alan Eagleson said, &quot;We gotta win in eight games. Anything less than an unblemished sweep of the Russians would bring shame down on the heads of the players and the national pride.&quot;
Vladislav Tretiak recalled: &quot;The Canadians said that they were professionals, and amateurs played in Europe. Tarasov had been calling them to face off for a long time. But NHL responded: &quot;Why do we need this? We will beat you with a double-digit score, we will kill everyone so that in the second period there will be no one on the court. Have you become amateur champions again? So study there, you have nothing to play with us.&quot;

Yvan Cournoyer remembered: &quot;Everyone told us: don&#x27;t worry, you&#x27;ll beat them easily. We trained half-heartedly, so we didn&#x27;t prepare for the upcoming meetings in the best way.&quot; At the same time, Phil Esposito perceived the upcoming series as &quot;a real fight — capitalism against communism: &quot;Do you know how we hated the damn communists? We had no right to lose. I didn&#x27;t want to know the Russians. They were against our way of life, against private property.&quot; Soviet hockey players, also feeling responsible for the country, did not hate Canadians. They downplayed themselves, stating that they were in the Series to learn.

In a poll of experts conducted by &quot;The Hockey News&quot;, not one expected the Soviets to win a single game. Journalist Dick Beddoes of Toronto&#x27;s &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; offered to eat his words &quot;shredded at high noon in a bowl of borscht on the steps of the Russian Embassy&quot; if the Soviets won one game. Canadian journalists Milt Dunnell (&quot;Toronto Star&quot;), Jim Coleman (Southam), and Claude Larochelle (&quot;Le Soleil&quot;) predicted results of seven wins for Canada to one for the Soviets. American journalists Gerald Eskenazi (&quot;The New York Times&quot;) and Francis Rosa (&quot;Boston Globe&quot;) predicted eight wins to none, while Mark Mulvoy (&quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;) predicted seven wins to one for Canada.

Before the first game, former Canadiens&#x27; star goaltender Jacques Plante gave Soviet goaltender Tretiak advice on how to play the NHL forwards (losing the fact that Tretyak didn&#x27;t speak English). Plante did this because he was &quot;thinking of the humiliation he was almost certain to suffer&quot;. Plante himself predicted Canada would win &quot;eight straight&quot;. In a game scouted by Team Canada, Tretiak had given up eight goals in a game played the day before his wedding.

A few Canadians gave a dissenting prognosis of the series. John Robertson of the &quot;Montreal Star&quot; warned that Team Canada was too poorly prepared and out of shape to win the series. He blamed the NHL: &quot;This, the most important hockey event of our time, has been tacked onto the front of the NHL season as something only tolerated by the owners, and endorsed by the players as a means of enriching their pension plan.&quot; Former professional player Billy Harris who had coached Sweden&#x27;s national team earlier in the year, predicted a Soviets&#x27; win, largely on the strength of Tretiak&#x27;s goaltending. Former Canadian national team coach David Bauer also warned about the quality of the Soviets skating and their team play.

Prior to the series, Bobrov held a press luncheon in Moscow. He refused to consider that either team would sweep the series. To him, Team Canada had &quot;the fire power, know-how and goaltending&quot;, but how would it adapt to international rules, two-referee system and amateur officials? He conceded that Phil Esposito would &quot;be difficult to move from the front of the net. I expect there will be some surprises for us when we meet your Canadian stars.&quot; He also predicted that Valeri Kharlamov &quot;will stand out, even against your best Canadians. By North American standards, he is small but he has an excellent shot. I think he will be effective.&quot; Sinden was aware of Kharlamov and he selected Ron Ellis to the Team Canada roster especially to cover Kharlamov.

==The series==
===Game one===
Game one was held in Montreal in a very warm Montreal Forum on September 2 before 18,818 fans. The gamesmanship between the teams started before the opening puck drop. Canada was assigned the home team for all games in Canada, while the Soviets would be the home team in Moscow. The Soviets would not release their lineup until they had seen their opponents&#x27;, which was the opposite order, considering they were the visitors. The official scorer had to return to the Soviets&#x27; dressing room and demand the lineup. Sinden wanted to put the Ellis-Clarke-Henderson line on against Valeri Kharlamov&#x27;s line. The Soviets did not start Kharlamov&#x27;s line and Sinden named Phil Esposito&#x27;s line for the opening faceoff.

The move paid off as Esposito scored for Canada after just 30 seconds of play, knocking a puck out of the air behind Tretiak. But even after a few minutes, Sinden felt the Soviets were coming on and having no difficulty getting through Canada&#x27;s defence. Henderson scored after six minutes to give Canada a two-goal lead on a faceoff win by Clarke (the only advantage that Team Canada had, in Sinden&#x27;s estimation). To the Canadian spectators and media, the second goal gave the appearance that the pre-series predictions of a rout were being proven correct. But the Soviets got over any awe of the NHLers and scored twice to tie the game 2–2 before the end of the first period. Yevgeni Zimin scored on a pass from behind the net, and Vladimir Petrov scored a shorthanded goal on a Soviet 2-on-1 break, with Petrov potting the rebound after an initial Dryden save. According to Sinden, the Canadian players had lost their poise, &quot;running all over the ice&quot; trying to establish their hitting game, while the Soviets used an unexpected tactic, the long pass, to break a man out of their defensive zone. The Canadian defence was also dropping to the ice to block shots, while the Soviets simply skated around them to get a closer shot. Although Tretiak had given up two goals on Canada&#x27;s first two shots, he recovered later in the period to make two critical saves off Esposito at point-blank range. According to Esposito, &quot;at Christmas time, it would have been 4–0 for us.&quot;

In the second period, Kharlamov scored on a great individual effort to put the Soviets ahead 3–2. Kharlamov deked Don Awrey, skated around him, faked a backhand shot on goaltender Ken Dryden, then scored on the forehand. Kharlamov then scored a second goal to give the Soviets a two-goal lead at the end of the second period. During the period, the air temperature in the Forum (which had no air conditioning system) increased. By the end of the second period, the temperature in the Forum had reached .

For the third period, Sinden benched Awrey and the Jean Ratelle line, going with just three lines. In the third, Clarke scored to bring Canada within one. In the Canadians&#x27; attempt to tie the game, Yvan Cournoyer put a puck off the post, but the Soviets broke out afterwards and Boris Mikhailov scored on the counterattack to restore their two-goal lead with six minutes to play. Mikhailov skated across the Canadian net about 20 feet out, lured Dryden away from the goal crease, then back-handed the puck between the goalie&#x27;s legs into the net. The strategy of three lines, combined with the heat in the arena, had left the Canadians exhausted, and the Soviets scored twice in the final minutes to finish with a 7–3 victory.

&quot;I was stunned by their performance&quot; was Sinden&#x27;s assessment. Former Montreal Canadiens&#x27; coach Claude Ruel commented that the Soviets&#x27; forwards were one of the most finely honed units he had ever seen. &quot;They are always moving, never standing around, they head-man the puck as well as anyone has ever done—and they always seem to be in the right place.&quot; According to Dryden: &quot;We didn&#x27;t play our game at all. After they tied it up, we started playing a panic type of game. Sometimes there were five men going for the puck at once.&quot; At the end of the game, Team Canada accidentally snubbed the Soviets by returning to the dressing room directly without shaking hands with the Soviets after the game.

The win by the USSR team was celebrated into the early hours back home, and many took the next day off work. Valeri Kharlamov&#x27;s father Boris held an impromptu party at his Moscow apartment. Dick Beddoes fulfilled his promise - he came to a hotel in Toronto, where Soviet hockey players lived, and ate a printed copy of his column after covering it with borscht.

===Game two===

The second game was played at Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto on September 4. Sinden scratched several players from the first game, including Dryden, Awrey, Ratelle, Red Berenson, Rod Gilbert, Vic Hadfield, Mickey Redmond and Rod Seiling. Hadfield took the scratch hard, as he was from the Toronto area and felt he was being embarrassed in front of his hometown. On defence, Serge Savard, Pat Stapleton and Bill White were added, as were forwards Mikita, Wayne Cashman and J. P. Parisé. Tony Esposito, Phil&#x27;s brother, took over goaltending duties. Sinden&#x27;s changes were made to get &quot;the diggers into the game and try to grind the Russians down. We had went for speed and quickness in our first lineup, yet the Russians were still faster and quicker.&quot;

Team Canada responded to their previous defeat with stronger play in this game. The first period was scoreless, but the Canadians used the period to intimidate the Soviets with hard body checking, especially from Cashman, Gary Bergman, Peter Mahovlich and Parisé, to throw the Soviets off their game. In the second period, Esposito again scored the first goal of the game, this time from a feed from his regular Boston Bruins&#x27; linemate Cashman, who had retrieved the puck deep in the Soviets&#x27; zone after colliding with USSR defenceman Vladimir Lutchenko. In the third period, Yvan Cournoyer wheeled around Alexander Ragulin and beat Tretiak to give Canada a 2–0 lead. Yakushev got the Soviets on the board after teammate Yevgeni Zimin missed on a breakaway. Yuri Lyapkin pounced on the rebound and fed it out front for Alexander Yakushev to bury the puck behind Esposito. Peter Mahovlich then scored a critical shorthanded goal, deking out the Soviet defender one-on-one, then Tretiak, to again give Canada a two-goal lead. His brother Frank then finished the scoring on a feed from Mikita, who had circled around a Soviet defenceman. Team Canada&#x27;s 4–1 win tied the series at one game apiece.

The Soviet coaches blamed the loss on the officiating. Bobrov complained that the pair of American referees, Frank Larsen and Steve Dowling, let the Canadians get away with everything. After the game, the head of the USSR Hockey Federation, Andrei Starovoytov, charged the door of the officials&#x27; dressing room and kicked chairs over, exclaiming: &quot;American referees allowed Canadian hockey players to act like a gang of outlaws.&quot; The two referees, scheduled to work game four in Vancouver, were replaced by the pair who had refereed games one and three, Gord Lee and Len Gagnon. Team Canada agreed to the Soviets&#x27; request to change referees, apparently not aware of Starovoitov&#x27;s tantrum after game two.

===Game three===
Game three was played in the Winnipeg Arena on September 6. After the second game, the Soviets said that they had strayed into playing too much of the Canadian style, as individuals, and promised to return to their team style for the third game. Canada went with the same lineup as game two, with the exception of Ratelle replacing Bill Goldsworthy. Team Canada held leads of 3–1 and 4–2, but the Soviets rallied and the game ended in a 4–4 tie.

Canada took the lead only 1:54 into the game on a goal by Parisé, but Petrov replied shorthanded at 3:16 to tie. Petrov stole the puck from Frank Mahovlich for a breakaway and deked Tony Esposito to score. After a strong forecheck by the Canadians in the Soviets&#x27; zone, Ratelle scored off a turnover to put Canada ahead 2–1 after the first. In the second period, Wayne Cashman dug the puck out of a scrum in the corner to feed the puck to Phil Esposito, who scored to put Canada ahead 3–1. But on another Canadian power play, Kharlamov circled behind the Canadian defence and gathered a breakaway pass, then beat Tony Esposito to score the Soviets&#x27; second shorthanded goal. Paul Henderson scored unassisted seconds later to restore Canada&#x27;s two-goal lead. However, the Soviets&#x27; &quot;Youngster&#x27;s Line&quot; of Yuri Lebedev, Vyacheslav Anisin and Alexander Bodunov scored twice to tie the game at 4–4 after two periods. The third period was scoreless, creating what would prove to be the only tie of the eight-game series (there was no provision for overtime).

Team Canada assistant coach John Ferguson felt that the Canadians had gotten overconfident. &quot;I was fooled again. I felt that after we had taken a 3–1 lead, the final score might be something like 7–1. But those two shorthanded goals. When you score one shorthanded goal it can turn it all around. But two? That&#x27;s almost fatal.&quot; According to Tim Burke of the &quot;Montreal Gazette&quot;, both goaltenders, Tony Esposito and Vladislav Tretiak, reached great heights, or the outcome could have been 10–10. Tretiak was making an unexpected start for the Soviets, who had planned to start Viktor Zinger, but he was reported to be ill before the game. Soviet coach Bobrov complained about the officiating and the play of Wayne Cashman, stating that &quot;if that game had been played in Europe, he would have spent the whole game in the penalty box.&quot;

===Game four===

Game four was played in Vancouver at the Pacific Coliseum. The game started with two consecutive penalties by Bill Goldsworthy, and Boris Mikhailov converted both into power play goals to give the Soviets a 2–0 lead. Goldsworthy, starting in place of Cashman, was trying to counter his teammate&#x27;s truculence, but only ended up hurting his team and was criticized privately by Sinden. In the second, Gilbert Perreault scored when a Soviet deflected his shot past Tretiak, but Blinov scored less than a minute later to restore the two-goal lead. Rod Gilbert scored a questionable goal that was disallowed, and Canada&#x27;s protests went unheeded. To Sinden, that was the turning point of the game, and the result could have been different had the goal been allowed, although Sinden admitted that it was &quot;a beating&quot;. Vikulov scored to put the Soviets ahead 4–1 after two periods. In the third, Goldsworthy made partial amends with a goal to get Canada to within 4–2, but then Shadrin scored to put the game out of reach. Dennis Hull scored a too-little, too-late goal in the final minute.

All the Canadian goals were scored by players Sinden had inserted in place of players who had played in Winnipeg. Still, Sinden felt that changing the lineup had been a mistake. According to Sinden, Ken Dryden, who had replaced Tony Esposito in goal, did not have a good game; he was shaky and Tretiak was great. According to Conacher, the Soviets used cross-ice passing in the attacking zone, a tactic that caused problems for Dryden. Serge Savard missed the game after fracturing his ankle in practice.

Team Canada was booed off the ice at the end of what was the final game of the series played in Canada. Responding to the negative public and media reaction in light of the expectation for an overwhelming Team Canada sweep of the series, Phil Esposito made an emotional outburst in a post-game interview:

Brad Park and Frank Mahovlich also criticized the booing. According to Park: &quot;We get nothing—not a dime for this. Brother, I&#x27;m sick&quot;. Other players were more sanguine. Dryden didn&#x27;t lash out at the fans. &quot;I&#x27;m disappointed, but I can understand it. The fans wanted us to do real good, and they&#x27;re frustrated we didn&#x27;t. I didn&#x27;t think I deserved to be booed. Tretiak frustrated us, but I guess I didn&#x27;t frustrate them enough.&quot;

After the fourth game, the series went on a two-week hiatus. The Soviets returned home and played in a domestic tournament. The Canadians took a few days off, then travelled to Sweden for a pair of exhibition games before arriving in Moscow.

===Game five===
Team Canada arrived in Moscow for the final four games at the Luzhniki Ice Palace, accompanied by 3,000 Canadian fans. Not long after starting practices in Moscow, Team Canada players Vic Hadfield, Rick Martin and Jocelyn Guevremont left the team and went home for what they felt was a lack of playing time. Team Canada used its practice time in the Dvoretz Sporta to learn the differences of the Soviet rinks. While there had been concern about the wider ice surface, what was most strange to the Canadian players was the fish netting draped at the ends of the rink above the boards instead of glass. Considered &quot;in play&quot;, the netting was strung tight, and a slap shot to the netting could catapult the puck back as fast as the original shot.

Game five was held on September 22. Luzhniki was filled to its 14,000 capacity, including Communist Party General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev, Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin and Soviet head of state Nikolai Podgorny and a large contingent of military in dress uniform. The 3,000 Canadian fans were given seats, but a group of 150 Canadian sports figures were left unseated. The players marched out to the rink for the game to loud cheers, accompanied by the song &quot;No Coward Plays Hockey&quot;. During the pregame introductions, Jean Ratelle, captain for the night, was given the traditional gift of bread and salt. The players were all given red and white carnations. Phil Esposito was given flowers, but he slipped and fell on a flower stem, landing on his back. Esposito recovered to laugh at his pratfall, and bowed to the delight of all of the spectators.

Parisé scored the only goal of the first period, and Clarke and Henderson scored in the second to give Canada a 3–0 lead. In the third, Yury Blinov scored for the Soviets at 3:34 and Henderson scored at 4:56 to make it a 4-1 Canada lead. At 9:05, Anisin scored on a deflection to start a run of four straight Soviet goals. Vladimir Vikulov&#x27;s goal at 14:46 was the game-winner for the USSR, whose 5–4 victory gave them a 3–1–1 series lead. According to Bobby Clarke, &quot;we&#x27;re not a defensive club, yet we tried to play defensively.&quot;

Despite the loss, all the Canadian fans in the arena sang &quot;O Canada&quot; as Team Canada left the ice. The cheering of the Canadian fans was unknown at Soviet hockey games. The Soviet newspaper &quot;Pravda&quot; noted wryly that the roof of the arena had withstood the loudness of the cheering and had remained in place.

Team Canada was now faced with the daunting task of having to win all three remaining games to win the series. To add to the Canadian struggles, Gilbert Perreault left Team Canada for home to focus on getting into shape for the upcoming NHL season. Perreault had played in game five, practiced with the team the day after, and then asked to return home.

Alexander Yakushev recalled: &quot;After this difficult victory, we decided that everything was done, it was enough to win one match out of three. No one doubted that we would succeed.&quot;

===Game six===
Game six produced a vital Canadian 3–2 victory. After a scoreless first period, Lyapkin scored the first goal at 1:12 of the second, but the Canadians&#x27; confidence did not waver. The Canadians caught the Soviets in a lapse and scored three goals in a one-and-a-half-minute span to take a 3–1 lead. Hull flipped a rebound over Tretiak to tie the score after Gilbert had capitalized on a Soviet giveaway. Cournoyer scored on a setup from behind the net by Berenson. Fifteen seconds later, Henderson scored what turned out to be the winning third goal on a 30-foot slap shot. Yakushev scored late in the second on a power play to finish the scoring. At the end of the second period, Kharlamov seemed to level the position, but the judges did not count the goal, declaring that the puck hit the post.

According to Dryden, after the second period the Canadians had a wild conversation in the locker room. They understood that they were losing control of themselves and that this threatened defeat. For psychological reasons, Sinden kept the players in the locker room for five minutes longer than expected before the start of the third period.

According to &quot;Montreal Gazette&quot; sports editor Ted Blackman, Canadian players Ken Dryden and Brad Park turned in their first big games of the series. Dryden ended a personal losing streak to Soviet teams dating back to his amateur career and two previous games in the series. In his opinion, the Canadian penalty-killing unit of Serge Savard, Peter Mahovlich, Bill White and Pat Stapleton was &quot;brilliant&quot; as it held the Soviets to one power play goal despite a wide disadvantage in penalty minutes. Savard himself was recovering from a fractured ankle during the series. According to commentator Brian Conacher, Team Canada had adjusted its game to not play &quot;dump and chase&quot; but instead retain possession in the offensive zone. The strategy led directly to Henderson&#x27;s winning goal on an interception of an errant Soviet pass. According to Conacher, &quot;for the first time, the Soviets had opened the door a crack and Team Canada had rushed through like a freight train.&quot;

Following the game, the Canadians complained that Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader, the German referees (the same who refereed a controversial Canada-Sweden game), were biased, since Canada was assessed 31 minutes in penalties while the Soviets received only four minutes. Phil Esposito complained that one goal by the Soviets was directly the result of the referee dropping the puck while he was talking to a teammate. The Canadians gave the pair the nickname of &quot;Badder and Worse&quot;.

; &quot;The Slash&quot;
During game six, Valeri Kharlamov was targeted by Team Canada for attention. According to Conacher, &quot;every time they get a chance, they&#x27;re taking him for a rough ride along the boards.&quot; Kharlamov was the target of numerous body checks by Brad Park. Things started to heat up in the second period. Kharlamov had knocked down Bobby Clarke, who in retaliation rubbed Kharlamov&#x27;s face with his glove to raise Kharlamov&#x27;s temper, and the two exchanged punches. Bergman then stepped in and bumped into Kharlamov and harassed him all the way back to the bench. Peter Mahovlich later elbowed Kharlamov, who retaliated by dumping Mahovlich to the ice. Later, Clarke raced down the ice to catch a streaking Kharlamov and deliberately slashed Kharlamov&#x27;s already sore ankle, injuring it and according to reports, fracturing it. Kharlamov skated over to the Canadians&#x27; bench and yelled at them before limping off the ice to the dressing room. The referees handed Clarke a minor penalty for slashing and an additional 10-minute misconduct penalty. Later, with Clarke still serving the misconduct, the referees also gave Dennis Hull a slashing penalty, during which Yakushev scored. Despite his injured ankle, Kharlamov returned to play and very nearly scored on a power play later in the second period. The Soviets&#x27; Mikhailov exacted his own retribution, kicking Bergman hard enough to cut his leg through his shin pads.

The incident was widely reported and condemned by the Soviet press. Kharlamov himself believed that &quot;Bobby Clarke was given the job of taking me out of the game.&quot; The slash was apparently done at the instigation of assistant coach John Ferguson. &quot;I remember that Kharlamov&#x27;s ankle was hurting pretty bad. I called Clarke over to the bench, looked over at Kharlamov and said, &#x27;I think he needs a tap on the ankle.&#x27; I didn&#x27;t think twice about it. It was Us versus Them. And Kharlamov was killing us. I mean, somebody had to do it.&quot; Dick Beddoes asked Clarke about it later at a team reunion, calling it a &quot;wicked two-hander&quot;, to which Clarke replied &quot;Dick, if I hadn&#x27;t learned how to lay on a two-hander once in a while, I&#x27;d never have left Flin Flon.&quot;

In a 2006 interview with the Russian &quot;Sport Express&quot; magazine, Clarke stated that he was unaware of Kharlamov&#x27;s sore ankle at the time and does not recall Ferguson telling him to target the ankle. Further, he recalled that Kharlamov had used stick work on him, and Clarke&#x27;s slash was in retribution for Kharlamov&#x27;s actions:

On the 30th anniversary of the series, Henderson called the incident &quot;the low point of the series&quot;, but would later apologize to Clarke. In his 2007 book, Conacher wrote that &quot;from the broadcast booth I was shocked and disgusted when I saw Clarke viciously chop at Kharlamov&#x27;s left ankle.&quot; He noted &quot;that emotionally these games had clearly gone beyond sport for Team Canada and had truly become unrestricted war on ice.&quot; Media opinion is divided on the effect it had on the outcome of the series. The controversy and admissions that have come forth throughout the years have led some to the belief that the incident could be considered a form of cheating. Kharlamov, who had been one of the Soviets&#x27; best forwards, missed game seven, when the Soviets could have clinched the series and while he did play in game eight, he was not at 100% and did not score. In Clarke&#x27;s opinion, there were other factors for Team Canada&#x27;s turnaround in Moscow: &quot;In Moscow we played much better than in Canada. We were almost equal to the Soviet team physically by then, we passed much better, we shot the puck much better, we became faster and played better on defence. Besides, when you have nothing to lose, it is easier to play. And after the fifth game we had nothing to lose.&quot;

===Game seven===
Czech referee Rudolf Baťa and Swede referee Ove Dahlberg officiated the seventh game, and it was announced that the German referee pair of Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader had been sent home and Baťa and Dahlberg would referee the final game, in exchange for a promise that Bergman would not publicly berate Bobrov.

Harry Sinden described tactical training in this way: &quot;Before the match, we made one significant rearrangement, which turned out to be very useful. During the last two games, the Russians did not miss Esposito, so he did not score goals. He was controlled by Petrov. Then we decided to outsmart them by playing four lines. We knew that our opponents were unlikely to break up their team to counter this.&quot;

Team Canada won game seven by a 4–3 score to even the series 3–3–1. In the first period, Phil Esposito scored two goals while Yakushev and Petrov tallied for the USSR, ending the first period tied 2–2. The second period was scoreless. In the third, Gilbert put Canada ahead, but Yakushev scored again to tie the score 3-3. At 17:54, Henderson fooled Soviet defender Tsygankov with a pass through the Soviet&#x27;s feet, then skated around him to pick up the puck and break in on Tretiak. As Henderson shot and scored, Valeri Vasiliev tripped Henderson who did not see his shot go in. The goal light went on and off quickly and Team Canada rushed onto the ice to congratulate Henderson before there was any doubt raised about the goal. The Soviet coach Bobrov publicly blamed the loss on Tsygankov. After the game, Henderson commented about the goal as the &quot;one that gave him his most personal satisfaction ever&quot;.

The game also featured a controversial incident. At 16:26 of the third period, a scuffle broke out between Canada&#x27;s Bergman and the USSR&#x27;s Mikhailov, in which Mikhailov tried to kick Bergman twice.

===Game eight===
Controversy ensued when the Soviets wanted to back out of the refereeing agreement. The Soviets wanted to include the German pair of referees originally scheduled for the game. Eagleson threatened to pull Team Canada from playing the eighth game. In a compromise, Kompalla refereed along with Bata instead of Baader. The ill will spilled over into the presentation of a totem pole as a gift from Team Canada. The pre-game presentation was cancelled by the Soviets, but restored on the insistence of Team Canada. According to Sinden, Eagleson stated that they &quot;were going to take this totem pole and bring it to centre ice and they&#x27;ll have to take it or skate around it the whole game&quot;.

Heading into the eighth and final game, each team had three wins, three losses and one tie, but the Soviets were two goals ahead in goal differential. In Canada, much of the country enjoyed an unofficial &#x27;half a day&#x27; holiday, with many students in Toronto being sent home the afternoon of the game (which began at 1 pm Eastern Time), while many others watched the game at work or school. In Montreal&#x27;s Central Station, 5,000 fans gathered around ten TV sets to watch the game, which was simulcast in English on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) television network, the CTV Television Network, and in French on the TV Radio-Canada television network. Until the men&#x27;s hockey gold medal game of the 2010 Winter Olympics, it was the most-watched sporting event in the history of Canadian television.

Team Canada took a number of questionable early penalties. With two Canadians (White and Peter Mahovlich) off, Yakushev scored to give the Soviets the lead 1–0. The game was delayed after a mistaken call against Parisé (he was called for interference, but Parisé admitted later he was guilty of cross-checking) and emotions boiled over. Parisé was called for a misconduct for banging his stick on the ice, and when he saw the misconduct called, he dashed across the ice with his stick raised. Parisé nearly swung his stick at Kompalla and got a match penalty. Sinden threw a chair on the ice. Some writers have commented that the incidents resulted in the rest of the game being refereed capably.

After Parisé&#x27;s penalty was served, it was Canada&#x27;s turn to go on the power play, and Esposito scored his sixth goal of the series to tie it at 1–1. The teams exchanged power plays before Lutchenko scored a power-play goal on a slap shot to put the Soviets ahead 2–1. Brad Park then scored his only goal of the series at even strength to complete some pretty passing between Dennis Hull and the Rangers&#x27; teammates of Ratelle, Gilbert and Park to tie the score. The period ended with the teams tied 2–2.

In the second, the Soviets started with a quick goal by Vladimir Shadrin after 21 seconds. The last ten minutes saw two goals from the Soviets: Yakushev scoring his seventh of the series followed by Valery Vasiliev on the power play to put the Soviets ahead 5–3 after two periods. White had countered for Canada midway through the period. It was one of few moments for Canada to cheer as the Soviets played an excellent period. The other was a goal-saving play by Phil Esposito who stopped a shot by Yury Blinov, who had faked goaltender Dryden out of position and had an empty net to shoot at. Esposito stopped the puck with his stick on the goal line. Blinov and the crowd had prematurely celebrated the apparent goal, and Blinov shook his head in disbelief.

Sinden told the players to &quot;try to get one back quickly, but play tight defensively and not allow the game to get out of hand. Don&#x27;t gamble until after the half-way point if need be.&quot; Esposito scored to put the Canadians within one. The tension rose at the rink, and extra soldiers were dispatched for security. It was matched on the ice as Gilbert and Yevgeni Mishakov had a fight. Veteran Canadian hockey commentator Foster Hewitt noticed that &quot;You can feel the tension almost everywhere!&quot;

At the ten-minute mark, Sinden noticed that the Soviets had changed their style, playing defensively to protect the lead rather than pressing. However, the strategy backfired on the Soviets. The change in tactics gave the Canadians more chances to score and Cournoyer scored to tie the game 5-5.

After the Cournoyer goal, the goal judge refused to put the goal light on despite the fact that it was signalled a goal on the ice. In response, Alan Eagleson (seated across the ice from the Team Canada bench) attempted to reach the timer&#x27;s bench to protest, causing a ruckus in the crowd as he made his way there. As he was being subdued by the Soviet police, the Canadian players headed over and Peter Mahovlich jumped over the boards to confront the police with his stick. Eagleson was freed and escorted by the coaches across the ice to the bench. In anger, he shoved his fist to the Soviet crowd, as a few other Canadian supporters also gave the finger to the Soviets.
Soviet commentator Nikolai Ozerov uttered a phrase that had become legendary: &quot;We don&#x27;t need such hockey!&quot; ().

The Soviets continued to play defensively. Sinden speculates the Soviets were willing to accept the tie and win the series on goal differential.

; &quot;The Goal&quot;

In the final minute of play, with Phil Esposito, Yvan Cournoyer and Peter Mahovlich out on the ice, Paul Henderson stood up at the bench and called Mahovlich off the ice as he was skating by. &quot;I jumped on the ice and rushed straight for their net. I had this strange feeling that I could score the winning goal&quot;, recalls Henderson. Bobby Clarke was supposed to replace Esposito, but Phil did not come off (&quot;There was no way I was coming off the ice in that situation,&quot; Esposito said). Cournoyer picked up a puck that had been passed around the boards by the Soviets in a clearing attempt. He missed Henderson with a pass, but two Soviets mishandled the puck in the corner and Esposito shot the puck on Tretiak.

Henderson, who had fallen behind the net, got up and went to the front of the net, where he was uncovered. Henderson got the rebound of Esposito&#x27;s shot, shot the puck and was stopped, but recovered the rebound. With Tretiak down, he put the puck past the goalie with only 34 seconds to play. Foster Hewitt&#x27;s voice rose in excitement as he called the winning goal:

The scene was captured on film by cameraman Frank Lennon. The picture became iconic in Canada. Canada held on to win the game and the series, four games to three with one tie. Pat Stapleton picked up the puck for a keepsake after the game.

Somewhat overshadowed by Henderson&#x27;s winning goal was a four-point game by Phil Esposito, who tallied two goals and two assists and had a hand in all three goals of the third period. Esposito was the only player on either team to score four points in a game during the series. According to Ron Ellis, he had &quot;never seen another player have a period where there was so much pressure and was still able to accomplish what he did&quot;. Sinden considered it to be Esposito&#x27;s &quot;finest hour&quot;. Esposito describes it as &quot;there was no stopping me. And I think some of the guys got a little angry with me. If we had lost, I would have been the goat. But we didn&#x27;t lose. I just had enough faith in myself, that I was going to get it done, one way or another.&quot;

The series ended with no ceremony. After a brief on-ice gathering of Canadian players and team officials, the opposing teams shook hands and skated off the ice. There was no trophy or prize money at stake, and the players received no medals, not even a commemorative token.

===Aftermath===
Team Canada arrived back in Canada on October 1. The team was mobbed by an estimated crowd of 10,000 at Montreal&#x27;s Dorval Airport. Also greeting the team were Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and City of Montreal Mayor Jean Drapeau. Montrealers Ken Dryden, Serge Savard, Yvan Cournoyer, Jean Ratelle and coach John Ferguson stayed in Montreal, while the rest of the team travelled on to Toronto. In Toronto, an estimated crowd of 80,000 attended a ceremony at Nathan Phillips Square to salute the players. The players were welcomed by Ontario Premier Bill Davis and Toronto Mayor William Dennison.

After the series, it was reported that NHL president Campbell and Chicago Black Hawks&#x27; owner Bill Wirtz had concluded an agreement with the Soviets for the Soviet national team to play an exhibition series in January 1973 against the Boston Bruins, New York Rangers and Chicago Black Hawks. Campbell characterized the reports as &quot;presumptuous&quot;. The NHL and the Soviets had held talks during the Moscow games, during which the Soviets had requested further games, but Campbell stated &quot;we don&#x27;t even know if we could schedule such a series&quot; and &quot;we&#x27;re a long way from any arrangement.&quot; Although the 1973 exhibition series did not take place, exhibition series would take place a few years later.

Kompalla gave an interview with newspaper &quot;General-Anzeiger&quot; after the series. &quot;When I recall these matches, my flesh creeps. Ten more such games and I would age several years. I am very glad that I got back home uninjured.&quot; He went on to state that the Canadians played &quot;very crudely, purposely using foul methods that endanger the lives of their rivals&quot;. He complained that the Canadian team threw &quot;cucumbers and other leftovers&quot; at his colleague Franz Baader on the flight from Moscow to Prague and harassed visitors in hotels. Bobby Hull also criticized Team Canada, stating that the fighting and gestures of the Canadian players &quot;were a bad example to young players and diplomatically harmful&quot;.

The Soviet coaches Bobrov and Kulagin were interviewed after the series in &quot;Sovietsky Sport&quot;. They accused Team Canada of &quot;trying several methods to intimidate their players, though this war of nerves did not bring them success&quot;. The coaches said they were astonished that the Canadians argued with the referees. They singled out Team Canada Assistant Coach John Ferguson for his &quot;pugnacity&quot;. They did compliment Team Canada on their defensive skills, but felt that the Soviets were technically superior, and, but for some deplorable mistakes by their players, the Soviets would have won the series.

Alan Eagleson was not repentant for his actions during game eight. Eagleson was not the only one jostled by police; Eagleson&#x27;s wife and the Canadian ambassador&#x27;s wife were also jostled. Eagleson woke up with bruises from his treatment. Eagleson regretted the incident and planned to not get involved in further series. He did get a letter of support from Robert Ford, the ambassador, who basically agreed with Eagleson&#x27;s actions. Mail and messages about the incident was mostly in favour of Eagleson. According to Ted Blackman, Canadian fans were basically understanding of Team Canada&#x27;s actions as being provoked while the team was under duress.

===Soviets&#x27; gamesmanship===
As well as the disputes over the refereeing, the goal judges on several occasions did not turn on the red light indicating a goal after a Canadian score. After Henderson&#x27;s goal in game seven, Sinden sent the entire team off the bench to ensure the goal was counted. A similar incident during game eight led to the melee that Eagleson was involved in.

During Team Canada&#x27;s stay in Moscow, the team&#x27;s treatment was the source of numerous complaints by the players. When leaving Sweden, the team was informed that the players would stay at one hotel, their wives at another. The players threatened not to go, and the arrangements were changed to keep the players and wives together at the Intourist Hotel. The players&#x27; wives were fed substandard food and the players would smuggle some of their food to their wives. The team had contracted to have Canadian beer and steaks delivered to them in Moscow. The beer was lost at the airport, while the steaks were cut in half. At a practice after game six, the Soviets tried to cut short the Canadians&#x27; practice.

During their stay in Moscow, the players visited Red Square, theatres, ballet, museums and the Kremlin, meeting with many ordinary Muscovites. According to Frank Mahovlich, in Canada, before leaving for the Soviet Union, the players were accompanied by a bunch of instructions that their hotel rooms would be full of listening devices. This gave rise to a famous anecdote about how Makhovlich unscrewed the fasteners of a huge chandelier in an Intourist&#x27;s conference room.

==Other Team Canada games==
===Sweden===
During the two-week hiatus between games four and five, the Canadians visited Sweden and played two exhibition games versus the Sweden national team. The Team Canada management had arranged for the visit to Sweden to get used to the bigger ice surfaces in Europe, and stopping in Sweden would provide some rest for Team Canada before resuming the series in Moscow. The games took place on September 16 and 17 at the Johanneshovs Isstadion arena in Stockholm. Canada won game one 4–1; the second game was a 4–4 tie. The first exhibition game introduced Canada to the two West German referees, Josef Kompalla and Franz Baader. These two referees would figure prominently in games six and eight of the Canada-Soviet Union series.

Sinden considered the first period of the first Swedish game the team&#x27;s worst since the team was put together, but the team improved and started to take command. Henderson, Clarke, Cashman and Parisé scored. Sinden criticized the German referees: &quot;... they were absolutely terrible. They couldn&#x27;t even skate. They were miles behind the play all night and don&#x27;t know the damn rules. Their incompetence helped the game become very bitter.&quot; The players were also introduced to the style of play of the Swedes, who were well used to using stick work to throw off their opponents. &quot;They were spearing, holding, interfering, and most of all, backstabbing.&quot; The Canadian players would retaliate and be penalized for their retribution. As an example of the referees&#x27; incompetence, Sinden pointed out that Esposito had been penalized for cross-checking, and given a misconduct for it. Sinden, who had played international ice hockey, knew that under international rules at the time, you could not give a misconduct for cross-checking.

A dirty incident marred the second game. Cashman was cut in the mouth by Sweden&#x27;s Ulf Sterner&#x27;s stick. The cut to his tongue required nearly 50 stitches and forced him to miss the rest of the Summit Series, although he stayed with the team. Sterner was not penalized on the play. During the second intermission, Team Canada and Team Sweden scuffled in the runway to their dressing rooms before being separated by police. Canada took a 2–1 lead in the game, but the Swedes were not in awe of Canada like they had been at the beginning of game one. The Swedish tactics were effective; Canada took 31 minutes in penalties to Sweden&#x27;s two. Sweden led the game 4–3 before Esposito scored on a 35-foot shot in the final minute. The Swedish defenceman had actually backed into their goaltender, allowing Esposito an easy shot for goal. Sinden also admitted that the tying goal was off-side but the referees had missed the call. Sinden was &quot;thrilled with the tie. I wouldn&#x27;t be able to stomach their gloating if they beat us.&quot;

Team Canada was heavily criticized by the Swedish media for its &quot;criminal&quot;-style play during the two games. Pictures in the newspapers highlighted the blood from a two-stitch cut the Swedish captain Lars-Erik Sjöberg had received on a cross-check from Vic Hadfield. Reports of the games led to criticism from back home in Canada, which incensed Sinden. The team cooled off the next day with a session in Södertälje playing for the employees of a Volkswagen plant. The team played mock games against local teams of youngsters 12 and 13 years in age. The practice improved the mood of the players. The team drank beer on the bus, and started &quot;singing songs like a bunch of kids&quot;. Several of the players then went out drinking, impressing Sinden the next day with their best practice session to date. The time in Sweden helped bring Team Canada together as a team and focused them for the final four games.

===Czechoslovakia===
After the series, Team Canada played an exhibition game against the Czechoslovak national team; at the time, the world champions. The game took place on September 30 at the Sportovní hala in Prague and ended in a 3–3 tie. Canada took the lead in the first period on goals by Serge Savard and Peter Mahovlich. The Czechoslovakian team tied it with two goals in the second by Bohuslav Stastny. Jiri Kochta scored at 2:28 of the third and the lead nearly held up until the end. Canada pulled its goalie and Savard scored his second goal with four seconds left.

For the game, Stan Mikita was named captain of the Canadian team. Mikita had left Czechoslovakia at age eight to live in Canada with an aunt and uncle, leaving behind his mother. During player introductions, Mikita received the largest ovation of any player. He took the opening faceoff and very nearly scored during the game.

==Broadcasting==
The games&#x27; broadcasts were produced by Hockey Canada, using experienced hockey commentators from Canadian television networks. In English, CBC Television (CBC) and CTV Television Network (CTV) split the coverage, with CTV carrying games one, three, five, seven and eight, while CBC aired games two, four, six and eight. Foster Hewitt called the play-by-play and former player Brian Conacher was the colour commentator for all of the games. At the request of the broadcasters, Hewitt came out of semi-retirement to be part of the broadcast. In French, all games were broadcast on TV Radio-Canada and the broadcast team was Rene Lecavalier and former player Jacques Plante for the games played in Canada, and with SRC&#x27;s Richard Garneau for the games played in Moscow - Garneau was already in Europe, having covered the 1972 Summer Olympics. For the eighth game, it was estimated that 16 million Canadians watched the match. (A year earlier, the national census had counted 21,963,000 Canadians.)

A partnership between Bobby Orr Enterprises and Harold Ballard bought the broadcast rights from Hockey Canada for . The bid, negotiated by Alan Eagleson, who, at the time, was both Orr&#x27;s agent and a Hockey Canada director, outbid McLaren Advertising, producers of &quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot;, which had offered $500,000. Ballard-Orr realized a profit on the series of .

Internationally, the series was broadcast in a total of 24 countries. In the US, the series was picked up by some television stations, such as WSNS (Channel 44) in Chicago. The telecasts of games one through four were produced by WSBK (Channel 38) in Boston and called by Bruins&#x27; announcers Fred Cusick and John Peirson. After efforts by WSBK to get rights to the four games in Moscow broke down, a last-minute deal by Boston public television station WGBH-TV allowed it to broadcast the CBC/CTV feed of games five through eight and to make the telecast available to PBS stations in several American cities, mostly those who had NHL, minor-league, or major college hockey teams. WGBH fed the Canadian telecasts; games six, seven, and eight were seen on WGBH and PBS on a tape-delay in prime-time.

The Soviet play-by-play was done by Nikolai Ozerov. In the style of that time, the Soviets did not televise anything during the pre-game, intermissions or post-game. During the intermission, the screen went black, with classical music playing quietly. After the games, the broadcast simply ended and Soviet television networks returned to regular programming.

==Legacy==
While Canada won the series, the Soviets earned the respect of fans and players alike. The Canadians went from scoffing at their antiquated equipment and strange training methods and practices to admiration for their talent and conditioning. Frank Mahovlich said, &quot;give the Russians a football and they&#x27;d win the Super Bowl in two years.&quot;

Soviet experts drew attention to a number of elements of the game that were not practiced by the USSR national team or were used rather poorly. In an interview with the Soviet &quot;&quot; magazine, Vsevolod Bobrov called the Canadians&#x27; strong point the ability to focus and solve individual tactical problems, and the Soviet hockey players — collective tactics and teamwork of units. He also noted the difference between the Soviet and Canadian styles of goal shots.

Many Soviet citizens believed that the outcome may have been different if Anatoli Firsov and Vitaly Davydov had not sat out the series to protest a coaching change. In response, some offer that Canada was without Bobby Orr and Bobby Hull, Orr due to his knee troubles and Hull due to the exclusion of Canadians playing in the World Hockey Association. These were arguably the best Canadian players at the time (along with Phil Esposito), so neither team had all of its greatest talent on the ice. The Soviet team had an obvious advantage of playing together year-round. Meanwhile, the Canadian team was picked and prepared in only a few weeks and most players were not yet in top shape when the series began. At the time, NHL players did not regularly train during the summer months, using the period for a holiday or other activities.

According to IIHF historians, Szemberg and Podnieks, the Summit Series convinced Canadians that ice hockey was now a global game and that any one of the top national teams in the world could win the Olympic or World Championship titles. Sweden national team coach Billy Harris (a former NHL player) later recalled that &quot;the (Swedish) media would ask me, &#x27;do you see even one Swedish player who could possibly have a chance in the National Hockey League?&#x27; I answered, &#x27;No, I see 14 of them!&#x27;&quot;

The success of the Summit Series led the NHL to organize further exhibitions against top Soviet clubs, such as the 1975-76 &quot;&quot;Super Series &#x27;76&quot; This was followed by the inaugural Canada Cup &quot;best-on-best&quot; tournament in 1976.

In North America, the Series (particularly the first few games) exposed the need for better preparation and off-season training. Philadelphia Flyers coach Fred Shero became an avid student of the Soviet style and was one of the first to bring the Soviet training techniques to the NHL as the Flyers won two Stanley Cup championships in 1974 and 1975. Tom Mellor (who joined the small but rapidly growing group of American-born NHL players after the 1972 Olympics) lamented that the NHL training methods of the early 1970s were vastly inferior to those of the Soviets. &quot;When I went to play for Detroit after the Olympics, Alex Delvecchio was the coach. ... When he would coach, we would do a couple of one-on-ones, two-on-twos, three-on-twos, we&#x27;d scrimmage, and he would scrimmage with us. At the end of the scrimmage, we&#x27;d do a couple of figure eights and then go to the bar. That was the NHL and pro mentality.&quot; Mark Howe commented that the Soviet national team must have trained six hours on the day of a game in the 1972 Winter Olympics. On the other hand, Swedish sports journalists were extremely impressed by the toughness and &quot;never say die&quot; fighting spirit of the Canadians, who lost only one game out of seven on European ice despite often trailing in the third period. According to Soviet player Boris Mikhailov, who later became a coach, &quot;it was a meeting between two schools of hockey and we have since continued this great exchange and we have learned from each other, taking the best of both styles.&quot;

As time passed, the significance of the series grew in the public consciousness, and the term &quot;Summit Series&quot; became its unofficial accepted name. In Canada, the Summit Series is a source of national pride, and is seen by many as a landmark event in Canadian cultural history. In Canada, Paul Henderson&#x27;s goal is considered to be the most famous in the history of the game, and can be referred to simply as &quot;the goal&quot;. The series is also seen by many Canadians as an important win in the Cold War.

===Legacy events===

Many of the 1972 Summit Series players faced each other again in subsequent international contests. Henderson played the Soviets in the 1974 Summit Series organized by the WHA. Eleven of the Soviet 1972 team players played against the Montreal Canadiens in the December 31, 1975, game of the &quot;Super Series &#x27;76&quot;. Seven players of Team Canada 1972 played for Montreal (Frank Mahovlich, Pete Mahovlich, Awrey, Cournoyer, Dryden, Lapointe and Savard). Many of the players also played in the 1976 Canada Cup, including Bobby Orr, making his first appearance against the Soviets as a professional. He had missed the chance in the Super Series &#x27;76, also due to injury.

In 1987, fifteen years after the series, a 60-minute commemorative video was directed and produced by Tom McKee and published by Labatt Brewing Company Limited, Toronto. The video includes interviews with Alan Eagleson and former players Bobby Clarke, Yvan Cournoyer, Paul Henderson, and Serge Savard in the studio. Every goal from the series is included as is a mention of the Soviets&#x27; &quot;shenanigans&quot;, as they try to interfere with one of the Canadians&#x27; practices in Moscow. Eagleson was later barred from public appearances with Team Canada members after his fraud convictions related to his hockey business dealings.

In 1989, Marcel Dionne retired as a member of the New York Rangers. He was the last active player from the Canadian roster. That same year, Sergei Priakin became the first Soviet to be given permission to play in the NHL, for the Calgary Flames.

In 1997, the Royal Canadian Mint released a commemorative silver dollar coin to mark the 25th anniversary.

On November 2, 2005, the team was honoured, en masse, as members of the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame. In the induction ceremony, Phil Esposito spoke: &quot;A lot of people will go back and say 1972 changed the face of the game and actually I believe it did. I&#x27;m not so sure it changed for the better, by the way. But it did change the way we think and look at hockey in this country.&quot;

In 2006, the CBC aired a two-part mini-series called &quot;Canada Russia &#x27;72&quot;, directed by T. W. Peacocke. The film is a dramatization of the series. The film was later made available on DVD.

In 2007, for the 35th anniversary of the series, Canadian and Russian national junior teams competed in the 2007 Super Series. Four games were played in Russia, followed by four in Canada. Canada won seven of eight games and game seven was a tie.

In 2010, the sweater Henderson wore while scoring the decisive final goal of the series was put up for auction by an anonymous American collector. The 42nd and winning bid of US$1,067,538 ($1,275,000 with auction fees, confirmed as the world record for hockey memorabilia by &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; in March 2012.) was placed by Mitchell Goldhar, a Canadian shopping mall mogul. It was also announced that Goldhar would be taking it on a tour of Canada, the locations of which to be decided by voters on Facebook.

In 2012, the 40th anniversary, several events took place. The 2012 Canada–Russia Challenge, a series between Canadian and Russian players took place in August. In September, two books were published to mark the anniversary. That month, in Russia, members of Team Canada went on a tour of Russian cities to celebrate the anniversary. A reciprocal tour of Canada was planned but no funding was available from the Government of Canada to sponsor the tour. Nevertheless, the anniversary was marked with several events in Canada. Team Canada received a star on Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame in Toronto. The series was replayed that month on Canadian television, and the Canadian team was honoured with a dinner at the Hockey Hall of Fame. Alan Eagleson was not part of any of the festivities. Also on the 40th anniversary, the IIHF Milestone Award was given to the Canadian and Russian teams for the event which had a &quot;decisive influence on the development of the game&quot;. Reuters wrote that Canada was expected to win the series easily, but when they came from behind to win in the eighth and final game, it marked &quot;the beginning of the modern hockey era&quot;.

In 2022, CBC Television produced a documentary mini-series about the series, entitled &quot;Summit &#x27;72&quot;. The documentary discusses the influence of Canadian Lloyd Percival&#x27;s book &quot;The Hockey Handbook&quot;, which had been used extensively as a reference by the Soviets. Percival was not surprised at the first-game loss to the Soviets, when many Canadian analysts had predicted a Canadian runaway.

===Cultural references===
Henderson&#x27;s goal in 1972 has been described as the &quot;goal that everyone remembers&quot; by the Canadian rockers The Tragically Hip in their song &quot;Fireworks&quot; from their album &quot;Phantom Power&quot;. The song describes the national eruption of celebration over the goal.

In the 1994 film &quot;&quot;, director Nikita Mikhalkov observes that to be a great nation, &quot;Russia needed great enemies&quot;. The film then shows Phil Esposito in the penalty box from video of the series. Esposito is &quot;performing a menacing pantomime&quot; in the words of author Dave Bidini. The term &quot;Esposito&quot; also was added as a derogatory term to street slang in Russia.

In 2022, Russian indie project Past Day released a sovietwave track &quot;USSR–Canada 1972&quot;, dedicated to the 50th anniversary of the Summit Series. It includes fragments of Nikolai Ozerov&#x27;s reports.

==Schedule and results==
===Game one===

Source: Podnieks

===Game two===

Source: Podnieks

===Game three===

Source: Podnieks

===Game four===

Source: Podnieks

===Game five===

Source: Podnieks

===Game six===

Source: Podnieks

===Game seven===

Source: Podnieks

===Game eight===

Source: Podnieks

===Canada vs. Sweden===
;Game one

Source: Dryden &amp; Mulvoy, Podnieks
;Game two

Source: Dryden &amp; Mulvoy, Podnieks

===Canada vs. Czechoslovakia===

Source: Podnieks, Dryden &amp; Mulvoy

==Statistics==
Statistics do not include the games in Czechoslovakia and Sweden.

===Team===

Source: MacSkimming 1996, Dryden &amp; Mulvoy

===Players===


Sources: &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, Society for International Hockey Research, Plus-minus: Dryden &amp; Mulvoy

===Did not play===
Seven other players were part of Team Canada, but did not play against the Soviet Union. The injured Bobby Orr did not play any games with Team Canada, while the other six played against Sweden, and Dionne, Glennie and Tallon played against Czechoslovakia. The seven players, with their jersey numbers:

* Brian Glennie (#38), Jocelyn Guevremont (#37), Bobby Orr (#4), Dale Tallon (#32) – defence
* Marcel Dionne (#34), Rick Martin (#36) – forward
* Eddie Johnston (#1) – goaltender

In addition, three junior-age players were invited to training camp to take part in practices only. All three were clients of Alan Eagleson; had been drafted in the first round of the 1972 NHL Entry Draft just five weeks before Team Canada roster was selected; and started their professional careers just days after the Summit Series ended. The three worked with the team until it left for Europe after the Canadian stage of the Summit Series. The three players, with their jersey numbers:

* John Van Boxmeer (#40) - defence
* Billy Harris (#39) - forward
* Michel Larocque (#30) - goaltender

====Coaches====
* Harry Sinden – coach
* John Ferguson – assistant

;Notes
* Seven Canadians played in all eight games: Phil Esposito, Bergman, Park, Cournoyer, and the high scoring line (3 goals with all three earning a point, 4 goals with two of the three earning a point) of Clarke, Henderson and Ellis.


Sources: &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, Society for International Hockey Research, Plus-minus: Dryden &amp; Mulvoy

====Did not play====
* Vitaly Davydov – defence
* Anatoli Firsov – forward/left wing
* Viktor Zinger (#1), Alexander Sidelnikov (#27), Alexander Pashkov – goaltenders

Jersey numbers: &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;

====Coaches====
* Vsevolod Bobrov – coach
* Boris Kulagin – assistant

;Notes
* With the exception of SKA Leningrad&#x27;s Solodukhin, every Soviet player came from a team based in Moscow.

==See also==
* 1974 Summit Series
* Aggie Kukulowicz, Canadian-born Russian language interpreter for the series
* List of international ice hockey competitions featuring NHL players
* Politics and sports

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Further reading ===
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Canada Versus the Soviet Union—The heyday of the battle for world hockey supremacy (1972–1987)
* CBC Digital Archives – Canada-Soviet Hockey Series, 1972, archived from the original
* Hockey Hall of Fame – Summit Series
* Short clips from a Chicago Area broadcast of Game 8 
* Website dedicated to the 50th anniversary of the Summit Series (In Russian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46615" start="4" end="17" title="Summit Series" label="Summit Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q46615" start="19" end="34" title="Summit Series" label="Super Series 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q46615" start="36" end="54" title="Summit Series" label="Canada–USSR Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q46615" start="62" end="83" title="Summit Series" label="Series of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="106" end="116" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="136" end="148" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="153" end="159" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330035" start="226" end="246" title="Soviet Union national ice hockey team" label="Soviet national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="310" end="332" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190173" start="509" end="544" title="International Ice Hockey Federation" label="International Ice Hockey Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q150670" start="1707" end="1721" title="Paul Henderson" label="Paul Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1757" end="1765" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="1963" end="1982" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385616" start="1993" end="2011" title="Alexander Yakushev" label="Alexander Yakushev"/>
<link wikidata="Q380267" start="2013" end="2029" title="Valeri Kharlamov" label="Valeri Kharlamov"/>
<link wikidata="Q316864" start="2045" end="2062" title="Vladislav Tretiak" label="Vladislav Tretiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="2164" end="2177" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238500" start="2263" end="2267" title="Line (ice hockey)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q888504" start="2271" end="2283" title="Bobby Clarke" label="Bobby Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q437621" start="2285" end="2294" title="Ron Ellis" label="Ron Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="2759" end="2769" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="2939" end="2963" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="3013" end="3022" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="3186" end="3216" title="Ice Hockey World Championships" label="Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785302" start="3305" end="3314" title="Allan Cup" label="Allan Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="3815" end="3835" title="Olympic Winter Games" label="Olympic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832733" start="3935" end="3953" title="Trail Smoke Eaters" label="Trail Smoke Eaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q518147" start="3961" end="3978" title="1961 Ice Hockey World Championships" label="1961 championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="4023" end="4028" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4228" end="4240" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32140" start="4544" end="4555" title="CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269063" start="4584" end="4590" title="Dynamo Sports Club" label="Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q622109" start="4595" end="4602" title="Spartak (sports society)" label="Spartak"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="4891" end="4894" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="4939" end="4943" title="Red Army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q264127" start="5199" end="5214" title="Anatoly Tarasov" label="Anatoly Tarasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="5592" end="5612" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622622" start="5624" end="5637" title="Hockey Canada" label="Hockey Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062293" start="5924" end="5943" title="Channel One Cup (ice hockey)" label="Izvestia tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315881" start="6158" end="6187" title="1970 World Ice Hockey Championships" label="1970 IIHF World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6260" end="6266" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229733" start="6497" end="6556" title="All-Union Council on Physical Culture and Sports" label="State Committee for Physical Culture and Sports of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341560" start="6558" end="6571" title="Sergei Pavlov (politician)" label="Sergei Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="6597" end="6603" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q753932" start="6711" end="6719" title="Izvestia" label="Izvestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846841" start="7071" end="7089" title="Andrei Starovoytov" label="Andrei Starovoytov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586432" start="7285" end="7296" title="Robert Ford (Canadian diplomat)" label="Robert Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="7493" end="7507" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874734" start="7780" end="7806" title="Hotel International Prague" label="Hotel International Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315896" start="7818" end="7853" title="1972 World Ice Hockey Championships" label="1972 World Ice Hockey Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q59130267" start="7956" end="7967" title="Joe Kryczka" label="Joe Kryczka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032034" start="7973" end="8008" title="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association" label="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177145" start="8043" end="8077" title="Ice Hockey Federation of Russia" label="Soviet Union Ice Hockey Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q692292" start="8097" end="8110" title="Bunny Ahearne" label="Bunny Ahearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496042" start="8164" end="8173" title="Fred Page" label="Fred Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095380" start="8684" end="8701" title="Clarence Campbell" label="Clarence Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q615640" start="9585" end="9589" title="Soviet rouble" label="Rbls"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="9915" end="9923" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q367272" start="9925" end="9939" title="Montreal Forum" label="Montreal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9942" end="9949" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814534" start="9951" end="9969" title="Maple Leaf Gardens" label="Maple Leaf Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="9972" end="9980" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165024" start="9982" end="9996" title="Winnipeg Arena" label="Winnipeg Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="10003" end="10012" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q832644" start="10014" end="10030" title="Pacific Coliseum" label="Pacific Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971579" start="10103" end="10122" title="Luzhniki Palace of Sports" label="Luzhniki Ice Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="10309" end="10315" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830499" start="10512" end="10525" title="Alan Eagleson" label="Alan Eagleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="11357" end="11395" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="11533" end="11546" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586821" start="11559" end="11571" title="Harry Sinden" label="Harry Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="11753" end="11770" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181489" start="12148" end="12161" title="John Ferguson Sr." label="John Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41583" start="12169" end="12184" title="assistant coach" label="assistant coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q433391" start="12264" end="12279" title="Vsevolod Bobrov" label="Vsevolod Bobrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q744753" start="12437" end="12467" title="HC Spartak Moscow" label="Moscow Spartak ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="13220" end="13232" title="Team McLaren" label="Team McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="14490" end="14514" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373484" start="14562" end="14576" title="Gerry Cheevers" label="Gerry Cheevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200111" start="14578" end="14593" title="Derek Sanderson" label="Derek Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676285" start="14598" end="14612" title="J. C. Tremblay" label="J. C. Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127574" start="14853" end="14867" title="Harold Ballard" label="Harold Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="14873" end="14892" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="15118" end="15132" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714629" start="15161" end="15172" title="Doug Fisher (politician)" label="Doug Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q356280" start="15336" end="15354" title="Jacques Laperrière" label="Jacques Laperrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q356285" start="15368" end="15380" title="Guy Lapointe" label="Guy Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189210" start="15414" end="15425" title="Dennis Hull" label="Dennis Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047280" start="15572" end="15586" title="Eddie Johnston" label="Eddie Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q440237" start="15588" end="15599" title="Stan Mikita" label="Stan Mikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q328789" start="15620" end="15631" title="Rick Martin" label="Rick Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="15653" end="15662" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382032" start="15938" end="15953" title="Frank Mahovlich" label="Frank Mahovlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="15958" end="15970" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q550733" start="16476" end="16493" title="Alexander Ragulin" label="Alexander Ragulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392976" start="16785" end="16798" title="Boris Kulagin" label="Boris Kulagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82534" start="16809" end="16824" title="Krylya Sovetov Moscow" label="Krylia Sovietov"/>
<link wikidata="Q488039" start="16899" end="16913" title="Anatoli Firsov" label="Anatoli Firsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442059" start="17381" end="17402" title="Queen Elizabeth Hotel" label="Queen Elizabeth Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352592" start="17695" end="17709" title="Vitali Davydov" label="Vitali Davydov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182069" start="18065" end="18078" title="John McLellan (ice hockey)" label="John McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238953" start="18421" end="18432" title="Rick Noonan" label="Rick Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="18452" end="18482" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9652" start="18627" end="18647" title="1980 Winter Olympics" label="1980 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="19041" end="19054" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q316864" start="19566" end="19583" title="Vladislav Tretiak" label="Vladislav Tretiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q264127" start="19680" end="19687" title="Anatoly Tarasov" label="Tarasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q710342" start="20013" end="20027" title="Yvan Cournoyer" label="Yvan Cournoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="20300" end="20328" title="Cold War" label="capitalism against communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851798" start="20720" end="20735" title="The Hockey News" label="The Hockey News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272660" start="20805" end="20817" title="Dick Beddoes" label="Dick Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="20842" end="20860" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290515" start="21033" end="21045" title="Milt Dunnell" label="Milt Dunnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="21053" end="21065" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683965" start="21074" end="21085" title="Jim Coleman (journalist)" label="Jim Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234369" start="21087" end="21094" title="Southam Inc." label="Southam"/>
<link wikidata="Q95140121" start="21101" end="21118" title="Claude Larochelle" label="Claude Larochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227253" start="21126" end="21135" title="Le Soleil (Quebec)" label="Le Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21254" end="21272" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q98030270" start="21284" end="21296" title="Francis Rosa" label="Francis Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="21304" end="21316" title="The Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="21379" end="21397" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q538935" start="21508" end="21522" title="Jacques Plante" label="Jacques Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q863117" start="22402" end="22414" title="Billy Harris (ice hockey b. 1935)" label="Billy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018988" start="22602" end="22613" title="David Bauer (ice hockey)" label="David Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369655" start="24925" end="24938" title="Yevgeni Zimin" label="Yevgeni Zimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358990" start="24981" end="24996" title="Vladimir Petrov (ice hockey)" label="Vladimir Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035717" start="25857" end="25866" title="Don Awrey" label="Don Awrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q739820" start="25923" end="25933" title="Ken Dryden" label="Ken Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q710342" start="26451" end="26465" title="Yvan Cournoyer" label="Yvan Cournoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367531" start="26532" end="26547" title="Boris Mikhailov (ice hockey)" label="Boris Mikhailov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="27069" end="27087" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978107" start="27100" end="27111" title="Claude Ruel" label="Claude Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551" start="28091" end="28098" title="borscht" label="borscht"/>
<link wikidata="Q332240" start="28281" end="28293" title="Red Berenson" label="Red Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265683" start="28295" end="28306" title="Rod Gilbert" label="Rod Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q978691" start="28308" end="28320" title="Vic Hadfield" label="Vic Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q362706" start="28322" end="28336" title="Mickey Redmond" label="Mickey Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382373" start="28341" end="28352" title="Rod Seiling" label="Rod Seiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q569178" start="28490" end="28502" title="Serge Savard" label="Serge Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056579" start="28504" end="28517" title="Pat Stapleton (ice hockey)" label="Pat Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q359072" start="28522" end="28532" title="Bill White (ice hockey)" label="Bill White"/>
<link wikidata="Q731201" start="28570" end="28583" title="Wayne Cashman" label="Wayne Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685140" start="28588" end="28600" title="J. P. Parisé" label="J. P. Parisé"/>
<link wikidata="Q954322" start="28602" end="28615" title="Tony Esposito" label="Tony Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008369" start="29109" end="29121" title="Gary Bergman" label="Gary Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q432389" start="29123" end="29138" title="Peter Mahovlich" label="Peter Mahovlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369747" start="29432" end="29450" title="Vladimir Lutchenko" label="Vladimir Lutchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518203" start="29655" end="29667" title="Yuri Lyapkin" label="Yuri Lyapkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385616" start="29716" end="29734" title="Alexander Yakushev" label="Alexander Yakushev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846841" start="30337" end="30355" title="Andrei Starovoytov" label="Andrei Starovoytov"/>
<link wikidata="Q862132" start="31174" end="31190" title="Bill Goldsworthy" label="Bill Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297953" start="32124" end="32136" title="Yuri Lebedev (ice hockey)" label="Yuri Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379171" start="32138" end="32155" title="Vyacheslav Anisin" label="Vyacheslav Anisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725607" start="32160" end="32177" title="Alexander Bodunov" label="Alexander Bodunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369365" start="32975" end="32988" title="Viktor Zinger" label="Viktor Zinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q141078" start="33663" end="33680" title="Gilbert Perreault" label="Gilbert Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179834" start="36128" end="36146" title="Jocelyn Guevremont" label="Jocelyn Guevremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="36793" end="36808" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="36825" end="36839" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295781" start="36865" end="36881" title="Nikolai Podgorny" label="Nikolai Podgorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101834" start="37135" end="37157" title="No Coward Plays Hockey" label="No Coward Plays Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q945218" start="37270" end="37284" title="bread and salt" label="bread and salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="37327" end="37336" title="carnation" label="carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369714" start="37668" end="37679" title="Yury Blinov" label="Yury Blinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650551" start="37855" end="37871" title="Vladimir Vikulov" label="Vladimir Vikulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="38147" end="38155" title="O Canada" label="O Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="38288" end="38294" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549535" start="40137" end="40153" title="Montreal Gazette" label="Montreal Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="40220" end="40229" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q912015" start="40733" end="40747" title="Brian Conacher" label="Brian Conacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705022" start="41182" end="41196" title="Josef Kompalla" label="Josef Kompalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492689" start="41201" end="41213" title="Franz Baader (ice hockey)" label="Franz Baader"/>
<link wikidata="Q68833" start="42482" end="42492" title="Bone fracture" label="fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q666831" start="43903" end="43912" title="Flin Flon" label="Flin Flon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615259" start="45658" end="45670" title="Ove Dahlberg" label="Ove Dahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="47866" end="47876" title="totem pole" label="totem pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="48728" end="48761" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="48768" end="48786" title="CBC Television" label="television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="48792" end="48814" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="48837" end="48852" title="Ici Radio-Canada Télé" label="TV Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q644408" start="48883" end="48944" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="men&amp;#x27;s hockey gold medal game of the 2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005563" start="50297" end="50313" title="Vladimir Shadrin" label="Vladimir Shadrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q735951" start="50440" end="50455" title="Valery Vasiliev" label="Valery Vasiliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369277" start="51371" end="51387" title="Yevgeni Mishakov" label="Yevgeni Mishakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473707" start="51437" end="51450" title="Foster Hewitt" label="Foster Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137711" start="52470" end="52480" title="the finger" label="the finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332121" start="52516" end="52530" title="Nikolai Ozerov" label="Nikolai Ozerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487912" start="53945" end="53957" title="Frank Lennon" label="Frank Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q979154" start="55444" end="55456" title="Jean Drapeau" label="Jean Drapeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915521" start="55685" end="55707" title="Nathan Phillips Square" label="Nathan Phillips Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q862052" start="55776" end="55786" title="Bill Davis" label="Bill Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578463" start="55805" end="55821" title="William Dennison (Canadian politician)" label="William Dennison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903401" start="55922" end="55932" title="Bill Wirtz" label="Bill Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q880953" start="56612" end="56628" title="General-Anzeiger" label="General-Anzeiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="59777" end="59787" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="59823" end="59830" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="60045" end="60062" title="Covert listening device" label="listening devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q913643" start="60376" end="60396" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Sweden national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q304362" start="60664" end="60686" title="Hovet" label="Johanneshovs Isstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="60696" end="60705" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379127" start="62130" end="62141" title="Ulf Sterner" label="Ulf Sterner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840073" start="63302" end="63319" title="Lars-Erik Sjöberg" label="Lars-Erik Sjöberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26518" start="63507" end="63517" title="Södertälje" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329981" start="64107" end="64133" title="Czechoslovakia men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Czechoslovak national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000294" start="64212" end="64226" title="Sportovní hala" label="Sportovní hala"/>
<link wikidata="Q558357" start="64413" end="64429" title="Bohuslav Stastny" label="Bohuslav Stastny"/>
<link wikidata="Q710726" start="64431" end="64442" title="Jiri Kochta" label="Jiri Kochta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426504" start="65570" end="65585" title="Rene Lecavalier" label="Rene Lecavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430782" start="65671" end="65686" title="Richard Garneau" label="Richard Garneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="65770" end="65790" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="66223" end="66245" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955801" start="66474" end="66478" title="WSNS" label="WSNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564793" start="66561" end="66565" title="WSBK-TV" label="WSBK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494941" start="66627" end="66638" title="Fred Cusick" label="Fred Cusick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702380" start="66643" end="66655" title="John Peirson" label="John Peirson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564675" start="66788" end="66795" title="WGBH-TV" label="WGBH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="68562" end="68572" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446306" start="69830" end="69851" title="Super Series &amp;#x27;76" label="Super Series &amp;#x27;76"/>
<link wikidata="Q605945" start="69893" end="69903" title="Canada Cup" label="Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="70079" end="70098" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167950" start="70105" end="70115" title="Fred Shero" label="Fred Shero"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="70257" end="70268" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234651" start="70301" end="70311" title="Tom Mellor (ice hockey)" label="Tom Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="70548" end="70555" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q662920" start="70576" end="70591" title="Alex Delvecchio" label="Alex Delvecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370223" start="70884" end="70893" title="Mark Howe" label="Mark Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9646" start="70990" end="71010" title="1972 Winter Olympics" label="1972 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778952" start="72188" end="72206" title="1974 Summit Series" label="1974 Summit Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031949" start="72554" end="72569" title="1976 Canada Cup" label="1976 Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="73315" end="73320" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="73384" end="73397" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="73425" end="73441" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510701" start="73515" end="73529" title="Sergei Priakin" label="Sergei Priakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="73605" end="73619" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647539" start="73635" end="73654" title="Royal Canadian Mint" label="Royal Canadian Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330014" start="73802" end="73830" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029423" start="74185" end="74207" title="Canada Russia &amp;#x27;72" label="Canada Russia &amp;#x27;72"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511933" start="74227" end="74241" title="T. W. Peacocke" label="T. W. Peacocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q818865" start="74437" end="74454" title="2007 Super Series" label="2007 Super Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953738" start="74917" end="74933" title="Mitchell Goldhar" label="Mitchell Goldhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625056" start="75165" end="75193" title="2012 Canada–Russia Challenge" label="2012 Canada–Russia Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="75659" end="75685" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="75813" end="75832" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q190173" start="75922" end="75942" title="IIHF Milestone Award" label="IIHF Milestone Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="76076" end="76083" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085638" start="76364" end="76379" title="Summit &amp;#x27;72" label="Summit &amp;#x27;72"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662690" start="76439" end="76453" title="Lloyd Percival" label="Lloyd Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="76838" end="76856" title="The Tragically Hip" label="The Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452050" start="76877" end="76886" title="Fireworks (The Tragically Hip song)" label="Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378088" start="76916" end="76929" title="Phantom Power (The Tragically Hip album)" label="Phantom Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q55207" start="77049" end="77065" title="Nikita Mikhalkov" label="Nikita Mikhalkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30895273" start="77459" end="77469" title="sovietwave" label="sovietwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332121" start="77587" end="77601" title="Nikolai Ozerov" label="Nikolai Ozerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963856" start="78718" end="78731" title="Brian Glennie" label="Brian Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179834" start="78739" end="78757" title="Jocelyn Guevremont" label="Jocelyn Guevremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="78765" end="78774" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q110556" start="78781" end="78792" title="Dale Tallon" label="Dale Tallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="78811" end="78824" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q328789" start="78832" end="78843" title="Rick Martin" label="Rick Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047280" start="78862" end="78876" title="Eddie Johnston" label="Eddie Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="78915" end="78925" title="Junior ice hockey" label="junior-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q141023" start="79080" end="79100" title="1972 NHL Entry Draft" label="1972 NHL Entry Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701997" start="79389" end="79405" title="John Van Boxmeer" label="John Van Boxmeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863118" start="79424" end="79436" title="Billy Harris (ice hockey, born 1952)" label="Billy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q362573" start="79455" end="79470" title="Michel Larocque" label="Michel Larocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586821" start="79509" end="79521" title="Harry Sinden" label="Harry Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181489" start="79532" end="79545" title="John Ferguson Sr." label="John Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352592" start="79940" end="79954" title="Vitaly Davydov" label="Vitaly Davydov"/>
<link wikidata="Q488039" start="79967" end="79981" title="Anatoli Firsov" label="Anatoli Firsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369365" start="80004" end="80017" title="Viktor Zinger" label="Viktor Zinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374034" start="80024" end="80044" title="Alexander Sidelnikov" label="Alexander Sidelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q224889" start="80052" end="80069" title="Alexander Pashkov" label="Alexander Pashkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q433391" start="80151" end="80166" title="Vsevolod Bobrov" label="Vsevolod Bobrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q392976" start="80177" end="80190" title="Boris Kulagin" label="Boris Kulagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778952" start="80338" end="80356" title="1974 Summit Series" label="1974 Summit Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692209" start="80359" end="80375" title="Aggie Kukulowicz" label="Aggie Kukulowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248502" start="80437" end="80504" title="List of international ice hockey competitions featuring NHL players" label="List of international ice hockey competitions featuring NHL players"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225186" start="80507" end="80526" title="Politics and sports" label="Politics and sports"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476876" wikidata="Q2057801" url="?curid=476876" title="Patrick McGilligan (Fine Gael politician)">
<text>Patrick Joseph McGilligan (12 April 1889 – 15 November 1979) was an Irish Fine Gael politician who served as the 14th Attorney General of Ireland from 1954 to 1957, Minister for Finance from 1948 to 1951, Minister for External Affairs from 1927 to 1932 and Minister for Industry and Commerce from 1924 to 1932. He served as a Teachta Dála (TD) from 1923 to 1965.

==Early life==
McGilligan was born in Hanover Place, Coleraine, County Londonderry, the son of Patrick McGilligan, a draper, who would serve as MP for South Fermanagh from 1892 to 1895 for the Irish Parliamentary Party, and Catherine O&#x27;Farrell. He was educated at St Columb&#x27;s College in Derry; Clongowes Wood College in County Kildare and University College Dublin.

==Lawyer and politician==
He joined Sinn Féin but was unsuccessful in his attempt to be elected as an MP at the 1918 general election. McGilligan was called to the bar in 1921.

==Minister for Industry and Commerce==
He was elected as a Cumann na nGaedheal TD for the National University at a by-election held on 3 November 1923. His time in Government was marked by economic retrenchment and a focus on low taxation. At the beginning of his time in office he declared that &quot;People may have to die in this country and may have to die of starvation&quot;. Between 1924 and 1932, McGilligan served as Minister for Industry and Commerce, notably pushing through the Shannon hydroelectric scheme, then the largest hydroelectricity project in the world. In 1927, he set up the Electricity Supply Board (ESB), and also the Agricultural Credit Corporation.

==Minister for External Affairs==

In 1927, McGilligan was appointed as Minister for External Affairs, following the assassination of Kevin O&#x27;Higgins by the anti-Treaty elements of the IRA, in revenge for O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; support for the execution of Republican prisoners during the Irish Civil War (1922–23). In this position, he was hugely influential at the Committee on the Operation of Dominion Legislation and at the Imperial Conference in 1930 (jointly with representatives of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa and the United Kingdom). The Statute of Westminster that emerged from these meetings gave greater power to dominions in the Commonwealth like the Irish Free State.

==In opposition==
Following the 1932 general election, Cumann na nGaedhael were sent into opposition for the first time as Fianna Fáil took over as the government. Tensions between the two parties ratcheted up as both sides began to turn towards paramilitaries. The Irish Republican Army began to disrupt Cumann na nGaedhael public meetings, and in turn, a pro-Cumann na nGaedhael paramilitary called the Army Comrades Association (later better known as the Blueshirts) was created to counteract the IRA and disrupt Fianna Fáil meetings. As the links between the Blueshirts and Cumann na nGaedhael rapidly developed, sitting CnaG Teachta Dála Thomas F. O&#x27;Higgins became the leader of the ACA. He was joined by several other CnaG TDs including McGilligan. Cumann na nGaedhael, The National Centre Party and the Blueshirts would eventually merge into one new party called Fine Gael in the aftermath of the 1933 general election and the banning of the Blueshirts. Despite their combination of strength, they failed to make much of an impact in the 1934 local elections either. Fine Gael would remain in opposition until the 1948 general election.

During this period in opposition from 1932 to 1948, McGilligan built up a law practice and became a professor of constitutional and international law at University College Dublin. When the National University Dáil constituency was abolished in 1937 (before being recreated in the Seanad in 1938), McGilligan was elected as TD for Dublin North-West.

==Inter-Party governments==
In 1948, McGilligan was appointed Minister for Finance in the first Inter-Party Government. As Minister, he undertook some major reforms. He instigated a new approach where the government invested radically in capital projects. Colleagues however complained of his frequent absence from cabinet and the difficulty of contacting him at the Department of Finance. Between 1954 and 1957, he served as Attorney General, a job in which, as he admitted, he felt far more at home than as Minister for Finance. He lost his seat at the 1965 general election. He then retired from politics, having served for over 40 years.

==Death and legacy==
Patrick McGilligan died in Dublin on 15 November 1979; at the age of ninety. A later Attorney General, John M. Kelly in the preface to his definitive text, &quot;The Irish Constitution&quot; (1980), noted the remarkable number of senior judges who were former students of McGilligan and suggested that given his own firm belief in the value of judicial review, he deserves much of the credit for the remarkable development of Irish law in this field since the early 1960s.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2057801" start="0" end="25" title="Patrick McGilligan (Fine Gael politician)" label="Patrick Joseph McGilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="74" end="83" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777749" start="118" end="145" title="Attorney General of Ireland" label="Attorney General of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294945" start="165" end="185" title="Minister for Finance (Ireland)" label="Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865853" start="205" end="234" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ireland)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865902" start="257" end="291" title="Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment" label="Minister for Industry and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="326" end="338" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108185" start="417" end="426" title="Coleraine" label="Coleraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192208" start="428" end="446" title="County Londonderry" label="County Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21711321" start="459" end="477" title="Patrick McGilligan (Irish nationalist politician)" label="Patrick McGilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="508" end="510" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567216" start="515" end="530" title="South Fermanagh (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="557" end="582" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592850" start="633" end="657" title="St Columb&amp;#x27;s College" label="St Columb&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="661" end="666" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294995" start="668" end="690" title="Clongowes Wood College" label="Clongowes Wood College"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="694" end="708" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="713" end="738" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="777" end="786" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="843" end="845" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q905063" start="853" end="874" title="1918 Irish general election" label="1918 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="891" end="908" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143631" start="978" end="997" title="Cumann na nGaedheal" label="Cumann na nGaedheal"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="998" end="1000" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979248" start="1009" end="1028" title="National University of Ireland (constituency)" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179683" start="1409" end="1437" title="Shannon Scheme" label="Shannon hydroelectric scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1456" end="1472" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050566" start="1518" end="1542" title="Electricity Supply Board" label="Electricity Supply Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650528" start="1563" end="1594" title="Agricultural Credit Corporation" label="Agricultural Credit Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865853" start="1669" end="1698" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ireland)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q963914" start="1731" end="1751" title="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="1764" end="1770" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="1787" end="1790" title="Irish Republican Army (1922–1969)" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="1889" end="1904" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139567" start="2029" end="2048" title="Imperial Conference" label="Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2090" end="2099" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2101" end="2107" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2109" end="2120" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2122" end="2134" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2143" end="2157" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="2164" end="2186" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="2242" end="2250" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2259" end="2271" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="2281" end="2297" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638428" start="2332" end="2353" title="1932 Irish general election" label="1932 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="2423" end="2434" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="2566" end="2587" title="Anti-Treaty IRA" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q689733" start="2705" end="2730" title="Army Comrades Association" label="Army Comrades Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789468" start="2943" end="2967" title="Thomas F. O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Thomas F. O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432611" start="3085" end="3106" title="National Centre Party (Ireland)" label="National Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="3175" end="3184" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071543" start="3209" end="3230" title="1933 Irish general election" label="1933 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895147" start="3350" end="3370" title="1934 Irish local elections" label="1934 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708652" start="3426" end="3447" title="1948 Irish general election" label="1948 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="3603" end="3628" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979248" start="3639" end="3658" title="National University of Ireland (constituency)" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531985" start="3780" end="3797" title="Dublin North-West (Dáil constituency)" label="Dublin North-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589351" start="3890" end="3918" title="5th Government of Ireland" label="first Inter-Party Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777749" start="4226" end="4242" title="Attorney General of Ireland" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430088" start="4355" end="4376" title="1965 Irish general election" label="1965 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="4491" end="4497" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671033" start="4567" end="4580" title="John M. Kelly (politician)" label="John M. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="4808" end="4823" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476880" wikidata="Q1174308" url="?curid=476880" title="David Edwards">
<text>David Edwards may refer to:
==Music==
*David &quot;Honeyboy&quot; Edwards (1915–2011), American blues singer and guitarist
*Dave Edwards (musician) (1941–2000), American musician
*David Edwards (singer) (1964–2021), Welsh musician
*David Eugene Edwards (born 1968), American musician; lead singer of Woven Hand and 16 Horsepower
*Minotaur Shock, stage name of David Edwards, British electronica musician

==Sports==
*David Edwards (Cambridgeshire cricketer) (1805–1850), English cricketer
*David Farragut Edwards (c. 1872–1930), American football coach
*Dai Edwards (1896–1960), Wales dual-code rugby international
*Dave Edwards (Scottish footballer) (1900–1946), early twentieth century association football goalkeeper
*David Edwards (rugby union) (1930–2006), Scottish rugby union player
*David Edwards (footballer, born 1934), Welsh footballer
*Dave Edwards (linebacker) (1939–2016), NFL linebacker
*Dave Edwards (baseball) (born 1954), former MLB player
*David Edwards (golfer) (born 1956), American PGA Tour and Champions Tour player
*Dave Edwards (defensive back) (born 1962), NFL defensive back
*David Edwards (sailor) (born 1973), Australian sailor
*David Edwards (footballer, born 1974), English footballer
*David Edwards (curler) (born 1979), Scottish curler
*David Edwards (cricketer, born 1980), English cricketer
*David Edwards (footballer, born 1986), Wales international footballer
*David Edwards (motivational speaker) (1987–2008), American footballer and speaker
*David Edwards (cyclist) (born 1993), Australian cyclist
*David Edwards (offensive lineman) (born 1997), American football offensive lineman
*David Edwards (basketball) (1971–2020), American basketball player

==Other==
*David Edwards (minister) (1660–1716), Welsh independent minister who lived in the Vale of Aeron
*David Edwards (soldier) (1841–1897), American soldier who fought in the American Civil War
*David Edwards (judge) (1871–1936), Australian judge
*David Miall Edwards (1873–1941), Welsh Non-conformist writer and theologian
*David Edwards (priest) (1929–2018), English Anglican Dean of Norwich
*Dave Edwards (Wyoming politician) (1938–2013), American politician
*David Edwards (quiz contestant) (born 1947), Welsh game show winner
*David Edwards (engineer), American biomedical engineering professor, writer and experimental artist
*David Edwards (journalist) (born 1962), British political writer
*David Edwards (Oregon politician) (born 1966), member of the Oregon State House of Representatives
*David Edwards (bishop), Anglican bishop of Fredericton, Canada

==See also==
*David Edward (born 1934), Scottish lawyer and academic
*David Edwardes (fl. 1529–1532), English anatomist</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1174308" start="0" end="13" title="David Edwards" label="David Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q560354" start="39" end="73" title="David &amp;quot;Honeyboy&amp;quot; Edwards" label="David &amp;quot;Honeyboy&amp;quot; Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228719" start="124" end="147" title="Dave Edwards (musician)" label="Dave Edwards (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233299" start="180" end="202" title="David Edwards (singer)" label="David Edwards (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q352895" start="232" end="252" title="David Eugene Edwards" label="David Eugene Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937530" start="330" end="344" title="Minotaur Shock" label="Minotaur Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066405" start="417" end="457" title="David Edwards (Cambridgeshire cricketer)" label="David Edwards (Cambridgeshire cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233561" start="490" end="512" title="David Farragut Edwards" label="David Farragut Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208990" start="554" end="565" title="Dai Edwards" label="Dai Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228716" start="616" end="650" title="Dave Edwards (Scottish footballer)" label="Dave Edwards (Scottish footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104215959" start="721" end="748" title="David Edwards (rugby union)" label="David Edwards (rugby union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94641829" start="791" end="828" title="David Edwards (footballer, born 1934)" label="David Edwards (footballer, born 1934)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4108324" start="848" end="873" title="Dave Edwards (linebacker)" label="Dave Edwards (linebacker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228718" start="903" end="926" title="Dave Edwards (baseball)" label="Dave Edwards (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233293" start="959" end="981" title="David Edwards (golfer)" label="David Edwards (golfer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004187" start="1040" end="1069" title="Dave Edwards (defensive back)" label="Dave Edwards (defensive back)"/>
<link wikidata="Q86844469" start="1103" end="1125" title="David Edwards (sailor)" label="David Edwards (sailor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376029" start="1158" end="1195" title="David Edwards (footballer, born 1974)" label="David Edwards (footballer, born 1974)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39085151" start="1217" end="1239" title="David Edwards (curler)" label="David Edwards (curler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233292" start="1270" end="1306" title="David Edwards (cricketer, born 1980)" label="David Edwards (cricketer, born 1980)"/>
<link wikidata="Q934766" start="1327" end="1364" title="David Edwards (footballer, born 1986)" label="David Edwards (footballer, born 1986)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233290" start="1398" end="1434" title="David Edwards (motivational speaker)" label="David Edwards (motivational speaker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017825" start="1481" end="1504" title="David Edwards (cyclist)" label="David Edwards (cyclist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609103" start="1538" end="1571" title="David Edwards (offensive lineman)" label="David Edwards (offensive lineman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q88465409" start="1622" end="1648" title="David Edwards (basketball)" label="David Edwards (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20732803" start="1701" end="1725" title="David Edwards (minister)" label="David Edwards (minister)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059767" start="1798" end="1821" title="David Edwards (soldier)" label="David Edwards (soldier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233294" start="1890" end="1911" title="David Edwards (judge)" label="David Edwards (judge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13127823" start="1943" end="1962" title="David Miall Edwards" label="David Miall Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233295" start="2020" end="2042" title="David Edwards (priest)" label="David Edwards (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228717" start="2090" end="2123" title="Dave Edwards (Wyoming politician)" label="Dave Edwards (Wyoming politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233287" start="2158" end="2189" title="David Edwards (quiz contestant)" label="David Edwards (quiz contestant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017827" start="2227" end="2251" title="David Edwards (engineer)" label="David Edwards (engineer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233296" start="2328" end="2354" title="David Edwards (journalist)" label="David Edwards (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233286" start="2394" end="2427" title="David Edwards (Oregon politician)" label="David Edwards (Oregon politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205893" start="2494" end="2516" title="David Edwards (bishop)" label="David Edwards (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233273" start="2572" end="2584" title="David Edward" label="David Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233283" start="2628" end="2642" title="David Edwardes" label="David Edwardes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476881" wikidata="Q219728" url="?curid=476881" title="Abdou Diouf">
<text>Abdou Diouf ( ; Serer: ; born 7 September 1935) is a Senegalese politician who was the second president of Senegal from 1981 to 2000.

Diouf is notable both for coming to power by peaceful succession and leaving willingly after losing the 2000 presidential election to long opposition-leader Abdoulaye Wade. He was also the second Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie from January 2003 to December 2014.

== Early life ==
Diouf was born into the Joof family in Louga, Senegal, the child of an Halpulaar mother and a Serer father. He attended primary and secondary school at the Lycée Faidherbe in Saint-Louis. He studied law at Dakar University and then at the Sorbonne in Paris. Diouf graduated in 1959.

== Political career ==
After graduation, Diouf returned to Senegal, where, in September 1960, he was appointed Director of International Technical Cooperation. In November 1960, he became assistant to the Secretary-General of the Government; in June 1961, he became Secretary-General of the Ministry of Defense. In 1961 he joined the Senegalese Progressive Union (&quot;Union Progressiste Sénégalaise&quot;, UPS), which later became the Socialist Party of Senegal. In December 1961 he became Governor of the Sine-Saloum Region, serving in that position until December 1962, when he became Director of the Cabinet of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In May 1963, he became Director of the Cabinet of President Léopold Senghor, where he remained until December 1965. In January 1964, he became Secretary-General of the Presidency until March 1968, when he became Minister of Planning and Industry. He remained in the latter position until February 1970, when he was named Prime Minister.

== Presidency ==
In 1970, Senghor reinstated the post of prime minister, giving it to Diouf, his protégé. Senghor trusted Diouf, who had administrative experience but no independent power base. This was important, for Senghor&#x27;s last prime minister, Mamadou Dia, was accused of using the position to launch a coup d&#x27;état. On 1 January 1981, Senghor resigned in favor of Diouf, who became president of Senegal.

===1983 and 1988 elections===

Diouf continued the political liberalization Senghor had begun by holding elections in 1983. He allowed fourteen opposition parties to run instead of the four Senghor had allowed. The practical effect was to fragment the opposition, and Diouf won with 83.5 percent of the vote.

In 1985, opposing parties tried to form a coalition. It was broken up because the national constitution forbade coalitions. Also in 1985, Abdoulaye Wade, Diouf&#x27;s main political opponent, was temporarily arrested for unlawful demonstration.

In February 1988, elections were held again. Diouf won 72.3 percent of the vote to Wade&#x27;s 25.8 percent, and opposing parties alleged electoral fraud. Disturbances followed, and Diouf declared a state of emergency, detaining Wade again until May of that year.

===Senegambia===
Under Diouf, Senegal agreed to form a confederation called Senegambia with neighboring Gambia on 12 December 1981; this union took place on 1 February 1982. In April 1989, the Mauritania-Senegal Border War developed, leading to an outbreak of ethnic violence and the severing of diplomatic relations with Mauritania. As the region destabilized, Senegambia was dissolved.

===Response to AIDS===
In 1986, Diouf began an anti-AIDS program in Senegal before the virus was able to take off in earnest. He used the media and schools to promote safe-sex messages and required prostitutes to be registered. He also encouraged civic organizations and both Christian and Muslim religious leaders to raise awareness about AIDS. The result was that while AIDS was decimating much of Africa, the infection rate for Senegal stayed below 2 percent.

===1993 and 2000 elections===

Diouf was reelected in February 1993 with 58% of the vote to a 7-year term; presidential term lengths had been extended by two years in 1991. In the first round of the 2000 elections, on 27 February, he took 41.3% of the vote against 30.1% for the long-time opposition leader Abdoulaye Wade. Still, in the second round on 19 March, he received only 41.5% against 58.5% for Wade. Diouf conceded defeat and left office on 1 April.

One of Diouf&#x27;s greatest contributions to African peace came from this electoral defeat, for he gracefully surrendered power to Abdoulaye Wade, his long-time rival. When Diouf left office, Wade even said he should receive a Nobel Peace Prize for leaving without violence.

==Socialist Party leadership==
Diouf was Deputy Secretary-General of the Socialist Party under Senghor. He became Secretary-General in 1981, and when the party was restructured at its Thirteenth Congress in 1996, he was moved to the position of President of the PS, while Ousmane Tanor Dieng became First Secretary, having been proposed by Diouf.

== International organizations ==

Diouf has been active in international organizations both during and after his presidency. He was President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) from 1985 to 1986. Soon after his election, he made a personal plea to François Mitterrand, the President of France, resulting in France speaking strongly for sanctions against South Africa. In 1992, he was again reelected President of the OAU for another year-long term. He was also instrumental in establishing the Goree Institute.

After leaving office as President of Senegal, he was unanimously elected as Secretary-General of La Francophonie at that organization&#x27;s Ninth Summit on 20 October 2002 in Beirut, following the withdrawal of the only other candidate, Henri Lopes of the Republic of the Congo. Diouf took office as Secretary-General on 1 January 2003. He was reelected as Secretary-General for another four years at the organization&#x27;s summit in Bucharest in September 2006.

Diouf is an Eminent Member of the Sergio Vieira de Mello Foundation.

He is also a member of the Fondation Chirac&#x27;s honour committee, ever since the foundation was launched in 2008 by former French president Jacques Chirac in order to promote world peace and on the International Multilateral Partnership Against Cyber Threats (IMPACT) International Advisory Board. Additionally, he is one of the 25 leading figures on the Information and Democracy Commission launched by Reporters Without Borders.

==Honours and decorations==

==References==

==External links==

|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219728" start="0" end="11" title="Abdou Diouf" label="Abdou Diouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="16" end="21" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116034" start="94" end="114" title="president of Senegal" label="president of Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114991" start="239" end="265" title="2000 Senegalese presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="292" end="306" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="324" end="402" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie#Executive Secretariat (Secretaries-General)" label="second Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065099" start="481" end="492" title="Joof family" label="Joof family"/>
<link wikidata="Q280243" start="496" end="501" title="Louga" label="Louga"/>
<link wikidata="Q864920" start="528" end="537" title="Toucouleur people" label="Halpulaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q739970" start="551" end="556" title="Serer people" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273779" start="632" end="643" title="Saint-Louis, Senegal" label="Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q671363" start="663" end="679" title="Dakar University" label="Dakar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="696" end="704" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="708" end="713" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054438" start="1075" end="1103" title="Senegalese Progressive Union" label="Senegalese Progressive Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054438" start="1178" end="1204" title="Socialist Party of Senegal" label="Socialist Party of Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572262" start="1249" end="1260" title="Sine-Saloum" label="Sine-Saloum"/>
<link wikidata="Q154545" start="1450" end="1465" title="Léopold Senghor" label="Léopold Senghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="2041" end="2057" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="2596" end="2610" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="2842" end="2857" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q828443" start="3045" end="3055" title="Sénégambia Confederation" label="Senegambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="3073" end="3079" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578207" start="3162" end="3191" title="Mauritania-Senegal Border War" label="Mauritania-Senegal Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="3291" end="3301" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="3410" end="3414" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="3634" end="3643" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="3648" end="3654" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358589" start="3750" end="3764" title="HIV/AIDS in Africa" label="much of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="4129" end="4143" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="4511" end="4528" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358520" start="4832" end="4851" title="Ousmane Tanor Dieng" label="Ousmane Tanor Dieng"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="5058" end="5087" title="Organization of African Unity" label="Organization of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="5165" end="5184" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5203" end="5209" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5271" end="5283" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803730" start="5411" end="5426" title="Goree Institute" label="Goree Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="5526" end="5541" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="5605" end="5611" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q324321" start="5667" end="5678" title="Henri Lopes" label="Henri Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="5865" end="5874" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q334835" start="5929" end="5962" title="Sergio Vieira de Mello Foundation" label="Sergio Vieira de Mello Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075419" start="5992" end="6008" title="Jacques Chirac Foundation for Sustainable Development and Cultural Dialogue" label="Fondation Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="6372" end="6397" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476883" wikidata="Q64672" url="?curid=476883" title="Elisabeth Becker">
<text>Elisabeth Becker (20 July 1923 – 4 July 1946) was a Nazi concentration camp overseer in World War II. She was convicted at the Stutthof trials of crimes against humanity and executed.

==Life==
Becker was born in Neuteich, Danzig (today Nowy Staw, Poland), to a German family. In 1936, aged 13, she joined the League of German Girls. In 1938, she became a tramway conductor in Danzig. In 1940, she began working for the Dokendorf firm in Neuteich, where she was employed until 1941, when she became an agriculture assistant in Danzig.

==Camps==
In 1944, the SS needed more guards at the nearby Stutthof concentration camp, and Becker was called up for service. She arrived at Stutthof on 5 September 1944 to begin training as an SS Aufseherin, or overseer. She later worked in the Stutthof SK-III women&#x27;s camp, personally selecting (Selektion) women and children for the gas chamber.

==Post-war==

After working in the camp for four months, Becker fled on 15 January 1945 and returned home to Neuteich. Three months later, on 13 April, Polish police arrested her and placed her in prison to await trial. 

The first Stutthof Trial began in Danzig on 31 May 1946, with five former SS women and several kapos as defendants. Becker, along with ten other defendants, was found guilty and sentenced to death. She had confessed to selecting at least 30 female prisoners to be gassed, but later retracted her confession. 

Becker sent several letters to Polish president Bolesław Bierut requesting that her sentence be commuted. The court had recommended that Becker&#x27;s sentence be commuted to 15 years on the grounds that her actions had not been as severe as those of co-defendants Gerda Steinhoff or Jenny-Wanda Barkmann. Becker had been at the camp for the shortest amount of time. No pardon was issued, and she was publicly hanged on 4 July 1946 at Biskupia Górka along with the ten other condemned SS supervisors and kapos. 

==In popular culture==
* In the play &quot;Maidens&quot;, written and directed by Kenley Smith, Becker is portrayed by Megan Dianne DeWald.

==See also==
* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64672" start="0" end="16" title="Elisabeth Becker" label="Elisabeth Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="57" end="75" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="88" end="100" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="127" end="142" title="Stutthof trials" label="Stutthof trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021282" start="213" end="221" title="Nowy Staw" label="Neuteich"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="223" end="229" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021282" start="237" end="246" title="Nowy Staw" label="Nowy Staw"/>
<link wikidata="Q38780" start="310" end="332" title="League of German Girls" label="League of German Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="377" end="383" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="559" end="561" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="595" end="622" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="639" end="660" title="conscription" label="called up for service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="733" end="743" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps#Supervision levels and ranks" label="Aufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="791" end="797" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="SK-III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="839" end="848" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany#S" label="Selektion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="877" end="888" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="1123" end="1137" title="Stutthof Trial" label="Stutthof Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1291" end="1309" title="death sentence" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q55832" start="1471" end="1486" title="Bolesław Bierut" label="Bolesław Bierut"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="1677" end="1687" title="Defendant" label="defendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q66759" start="1688" end="1703" title="Gerda Steinhoff" label="Gerda Steinhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q62818" start="1707" end="1727" title="Jenny-Wanda Barkmann" label="Jenny-Wanda Barkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="1858" end="1872" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q702997" start="1927" end="1931" title="kapo (Arbeitslager)" label="kapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="2092" end="2133" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476897" wikidata="Q724707" url="?curid=476897" title="Mickey Hargitay">
<text>Miklós Károly Hargitay (January 6, 1926 – September 14, 2006), was a Hungarian-American actor and the 1955 Mr. Universe. 

Born in Budapest, Hargitay moved to the United States in 1947 and eventually became a U.S. citizen. He was married to actress Jayne Mansfield and is the father of actress Mariska Hargitay. During their marriage, Hargitay and Mansfield made four movies together: &quot;Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?&quot; (1957), &quot;The Loves of Hercules&quot; (1960), &quot;Promises! Promises!&quot; (1963), and &quot;Primitive Love&quot; (1964).

==Early life and early career==
Miklós Károly Hargitay (or Hargitai) was born in Budapest, Hungary, on January 6, 1926. He was the son of Ferenc and Mária (Rothsischer) Hargitay (or Hargitai). Hargitay was one of four children of an athletic father. He and his brothers were all brought up as athletes. During his youth, Hargitay was part of an acrobatic act with his brothers. The act was so popular that the brothers performed throughout all Hungary, including the largest opera house in Budapest. After being introduced to the sport by his brother, Hargitay began competing in speed skating. In 1946, he won the Middle European championship at 500 and 1,500 meters, and placed second in the 5,000 meter race. He was also a proficient football player, and was an underground fighter during World War II.

In 1947, aged 21, Hargitay left Hungary to emigrate to the United States to avoid being drafted into military service by the Soviet Union. He settled in Cleveland, where he worked as a plumber and carpenter and also performed in an acrobatic act with his first wife, Mary Birge. He was inspired to begin bodybuilding after seeing a magazine cover featuring Steve Reeves, famed for playing Hercules. Hargitay won the National Amateur Body-Builders&#x27; Association (NABBA) Mr. Universe award in 1955.

Hargitay is credited with stimulating the enormous interest in physical fitness prevalent in the US during the 1950s. He appeared as a pin-up model in fitness magazines. After Mae West saw his photo on a magazine cover, Hargitay joined West&#x27;s muscleman revue.

==Acting career==

Hargitay&#x27;s first film role came when Jayne Mansfield demanded that he be cast in her movie, &quot;Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?&quot; (1957). The two fell in love and were described as inseparable. 20th Century Fox did not want Hargitay to appear in &quot;Rock Hunter&quot; because they disliked Mansfield&#x27;s view of Hargitay as her &quot;only&quot; lover; Fox preferred their sex symbols to be single.

In 1960, Hargitay and Mansfield played the lead roles in &quot;The Loves of Hercules&quot;. The film was shot in Italy, and has never been released in movie theaters in the United States, though it is available on Netflix under the title &quot;Hercules vs. Hydra&quot; and under its original title as episode 1108 of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; (2017). Over the next four years, Hargitay and Mansfield would appear together in &quot;Promises! Promises!&quot; (1963) and &quot;Primitive Love&quot; (1964). In 1965, Hargitay played the lead role in &quot;Bloody Pit of Horror&quot; without Mansfield.

Hargitay&#x27;s acting career was not limited to the United States; he also appeared in many Italian productions, and acted in Hungarian director György Szomjas&#x27; 1988 film, &quot;Mr. Universe&quot;.

In 2003, Hargitay guest-starred on &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;, the series in which his daughter Mariska stars, portraying a witness to a violent crime.

==Personal life==

Hargitay&#x27;s first wife was fellow acrobat Mary Birge. Hargitay had a daughter, Tina, with Birge in 1949. Hargitay and Birge later divorced. 

Hargitay and Jayne Mansfield met in 1956 while he was performing in &quot;The Mae West Show&quot; at the Latin Quarter. When Mansfield noticed Hargitay performing, she allegedly told the waiter, &quot;I&#x27;ll have a steak and that tall man on the left.&quot; The couple married on January 13, 1958. They had three children: Miklós, Zoltán, and Mariska. Mariska Hargitay grew up to be an actress, starring on &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;. Hargitay remodeled much of his and Mansfield&#x27;s Beverly Hills mansion, known as &quot;The Pink Palace&quot;, building its famous heart-shaped swimming pool. In November 2002, the house was razed by developers who had purchased it from Engelbert Humperdinck.

In May 1963, Hargitay and Mansfield filed for divorce in Ciudad Juárez. The divorce was ruled invalid, and the two reconciled in October 1963. After Mariska&#x27;s birth, Mansfield sued for the Juárez divorce to be declared legal and ultimately won. The divorce was recognized in the United States on August 26, 1964. After Mansfield&#x27;s death in a car crash on June 29, 1967, Hargitay sued Mansfield&#x27;s estate for over US$275,000 ($ in ) to support the children. In their divorce decree, Mansfield had agreed to pay child support, as well as to give Hargitay approximately $70,000 ($ in ) in cash and property.

Hargitay married Ellen Siano on April 14, 1968. Hargitay and Siano remained married until his death.

==Death==
On September 14, 2006, Hargitay died in Los Angeles, California, aged 80, from multiple myeloma. In Hargitay&#x27;s obituary, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; quoted bodybuilding historian Gene Mozee as stating the following: &quot;Walter Winchell once said that what [President] Eisenhower did for golf, Mickey Hargitay did for bodybuilding, because he brought it to the forefront... Back in those days, bodybuilding was thought of as a freakish, unusual activity that wasn&#x27;t popular with the general public... At that time, athletic coaches discouraged lifting weights, thinking you&#x27;d become musclebound. And along came Mickey Hargitay, a great all-around athlete&quot;.

==In popular culture==
Hargitay was portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger in the 1980 television film &quot;The Jayne Mansfield Story&quot;.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==References and footnotes==


==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724707" start="0" end="22" title="Mickey Hargitay" label="Miklós Károly Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121467" start="102" end="119" title="Universe Championships" label="1955 Mr. Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="131" end="139" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="249" end="264" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="294" end="310" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q931978" start="391" end="422" title="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?" label="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214566" start="443" end="464" title="The Loves of Hercules" label="The Loves of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249804" start="485" end="504" title="Promises! Promises!" label="Promises! Promises!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763074" start="529" end="543" title="Primitive Love (film)" label="Primitive Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="640" end="648" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="1139" end="1152" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1296" end="1304" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1351" end="1363" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1491" end="1503" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1519" end="1528" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="1670" end="1682" title="bodybuilding" label="bodybuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q358193" start="1723" end="1735" title="Steve Reeves" label="Steve Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="1755" end="1763" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q825134" start="1782" end="1830" title="National Amateur Body-Builders&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Amateur Body-Builders&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121467" start="1839" end="1851" title="Universe Championships" label="Mr. Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="2044" end="2052" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="2195" end="2210" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q931978" start="2256" end="2287" title="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?" label="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2358" end="2374" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="2541" end="2551" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214566" start="2631" end="2652" title="The Loves of Hercules" label="The Loves of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="2782" end="2789" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="2891" end="2919" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249804" start="3014" end="3033" title="Promises! Promises!" label="Promises! Promises!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763074" start="3057" end="3071" title="Primitive Love (film)" label="Primitive Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793127" start="3134" end="3154" title="Bloody Pit of Horror" label="Bloody Pit of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299933" start="3327" end="3341" title="György Szomjas" label="György Szomjas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3427" end="3464" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="3505" end="3512" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="4082" end="4098" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4143" end="4180" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="4240" end="4253" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167896" start="4278" end="4293" title="Jayne Mansfield&amp;#x27;s Pink Palace" label="The Pink Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q221289" start="4427" end="4448" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (singer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="4508" end="4521" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4878" end="4881" title="USD" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5223" end="5246" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="5262" end="5278" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="5319" end="5336" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="5416" end="5431" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="5917" end="5938" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q540345" start="5973" end="5998" title="The Jayne Mansfield Story" label="The Jayne Mansfield Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476898" wikidata="Q66759" url="?curid=476898" title="Gerda Steinhoff">
<text>Gerda Steinhoff (29 January 1922 – 4 July 1946) was a &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) Nazi concentration camp overseer following the 1939 German invasion of Poland.

== SS career ==

Steinhoff was born in Danzig-Langfuhr. As a teenager, she worked as house maid on a farm at Tygenhagen near Danzig. From 1939, she worked in a bakery in Danzig and later became a tramway conductor. She married in 1944 and had a child. In the same year, because of the Nazi call for new guards, she joined the camp staff at Stutthof.

On 1 October 1944, Steinhoff became a &quot;Blockleiterin&quot;, or block leader, in the Stutthof SK-III women&#x27;s camp. There, she took part in selections of prisoners to be sent to the gas chambers. On 31 October, she was promoted to SS-Oberaufseherin, senior overseer, and assigned to the Danzig-Holm subcamp.

On 1 December 1944, Steinhoff was reassigned to the Stutthof Bromberg-Ost female subcamp located in Bydgoszcz, some 170km (105 miles) south of Danzig. There, on 25 January 1945, she received a medal for her loyalty and service to the Third Reich. Steinhoff was devoted to her job in the camps and was known as a ruthless overseer. Just before the end of World War II, she fled the camp and returned home.

== Arrest, trial and execution ==
On 25 May 1945, Steinhoff was arrested and imprisoned by Polish officials. She was tried at the first Stutthof Trial with other &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) female staff and kapos. During her trial, Steinhoff repeatedly smiled and joked with her co-defendants. She was found guilty and convicted of crimes against humanity for her involvement in the selection process and her sadistic abuse of prisoners. Sentenced to death, Gerda Steinhoff was publicly hanged with the other ten condemned camp personnel on 4 July 1946 on Biskupia Górka Hill near Gdańsk.

== See also ==

* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps

==References==
== Sources ==
*Death on the Gallows</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66759" start="0" end="15" title="Gerda Steinhoff" label="Gerda Steinhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="60" end="73" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="85" end="108" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="144" end="162" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541765" start="204" end="219" title="Wrzeszcz" label="Danzig-Langfuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="290" end="296" title="Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="505" end="513" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="560" end="573" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Blockleiterin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="614" end="620" title="SK-III" label="SK-III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="664" end="674" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany#S" label="selections"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="706" end="717" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="755" end="772" title="SS-Oberaufseherin" label="SS-Oberaufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="811" end="822" title="Danzig-Holm" label="Danzig-Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973584" start="894" end="906" title="Bromberg-Ost" label="Bromberg-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="933" end="942" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="976" end="982" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1067" end="1078" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="1375" end="1389" title="Stutthof Trial" label="Stutthof Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1407" end="1420" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q702997" start="1449" end="1454" title="Kapo (concentration camp)" label="kapos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285927" start="1651" end="1659" title="Sadistic personality disorder" label="sadistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1693" end="1698" title="Capital punishment" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="1729" end="1735" title="hanging" label="hanged"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="1798" end="1812" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1823" end="1829" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="1850" end="1891" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476899" wikidata="Q866393" url="?curid=476899" title="Biskupin">
<text>Biskupin () is an archaeological site and a life-size model of a late Bronze Age fortified settlement in north-central Poland that also serves as an archaeological open-air museum. When first discovered it was thought to be early evidence of a West Slavic settlement, but archaeologists later confirmed it belonged to the Biskupin group of the Lusatian culture from the 8th century BC. 

The Museum is situated on a marshy peninsula in , ca. northeast of Poznań and south of the small town of Żnin. In the years 1956–2000, it was a division of the National Museum of Archaeology in Warsaw. After the Polish local government reforms of 1998, Biskupin was granted the status of an independent institution known as the Archeological Museum in Biskupin.

The site is one of Poland&#x27;s official national Historic Monuments (&quot;Pomnik historii&quot;), as designated September 16, 1994, and tracked by the National Heritage Board of Poland.

==History of the excavations==
In 1933, schoolteacher Walenty Szwajcer and his students discovered remains of a Bronze Age fort/settlement in Wielkopolska Region (Greater Poland), and the discovery became famous overnight. The site was excavated from 1934 onwards by the team from Poznań University, led by archaeologists Józef Kostrzewski (1885–1969) and Zdzisław Rajewski (1907–1974). The first report was published in 1936. By the beginning of 1939, ca. had been excavated. Biskupin soon became famous, attracting numerous distinguished guests, including officials of the Marshal Piłsudski government, members of the military, and high churchmen such as the primate of Poland. The site soon became part of Polish national consciousness, the symbol of achievements of the Slavonic forebears in prehistoric times. It was called the &quot;Polish Pompeii&quot; or &quot;Polish Herculaneum&quot;. The existence of a prehistoric fortress, from the German border, was used to show that the prehistoric &quot;Poles&quot; had held their own against foreign invaders and plunderers as early as the late Bronze Age. Biskupin came to feature in paintings and popular novels.

When the Germans occupied Poland in the autumn of 1939, Biskupin was renamed &quot;Urstädt&quot;. In 1940, excavations were resumed by the SS-Ahnenerbe until 1942. When the Germans were forced to retreat they flooded the site hoping to destroy it, but—ironically—it led to very good preservation of the ancient timbers. Excavations were resumed by Polish archaeologists after the war and continued until 1974.

==The site==

There are two settlement periods at Biskupin, which was located in the middle of a lake but is now situated on a peninsula, that follow each other without a break. Both settlements were laid out on a rectangular grid with eleven streets that are wide. The older settlement from the late Bronze Age was established on a slightly wet island of over and consisted of around 102-106 oak and pine log-houses that were of similar layout, measuring ca. each. They consisted of two chambers and an open entrance-area. These houses were designed to accommodate 10–12 persons. An open hearth was located in the centre of the biggest room. There are no larger houses that could indicate social stratification. Because of the damp, boggy ground the streets were covered with wooden planks.

The settlement was surrounded by a tall wooden wall, or palisade, set on a rampart made up of both wood and earth. The rampart was constructed of oak trunks that form boxes filled with earth. The rampart is more than long and accompanied by a wooden breakwater in the lake. of wood was used in the construction of the rampart.

===In popular culture===
The Biskupin archeological site was featured on stamps issued by the Polish Post in 1966 and 1978. 

The settlement served as a setting in a number of films including Jerzy Hoffman&#x27;s 1998 historical drama &quot;With Fire and Sword&quot; and 2003 historical film &quot;An Ancient Tale: When the Sun Was a God&quot;.

In August 2018, the Biskupin settlement was celebrated with a Google doodle on the 85th anniversary of the discovery of the site.

==Dating==

The settlement at Biskupin belongs to the Hallstatt C and D periods (late Bronze Age/early Iron Age, 800–650 BC and 650–475 BC). There are four radiocarbon dates from Biskupin (all B.C.):
* First settlement: 720±150 (Gif 494)
* Later settlement: 560±150 (Gif 495)
* Rampart: 620±150 (Gif 492)
* A2 4C, VII: 620±150 (Gif 493)

However, dendrochronological analysis provided more accurate dating. It proved that oak wood used in the construction of the settlement was cut down between 747–722 B.C. Over half of the wood used was cut during the winter of 748/747 B.C.

==The model==
In 1936 the first life-size model (open-air museum) was built on the peninsula, but it was intentionally destroyed by retreating Germans near the end of World War II. After the war it was rebuilt, and the ramparts and one full street with houses on both sides were also added.

In the 2000s, a film prop &quot;medieval&quot; timber castle was constructed on a part of the original site.

==Gallery==
==Bibliography==

* Danuta Piotrowska, Biskupin 1933–1996: archaeology, politics and nationalism. &quot;Archaeologia Polona&quot; 35–36, 1997/98, 255–285, ISSN 0066-5924
* Józef Kostrzewski &quot;Osada bagienna w Biskupinie w pow. żnińskim&quot;, Poznań 1936
* &quot;Gród prasłowiański w Biskupinie&quot;, Poznań 1938,
* Z. Rajewski &quot;Biskupin – osiedle obronne sprzed 2500 lat&quot;, Arkady, Warszawa 1970,
* Z. Rajewski &quot;Osadnictwo ludności z kulturą łużycką we wczesnym okresie epoki żelaznej w Biskupinie i okolicy&quot; Archeologia Polski, t. II 1958,
* Z. Rajewski &quot;10 000 lat Biskupina i jego okolic&quot;, Warszawa 1965,

== See also ==

* Castles in Poland
* Archeology
* Bronze Age
* Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodship
* Lusatian culture
* Pałuki
* Wenecja, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship
* Żnin
* Gąsawa

== References ==
== External links ==

*The official website of the Biskupin Archaeological Museum
*Biskupin archeological site on Google Maps
* Hypothetical reconstruction of a Lusatian culture settlement, raised using only bronze age tools – Wola Radziszowska (near Cracow)- Poland
* Biskupin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866393" start="0" end="8" title="Biskupin" label="Biskupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="18" end="32" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="70" end="80" title="Bronze Age Europe" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="91" end="101" title="human settlement" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="119" end="125" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q636819" start="149" end="179" title="archaeological open-air museum" label="archaeological open-air museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="244" end="255" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="344" end="360" title="Lusatian culture" label="Lusatian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="455" end="461" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q324941" start="493" end="497" title="Żnin" label="Żnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q637086" start="548" end="578" title="National Museum of Archaeology (Poland)" label="National Museum of Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="582" end="588" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q855451" start="600" end="631" title="Administrative divisions of Poland" label="Polish local government reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981101" start="802" end="820" title="List of Historical Monuments (Poland)" label="Historic Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981101" start="828" end="843" title="Pomnik historii" label="Pomnik historii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963390" start="905" end="938" title="Narodowy Instytut Dziedzictwa" label="National Heritage Board of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="1104" end="1118" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q348402" start="1222" end="1239" title="Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań" label="Poznań University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337432" start="1263" end="1280" title="Józef Kostrzewski" label="Józef Kostrzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="1516" end="1533" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Marshal Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839419" start="1602" end="1619" title="primate of Poland" label="primate of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1787" end="1794" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="1817" end="1828" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="2247" end="2249" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="2250" end="2259" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahnenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168833" start="3734" end="3745" title="Polish Post" label="Polish Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q551704" start="3832" end="3845" title="Jerzy Hoffman" label="Jerzy Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="3858" end="3874" title="historical drama" label="historical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200470" start="3881" end="3900" title="With Fire and Sword (film)" label="With Fire and Sword"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3938" end="3977" title="An Ancient Tale: When the Sun Was a God" label="An Ancient Tale: When the Sun Was a God"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="4048" end="4061" title="Google doodle" label="Google doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="4171" end="4180" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="4273" end="4284" title="radiocarbon" label="radiocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="4464" end="4483" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q756102" start="4744" end="4759" title="open-air museum" label="open-air museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859983" start="5213" end="5232" title="Archaeologia Polona" label="Archaeologia Polona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537075" start="5771" end="5788" title="Castles in Poland" label="Castles in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="5791" end="5801" title="Archeology" label="Archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5804" end="5814" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153" start="5817" end="5847" title="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodship" label="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodship"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="5850" end="5866" title="Lusatian culture" label="Lusatian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157090" start="5869" end="5875" title="Pałuki" label="Pałuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107155" start="5878" end="5918" title="Wenecja, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Wenecja, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q324941" start="5921" end="5925" title="Żnin" label="Żnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021761" start="5928" end="5934" title="Gąsawa" label="Gąsawa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476903" wikidata="Q1065651" url="?curid=476903" title="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year">
<text>The [[MTV Video Music Award]] for Video of the Year is the most prestigious competitive award and the final award presented at the annual MTV Video Music Awards. The award was created by the U.S. network MTV to honor artists with the best music videos. At the first MTV Video Music Awards ceremony in , the Video of the Year honor was presented to The Cars for the video &quot;You Might Think&quot;. Originally, all winners were determined by a special panel of music video directors, producers, and record company executives. Since the awards, winners of major categories are determined by viewers&#x27; votes through MTV&#x27;s website, while the jury decides in the technical categories. Beginning in , Burger King sponsored the category through a partnership with Paramount, resulting in the award being presented as MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year Presented by Burger King.

Taylor Swift holds the record for the most wins, with a total of five for &quot;Bad Blood&quot; (), &quot;You Need to Calm Down&quot; (), “All Too Well: The Short Film” (), “Anti-Hero&quot; () and ″Fortnight″ (). Swift and Eminem are tied for the most nominations, with seven as lead artists. David Lee Roth (), U2 (), and Lady Gaga () are the only acts to have had two Video of the Year nominations in a single ceremony. Two acts have won both the Video of the Year and the honorary Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award in the same night—Peter Gabriel in with &quot;Sledgehammer&quot; and Justin Timberlake in with &quot;Mirrors&quot;. Swift is the first artist to win Video of the Year for a self-directed video, with &quot;All Too Well: The Short Film&quot;. Kendrick Lamar, Swift, and Lil Nas X have further won the award for a video they co-directed: Lamar for &quot;Humble&quot; in , Swift for &quot;You Need to Calm Down&quot; in 2019, and Lil Nas X for &quot;Montero (Call Me By Your Name)&quot; in . Taylor Swift is the artist who won most Video of the Year trophies for self-directed videos - she directed &quot;All Too Well: The Short Film&quot;, &quot;Anti-Hero&quot; and &quot;Fortnight&quot;.

==Recipients==



==Statistics==
===Artists with multiple wins===
; 5 wins
* Taylor Swift

; 2 wins
* Beyoncé
* Eminem
* Kendrick Lamar{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Missy Elliott{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Rihanna

===Artists with multiple nominations===
{{col-begin}}
{{col-2}}
; 9 nominations
* Eminem{{efn| 1 with D12.}}

; 7 nominations
* Beyoncé{{efn|1 as a featured artist; 1 with The Carters.}}
* Taylor Swift

; 6 nominations
* Drake{{efn|2 as a featured artist.}}

; 5 nominations
* Bruno Mars{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Justin Timberlake{{efn|2 with NSYNC.}}

; 4 nominations
* Ariana Grande
* Doja Cat
* Jay-Z{{efn|2 as a featured artist; 1 with The Carters.}}
* Kanye West
* Lady Gaga
* Madonna
* Rihanna{{efn|2 as a featured artist.}}
* U2

; 3 nominations
* Aerosmith
* Billie Eilish
* Britney Spears
* Ed Sheeran
* Kendrick Lamar{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Lil Nas X
* Michael Jackson
* Missy Elliott{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Pharrell Williams{{efn|2 as a featured artist.}}
* R.E.M.
* Red Hot Chili Peppers
* SZA
* The Weeknd
{{col-2}}
; 2 nominations
* Adele
* Beastie Boys
* Christina Aguilera
* David Lee Roth
* DJ Khaled
* Don Henley
* Future{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Green Day
* Gwen Stefani{{efn|1 with No Doubt.}}
* Janet Jackson
* Jonas Brothers
* Justin Bieber{{efn|1 as a starring performer in the video but not a featured artist.}}
* Katy Perry
* Lil&#x27; Kim{{efn|1 as a featured artist.}}
* Miley Cyrus
* Nirvana
* NSYNC
* Olivia Rodrigo
* Peter Gabriel
* Steve Winwood
* Will Smith
* Young Thug{{efn|Both as a featured artist.}}
{{col-end}}

==See also==
* Grammy Award for Best Music Video
* MTV Europe Music Award for Best Video

==Notes==
{{NoteFoot}}
{{notelist}}

==References==
{{reflist|colwidth=30em}}

==External links==
* {{official website|https://www.mtv.com/vma}}

{{MTV Video Music Awards}}
{{MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year}}

{{featured list}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065651" start="4" end="51" title="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year" label="[[MTV Video Music Award]] for Video of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="138" end="160" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="204" end="207" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="239" end="251" title="music videos" label="music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="348" end="356" title="The Cars" label="The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432165" start="377" end="392" title="You Might Think" label="You Might Think"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="768" end="777" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065651" start="821" end="889" title="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year" label="MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year Presented by Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="892" end="904" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892111" start="972" end="981" title="Bad Blood (Taylor Swift song)" label="Bad Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q64590371" start="998" end="1019" title="You Need to Calm Down" label="You Need to Calm Down"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1031" end="1059" title="All Too Well: The Short Film" label="All Too Well: The Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q114721508" start="1066" end="1075" title="Anti-Hero (song)" label="Anti-Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511018" start="1090" end="1099" title="Fortnight (song)" label="Fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="1115" end="1121" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="1185" end="1199" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="1215" end="1224" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q821861" start="1376" end="1412" title="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award" label="Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="1431" end="1444" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q593978" start="1459" end="1471" title="Sledgehammer (Peter Gabriel song)" label="Sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="1482" end="1499" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514667" start="1514" end="1521" title="Mirrors (Justin Timberlake song)" label="Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="1654" end="1668" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62591281" start="1681" end="1690" title="Lil Nas X" label="Lil Nas X"/>
<link wikidata="Q29352319" start="1764" end="1770" title="Humble (song)" label="Humble"/>
<link wikidata="Q105865170" start="1859" end="1889" title="Montero (Call Me By Your Name)" label="Montero (Call Me By Your Name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="2177" end="2189" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="2202" end="2209" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="2212" end="2218" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="2221" end="2235" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="2269" end="2282" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="2316" end="2323" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="2407" end="2413" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="2453" end="2460" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="2514" end="2526" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="2546" end="2551" title="Drake (musician)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="2602" end="2612" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="2646" end="2663" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="2704" end="2717" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q51120673" start="2720" end="2728" title="Doja Cat" label="Doja Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="2731" end="2736" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="2790" end="2800" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="2803" end="2812" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="2815" end="2822" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="2825" end="2832" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="2866" end="2868" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="2888" end="2897" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="2900" end="2913" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="2916" end="2930" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="2933" end="2943" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="2946" end="2960" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62591281" start="2994" end="3003" title="Lil Nas X" label="Lil Nas X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="3006" end="3021" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="3024" end="3037" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q14313" start="3071" end="3088" title="Pharrell Williams" label="Pharrell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="3122" end="3128" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="3131" end="3152" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210722" start="3155" end="3158" title="SZA" label="SZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="3161" end="3171" title="The Weeknd" label="The Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="3200" end="3205" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="3208" end="3220" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="3223" end="3241" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="3244" end="3258" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80805" start="3261" end="3270" title="DJ Khaled" label="DJ Khaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q316454" start="3273" end="3283" title="Don Henley" label="Don Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445057" start="3286" end="3292" title="Future (rapper)" label="Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="3326" end="3335" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="3338" end="3350" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="3377" end="3390" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134233" start="3393" end="3407" title="Jonas Brothers" label="Jonas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="3410" end="3423" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="3499" end="3509" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q229379" start="3512" end="3525" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Kim" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="3559" end="3570" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="3573" end="3580" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="3583" end="3588" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q63243883" start="3591" end="3605" title="Olivia Rodrigo" label="Olivia Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="3608" end="3621" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314397" start="3624" end="3637" title="Steve Winwood" label="Steve Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="3640" end="3650" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637814" start="3653" end="3663" title="Young Thug" label="Young Thug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976730" start="3726" end="3759" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Video" label="Grammy Award for Best Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q38435" start="3762" end="3799" title="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Video" label="MTV Europe Music Award for Best Video"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476905" wikidata="Q455685" url="?curid=476905" title="Nina Wang">
<text>Nina Wang, born Kung Yu Sum (; 29 September 1936 – 3 April 2007), was Asia&#x27;s richest woman, with an estimated net worth of US$4.2 billion at the time of her death. She was the widow of Hong Kong chemical magnate Teddy Wang, who was kidnapped and disappeared in 1990.

==Early life==
Kung Yu Sum was born in Shanghai to parents from Wenzhou, and was a childhood playmate of Teddy Wang, whose father Wang Din-shin, a Wenzhounese businessman, established a paint and chemical business. The Wangs moved to Hong Kong, and the business became the Chinachem Group, eventually one of Hong Kong&#x27;s largest and most powerful companies based on a lucrative pharmaceutical division. In 1948, when she was 11 and he 15, they renewed their friendship, and in 1955 they married.

Nicknamed &quot;Little Sweetie&quot; (&quot;Siu Tim Tim&quot; or &quot;小甜甜&quot; in Cantonese), she was noted for her two pigtails and her love of dressing in traditional Chinese dresses. At the time of her death, she was the richest woman in Asia and the world&#x27;s 35th richest person, with a fortune of $4.2bn, according to &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine; a fortune which exceeded that of American talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

==Kidnappings==
On 12 April 1983, the Wangs&#x27; Mercedes was hijacked. Teddy Wang was taken away and chained to a bed for eight days until Nina Wang paid a $33 million ransom. On 10 April 1990, Teddy Wang was kidnapped again and not recovered. After his disappearance, Nina took the helm of Chinachem under the title of &quot;Chairlady&quot; and built it into a major property developer.

==Contested wills==
Teddy Wang&#x27;s body was never found, and he was declared dead in 1999. At that point, the battle over his fortune began, with at least three different wills circulating in the court system. The earliest will, the authenticity of which is not contested, was dated 1960 and split the estate equally between Teddy&#x27;s wife Nina, and his father, Wang Din-shin. A 1968 version produced by Din-shin (authenticity challenged) gave the entire estate to Din-shin. This will was made after Teddy discovered that his wife was having an affair. 

A 1990 will (dated a month before Teddy&#x27;s abduction) ceded the entire estate to Nina and included the phrase &quot;one life, one love&quot;, in English, with the rest of the will in Chinese, stating that the Wang family was disappointing. This will had a signature indicating it was witnessed by the family butler. On 21 November 2002, after a 171-day courtroom battle featuring some of Hong Kong&#x27;s most prominent lawyers and Wang Din-shin accusing Nina of adultery, High Court Justice David Yam declared the 1990 will a forgery and awarded all of Teddy Wang&#x27;s estimated $128 million estate to Wang Din-shin. Nina appealed the ruling but lost in a 2–1 decision on 28 June 2004. The money was handed over to Wang Din-shin.

On 28 January 2005, Nina Wang was formally charged with the forgery and freed on bail. On 16 September 2005, the Court of Final Appeal overturned the previous High Court ruling, giving control of the multibillion-dollar Chinachem firm back to Mrs. Wang. On 2 December 2005, prosecutors in the fraud case officially dropped all charges, effectively exonerating Wang.

==Death==
On 4 April 2007, Chinachem announced that Wang died at the Hong Kong Sanatorium and Hospital the previous day. Although the cause of death has not been disclosed, there have been reports suggesting that she might have been suffering from ovarian cancer.

On 13 April 2007, Chinachem confirmed in various Hong Kong local newspapers that Wang was first diagnosed with an undisclosed illness back in February 2004. She immediately flew to the United States to receive further treatment at Brigham and Women&#x27;s Hospital, which is affiliated with Harvard University. She received treatment for more than three years before her death.

==Controversy over cause of death==
In an interview with &quot;Apple Daily&quot;, published on 8 April 2007, Hong Kong shipping tycoon Cecil Chao criticized gambling magnate Stanley Ho, who claimed that Wang&#x27;s death was a consequence of her being parsimonious. Chao, who had known Wang for 40 years, revealed that the High Court ruling that went against Wang, and the subsequent forgery accusation, had taken a severe toll on Wang&#x27;s health. Chao paid tribute to Wang, who recalled &quot;In Little Sweetie (Wang&#x27;s nickname), you just could not feel at all the arrogance of a billionaire, she did not like to be overly in the spotlight, she was a very humble person, very low key and also very astute&quot;. 

On 8 April 2007, the Kung family announced they had drawn up a list of 45 people who would be members of the &#x27;funeral arrangement committee&#x27;. In what some regard as an obvious snub, Mr. Ho was not invited to be a member of that committee.

== Estate concern and development ==
On 8 April 2007, Hong Kong newspaper Sunday Morning Post reported that Wang named one individual as the sole beneficiary in her will, according to her lawyer Jonathan Midgley. Contrary to previous reports, Midgley also dismissed claims that her will dictated that her fortune was to go to charity.

On 9 April 2007, Hong Kong newspaper Apple Daily reported that the Kung family insisted that Nina Wang wished to use the largest portion of her multi-billion dollar estate to set up a charity fund for medical and education developments in mainland China. According to the report, the Kung family members held an &#x27;emergency meeting&#x27; after learning of Midgley&#x27;s statement. Apple Daily also describes Midgley&#x27;s client as a &#x27;mysterious person&#x27;. Midgley refused to comment whether he had any involvement in processing Wang&#x27;s will. 

The day after her funeral, two wills she allegedly wrote in 2002 and 2006 were published separately in Next Magazine and its sister publication, Apple Daily. The 2002 document gave Wang&#x27;s fortune to her charitable trust. But the later version named her personal feng shui consultant, Tony Chan Chun-chuen, as the beneficiary.

Following a lengthy court battle over Wang&#x27;s estate, the court ruled on 2 February 2010 that, while the court accepted Tony Chan&#x27;s claim that he and Wang had been secret lovers, the alleged 2006 will presented by Chan bore a forged signature. The court upheld the 2002 will awarding Wang&#x27;s entire estate to the ChinaChem Charitable Foundation. Chan declared his intent to appeal, but the following day his home was searched by the police and he was arrested for questioning on suspicion of forgery. 

==See also==
* Nina Tower – The tower Nina Wang planned and developed for her and her husband Teddy.

==References==
==External links==
; English news
*Asia&#x27;s richest woman cleared in fraud case
*HK richest lady wins will battle
*Wang&#x27;s Legacy: Sex, Lies And Litigation, &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine
*The enigma of Little Sweetie, The Economist&#x27;s Face Value on Mrs. Wang
;Court cases
*
;Chinese news
*The text of the 1990 will of Teddy Wang
*Nina Wang series by the Oriental Press Group
*The texts of the 2 wills of Nina Wang, &quot;Apple Daily&quot;; accessed 24 March 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q455685" start="0" end="9" title="Nina Wang" label="Nina Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q455685" start="16" end="27" title="Nina Wang" label="Kung Yu Sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="115" end="124" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694109" start="217" end="227" title="Teddy Wang" label="Teddy Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42635" start="337" end="344" title="Wenzhou" label="Wenzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694109" start="378" end="388" title="Teddy Wang" label="Teddy Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="507" end="516" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073564" start="546" end="561" title="Chinachem Group" label="Chinachem Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="1189" end="1202" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073564" start="1498" end="1507" title="Chinachem Group" label="Chinachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="1770" end="1774" title="will (law)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778860" start="2634" end="2644" title="High Court (Hong Kong)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q837636" start="3008" end="3029" title="Court of Final Appeal (Hong Kong)" label="Court of Final Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073564" start="3115" end="3124" title="Chinachem Group" label="Chinachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073564" start="3289" end="3298" title="Chinachem Group" label="Chinachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423165" start="3331" end="3364" title="Hong Kong Sanatorium and Hospital" label="Hong Kong Sanatorium and Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q709127" start="3969" end="3980" title="Apple Daily" label="Apple Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209851" start="4041" end="4051" title="Cecil Chao" label="Cecil Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q735458" start="4080" end="4090" title="Stanley Ho" label="Stanley Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778860" start="4229" end="4239" title="High Court (Hong Kong)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198574" start="4953" end="4972" title="Sunday Morning Post" label="Sunday Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="6045" end="6054" title="feng shui" label="feng shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q372159" start="6067" end="6087" title="Tony Chan Chun-chuen" label="Tony Chan Chun-chuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q520839" start="6641" end="6651" title="Nina Tower" label="Nina Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="6913" end="6919" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="6966" end="6979" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476908" wikidata="Q68984" url="?curid=476908" title="Wanda Klaff">
<text>Wanda Klaff (6 March 1922 – 4 July 1946) was a Nazi concentration camp overseer. Klaff was born in Danzig to German parents as Wanda Kalacinski. After the war, she was executed for crimes against humanity.

== Early life ==
Wanda Kalacinski was the daughter of railway worker Ludwig Kalacinski. The family name was changed to Kalden in 1941. She finished school in 1938 and worked in a jam factory until 1942. That year, she married Willy Klaff and became a housewife, then a streetcar operator.

== SS career, arrest, trial and execution ==

In 1944, Klaff joined the Stutthof concentration camp staff at Stutthof&#x27;s Praust subcamp in present-day Pruszcz, where she abused many of the prisoners. On 5 October 1944, she arrived at Stutthof&#x27;s Russoschin subcamp, in present-day northern Poland.

Klaff fled the camp in early 1945 but on 11 June 1945 was arrested by Polish officials; soon after, she fell ill from typhoid fever in prison. She stood trial at the first Stutthof trial with other former female supervisors and male personnel. She stated at the trial, &quot;I am very intelligent and very devoted to my work in the camps. I struck at least two prisoners every day.&quot;

Klaff was convicted and received the death sentence. She was publicly hanged by short-drop method on 4 July 1946 on Biskupia Górka Hill near Gdańsk, aged 24.

== References ==

== Sources ==
* Benjamin B. Ferencz, &quot;Less Than Slaves: Jewish Forced Labor and the Quest for Compensation&quot;, books.google.com; accessed 13 November 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68984" start="0" end="11" title="Wanda Klaff" label="Wanda Klaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="47" end="70" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="99" end="105" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q68984" start="127" end="143" title="Wanda Klaff" label="Wanda Kalacinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="569" end="596" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q988590" start="622" end="628" title="Praust" label="Praust"/>
<link wikidata="Q988590" start="652" end="659" title="Pruszcz Gdański" label="Pruszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381078" start="751" end="761" title="Rusocin, Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Russoschin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="795" end="801" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="922" end="935" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="976" end="990" title="Stutthof trials" label="Stutthof trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1230" end="1244" title="Capital punishment" label="death sentence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1290" title="Hanging#Short drop" label="short-drop method"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="1309" end="1323" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1334" end="1340" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476910" wikidata="Q4640126" url="?curid=476910" title="51st State (song)">
<text>&quot;51st State&quot; is a single by New Model Army, which appeared on their 1986 album &quot;The Ghost of Cain&quot;. The lyrics to the song stated that the UK was the 51st state of the United States and were believed to be behind a ban by the American Musician&#x27;s Union on the band, which prevented them touring the &quot;Ghost of Cain&quot; album in the United States.

The track was released as a single through EMI and reached number 71 on the UK Singles Chart, spending just two weeks in the listing. It was the band&#x27;s fourth appearance on that chart.

Originally this song was written by Ashley Cartwright and performed by his band called The Shakes, from whom New Model Army took the song after The Shakes broke up in 1983.

== Formats and track listing ==
;UK 7&quot; single (NMA 4)
#&quot;51st State&quot; (Ashley Cartwright, New Model Army)
#&quot;Ten Commandments&quot; (Justin Sullivan)

;UK 12&quot; single (12 NMAS 4)
#&quot;51st State&quot;
#&quot;Ten Commandments&quot;
#&quot;A Liberal Education&quot; (live) (Sullivan, Stuart Morrow)
#&quot;No Rest&quot; (live) (Sullivan, Morrow, Robert Heaton)
#&quot;No Man&#x27;s Land&quot; (live) (Sullivan)

;UK 12&quot; single doublepack (12 NMA 4D)
;;Disc one
:#&quot;51st State&quot;
:#&quot;Ten Commandments&quot;
;;Disc two (PSLP 348)
:#&quot;A Liberal Education&quot; (live)
:#&quot;No Rest&quot; (live)
:#&quot;No Man&#x27;s Land&quot; (live)

;Holland 12&quot; single (2018046)
#&quot;51st State&quot;
#&quot;Ten Commandments&quot;
#&quot;A Liberal Education&quot; (live)
#&quot;No Rest&quot; (live)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4640126" start="6" end="16" title="51st State (song)" label="51st State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501951" start="38" end="52" title="New Model Army (band)" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="83" end="88" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811658" start="95" end="112" title="The Ghost of Cain" label="The Ghost of Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993" start="170" end="180" title="51st state" label="51st state"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="188" end="201" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q975007" start="246" end="276" title="American Federation of Musicians" label="American Musician&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="406" end="412" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="421" end="424" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="454" end="470" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501951" start="846" end="860" title="New Model Army (band)" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360948" start="893" end="908" title="Justin Sullivan" label="Justin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q327212" start="1110" end="1123" title="Robert Heaton" label="Robert Heaton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476913" wikidata="Q194451" url="?curid=476913" title="Coll">
<text>Coll (; ) is an island located west of the Isle of Mull and northeast of Tiree in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland. Coll is known for its sandy beaches, which rise to form large sand dunes, for its corncrakes, and for Breacachadh Castle. It is in the council area of Argyll and Bute. Arinagour is the main settlement on Coll. There is a ferry terminal on the island which connects it with the mainland of Scotland. Coll also has a small airport. The island is rural in nature and has been awarded Dark Sky status.
== Geology ==
Coll is formed largely from gneiss forming the Lewisian complex, a suite of metamorphic rocks of Archaean to early Proterozoic age. The eastern part of the island is traversed by numerous normal faults most of which run broadly northwest–southeast. Dolerite and camptonite dykes of Permo-Carboniferous or Tertiary age are also seen in the east of the island. 
Quaternary sediments include raised beach deposits which are frequent around Coll&#x27;s coastline whilst stretches of alluvium occupy some low inland areas. There are considerable areas of blown sand in the west and along stretches of the north coast and of peat southwest from Arinagour.

== Geography ==
Coll is about long by wide. It had a population of 171 according to Census figures released in 2024. This is a decline from 195 in 2013. Coll&#x27;s sandy beaches rise to form large sand dunes. The highest point on Coll is Ben Hogh in the mid-west of the island, which is a ridge with two tops running northwest to southeast. It rises initially to a height of , with a triangulation pillar, and to to the southeast.

===Settlements===
Arinagour (), is the main settlement on the island located at the head of Loch Eatharna, on the east coast. Other inhabited locations include:
*Acha (), a crofting settlement located south-west of Arinagour.
*Arileod (), located on the west coast; south-west of Arinagour.
*Arnabost (), located north-west of Arinagour. it is the junction for travel between Sorisdale, Clabhach and Arinagour.
*Ballyhaugh (), located on the northern part of Hough Bay; west of Arinagour.
*Bousd (), located north-east of Arinagour.
*Clabhach (), located on the north-west coast; north-west of Arinagour.
*Cornaigmore
*Crossapol (), located on the south-west coast.
*Grishipoll
*Sorisdale
*Totronald (), located on the west coast southwest of Arinagour.
*Uig (), located north-east of the head of Loch Breachacha.

==Etymology==
Coll is sometimes derived from Gaelic &quot;coll&quot;, &#x27;hazel&#x27;. However, the name is given as &quot;Colosus&quot; in the Life of St Columba by Adamnán, the seventh century abbot of Iona. As /s/ between vowels had been lost in Celtic before Adamnán&#x27;s time, Watson suggests that &quot;Colosus&quot; may represent a pre-Celtic name. Richard Coates has proposed that the name may be related to Greek &quot;kolossós&quot; and may have referred to a humanoid standing stone located on the island, like those still seen on North Uist and Lewis. As &quot;Kolossós&quot; is not originally a Greek word, Coates suggests that the name could have been given to Coll at a time when the &quot;kolossói&quot; of Mediterranean culture were well-known, or named &quot;by speakers of a language in which the ancestor of the word was the native term.&quot; In Icelandic, the word &quot;kollur&quot; (Old Norse: &quot;kollr&quot;, Norwegian: &quot;koll&quot; or &quot;kolle&quot;) means &quot;a rounded protrusion, such as a rounded mountaintop, or a tussock&quot;.

==History==
===Early history===

In the 6th century, an Irish invasion led to the establishment of the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata, which included Coll. Dál Riata was divided into four kin-groups, of which the Cenél Loairn ruled Coll, Mull, and the adjacent mainland, which together consequently became known as &quot;Lorn&quot;, after them. Coll shared the history of Lorn for the next 1000 years, becoming part of the Kingdom of the Isles under Norwegian dominion, then the MacDougall subdivision of that kingdom after Somerled.

Coll, like other Hebridean islands, has several &quot;crannógs&quot; (artificial islands) located in some of its lochs, dating from this early period. It is difficult to estimate the exact age of these islands, but several are thought to date to the Norse period; local traditions describe three – Dùn Anlaimh, Dùn an Achaidh, Dùn Dubh – as having been Norse strongholds which survived until they were attacked by the Macleans.

The 1266 Treaty of Perth transferred the Norwegian crown dependency to the Scottish king. Following the MacDougall defeat in the dispute between king John Balliol and Robert de Bruys (they had backed the former), the position of &quot;sheriff of Argyll&quot; was created to have shrieval authority over Lorn, and the MacDougall lands were merged into the Lordship of the Isles. Though MacDougall authority was restored in 1357, by king David II, the MacDougall heir had 3 years previously, quitclaimed any rights to Mull (including Coll), which therefore remained with the Lord of the Isles.

In 1549 Dean Monro wrote of Coll that it was:
:&quot;ane mane fertile Ile inhabite and manurit, with an castell and ane paroch kirk in it, gude for fishing and fowlers, with ane utter fine Falcons nest in it&quot;.
He wrote of Rum:
:&quot;&quot;It pertains to McKenabrey of Coll&quot;.&quot;

In the 15th century, the island came under the ownership of the &quot;MacLeans of Coll&quot; who constructed Breachacha Castle. The MacLeans exercised baronial control of the island until 1848. The Maclean ownership of the castle was sold in 1851.

=== Departure ===
In the late 18th century there were about 1,000 people supported by agriculture and fishing. However, the collapse in the kelp market after the end of the Napoleonic Wars, followed by the Highland Potato Famine, caused a great deal of hardship on the island. By the mid 19th century, much of the population had chosen to leave, many of them moving to Australia, Canada, or South Africa in a process referred to as the Scottish diaspora. One source indicates that 23% of the island&#x27;s population relocated. The process took place alongside the clearances where many were removed from their land. In Coll, overpopulation was cited as a factor.

===Present day===

In the 2011 census, the island&#x27;s population was recorded as 195, representing an increase over the previous decade of nearly 19% During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4% (to 103,702).

In December 2013, Coll secured &#x27;dark skies&#x27; status, the second location in Scotland. The island has no street lights and little other light pollution, allowing unobstructed views of the night sky on clear nights. In winter the Northern Lights are often visible.

In January 2024, Coll experienced a 3.3 magnitude earthquake according to the British Geological Survey.

==Transport==

There are only two main roads on Coll. The main hub of the island is the island&#x27;s largest settlement, Arinagour. Just over a kilometre (0.7 miles) south of Arinagour is the Caledonian MacBrayne ferry terminal. The ferry travels from Oban to Coll to Tiree; and a return trip from Tiree, to Coll, to Oban. The ferry between Oban and Castlebay on Barra goes via Coll and Tiree once a week.

The airport on the island, is located between Uig and Arileod. Highland Airways who originally operated the route to Oban went into administration in 2010, but a new operator, Hebridean Air Services now operates the route under a PSO with flights to Oban, Tiree and Colonsay. The aircraft used for the flights are a BN2 Islander (G-HEBS). Hebridean headquarters are at Cumbernauld Airport, North Lanarkshire.


==Economy==

Agriculture, primarily land owned farming as opposed to crofting is one of the major employment areas on the island. There are also a few fishing vessels that operate from the island.

The Isle of Coll&#x27;s community centre, An Cridhe, and hostel, Coll Bunkhouse was opened in July 2012 by Princess Anne. Owned and managed by the community-led organisation Development Coll, the new facilities were built to provide much needed amenities on the island and a social hub for the local community. An Cridhe now hosts a series of annual events such as a half marathon, the Coll Show, a basking shark festival, a bird festival and a chamber music festival, as well as a range of music, comedy, theatre and dance throughout the year. The centre also has a film club, Screen Coll. A remote outdoor disco is also held on the island.

In September 2024, it was reported that the island had one shop, one restaurant, one hotel and a post office in operation.

The charity Project Trust, which organises overseas volunteering and gap-years, has been based on the island since 1974. The founder, Nicholas Maclean-Bristol, also restored Breacachadh Castle. The island also has several tourist businesses.

==Wildlife==
There is an extensive RSPB reserve towards the west end of the island. One of the main attractions is the rare corncrake, as well as Skylarks. Traditional local farming practices have helped this once common British bird to survive.

In the 1970s, scientists released sand lizards on Coll. There is also a small population of sand lizards, as much of 39 individuals were introduced by scientists to test whether they can survive so far north in the 1970s and are still thriving today.

In 2010, a colony of short-necked oil beetles was found on the island. The beetle, thought to be extinct in the UK, is now known only to occur in southern England and Coll. It is parasitic on ground-dwelling bees, and is also flightless, raising the question of how it arrived on the island. It does not appear to be found on neighbouring Tiree, possibly because of a difference in terrain. Modern farming methods had partly caused its demise elsewhere.
== In fiction ==

Mairi Hedderwick, the illustrator and author, used to live on Coll and has used the island as the setting for her Katie Morag series of children&#x27;s books. In the books, Coll is known by the fictional name of the Isle of Struay.

In Alexander McCall Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Charming Quirks of Others&quot; the protagonist, Isabelle Dalhousie, discusses Coll as a place for a honeymoon.

==See also==

* List of islands of Scotland
* List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree
* Cairns of Coll
* Land raid
* Religion of the Yellow Stick

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Munro, R. W. (1961) Electronic &quot;Monro&#x27;s Western Isles of Scotland and Genealogies of the Clans&quot;. Edinburgh and London. Oliver and Boyd.
* Watson, W. J. (1994) &quot;The Celtic Place-Names of Scotland&quot;. Edinburgh; Birlinn. . First published 1926.

==External links==
* The island of Coll</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="0" end="4" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="43" end="55" title="Isle of Mull" label="Isle of Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="73" end="78" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="86" end="100" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="176" end="185" title="sand dune" label="sand dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q26017" start="196" end="205" title="corncrake" label="corncrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116815" start="216" end="234" title="Breachacha Castle" label="Breacachadh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="265" end="280" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777863" start="282" end="291" title="Arinagour" label="Arinagour"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="554" end="560" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="573" end="589" title="Lewisian complex" label="Lewisian complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="602" end="618" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="623" end="631" title="Archean" label="Archaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="641" end="652" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="714" end="726" title="normal fault" label="normal fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="775" end="783" title="Dolerite" label="Dolerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q774790" start="788" end="798" title="camptonite" label="camptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="799" end="804" title="dike (geology)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="808" end="813" title="Permian" label="Permo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="814" end="827" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="831" end="839" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="886" end="896" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="897" end="905" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="915" end="927" title="raised beach" label="raised beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="1005" end="1013" title="alluvium" label="alluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="1145" end="1149" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777863" start="1165" end="1174" title="Arinagour" label="Arinagour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777863" start="1628" end="1637" title="Arinagour" label="Arinagour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778638" start="1772" end="1776" title="Acha, Argyll and Bute" label="Acha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2100" end="2105" title="Bousd" label="Bousd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2277" end="2287" title="Grishipoll" label="Grishipoll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2289" end="2298" title="Sorisdale" label="Sorisdale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2365" end="2368" title="Uig, Coll" label="Uig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="2470" end="2476" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145889" start="2501" end="2506" title="hazel" label="hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107360675" start="2571" end="2589" title="Vita Columbae" label="Life of St Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q120132" start="2593" end="2600" title="Adamnán" label="Adamnán"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="2631" end="2635" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="2676" end="2682" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200853" start="2711" end="2717" title="William J. Watson" label="Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324807" start="2785" end="2799" title="Richard Coates" label="Richard Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2845" end="2850" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="2908" end="2922" title="Menhir" label="standing stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="2971" end="2981" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="2986" end="2991" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3152" end="3165" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="3605" end="3611" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="3623" end="3632" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q109510907" start="3712" end="3724" title="Cenél Loairn" label="Cenél Loairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="3737" end="3741" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681413" start="3820" end="3824" title="Lorne, Scotland" label="Lorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="3922" end="3942" title="Kingdom of the Isles" label="Kingdom of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q912664" start="3978" end="3988" title="Clan MacDougall" label="MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781786" start="4023" end="4031" title="Somerled" label="Somerled"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="4088" end="4095" title="crannóg" label="crannóg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="4147" end="4151" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320406" start="4332" end="4343" title="Dùn Anlaimh" label="Dùn Anlaimh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320417" start="4345" end="4359" title="Dùn an Achaidh" label="Dùn an Achaidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320408" start="4361" end="4369" title="Dùn Dubh" label="Dùn Dubh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="4472" end="4487" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="4504" end="4513" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="4613" end="4625" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="4630" end="4645" title="Robert I of Scotland" label="Robert de Bruys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494981" start="4698" end="4715" title="sheriff of Argyll" label="sheriff of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494999" start="4742" end="4750" title="sheriffdom" label="shrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="4818" end="4839" title="Lordship of the Isles" label="Lordship of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="4899" end="4907" title="David II, King of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381692" start="4909" end="4928" title="John Gallda MacDougall" label="the MacDougall heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="4979" end="4983" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294895" start="5064" end="5074" title="Dean Monro" label="Dean Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116815" start="5458" end="5475" title="Breachacha Castle" label="Breachacha Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="5738" end="5742" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="5771" end="5786" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="5804" end="5826" title="Highland Potato Famine" label="Highland Potato Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003960" start="6034" end="6051" title="Scottish diaspora" label="Scottish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="6163" end="6173" title="Highland Clearances" label="clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="6289" end="6300" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="6439" end="6454" title="List of Scottish islands" label="Scottish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223097" start="6541" end="6551" title="Dark-sky movement" label="dark skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="6648" end="6663" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="6741" end="6756" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="Northern Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="6827" end="6837" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="6855" end="6880" title="British Geological Survey" label="British Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="7076" end="7096" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="7136" end="7140" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="7152" end="7157" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="7234" end="7243" title="Castlebay" label="Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="7247" end="7252" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654014" start="7295" end="7302" title="Coll Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135440" start="7354" end="7370" title="Highland Airways" label="Highland Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695948" start="7467" end="7489" title="Hebridean Air Services" label="Hebridean Air Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657316" start="7660" end="7679" title="Cumbernauld Airport" label="Cumbernauld Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q207111" start="7681" end="7698" title="North Lanarkshire" label="North Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q151754" start="8007" end="8020" title="HRH Princess Anne" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794688" start="8679" end="8692" title="Project Trust" label="Project Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="8945" end="8949" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q26017" start="9034" end="9043" title="corncrake" label="corncrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12127523" start="9056" end="9064" title="Skylarks" label="Skylarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q148595" start="9191" end="9203" title="sand lizards" label="sand lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306296" start="9430" end="9454" title="Meloe brevicollis" label="short-necked oil beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="9748" end="9753" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736936" start="9881" end="9897" title="Mairi Hedderwick" label="Mairi Hedderwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377520" start="9995" end="10006" title="Katie Morag" label="Katie Morag"/>
<link wikidata="Q364901" start="10117" end="10139" title="Alexander McCall Smith" label="Alexander McCall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722208" start="10153" end="10182" title="The Charming Quirks of Others" label="The Charming Quirks of Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="10286" end="10313" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964970" start="10316" end="10384" title="List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree" label="List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209307" start="10387" end="10401" title="Cairns of Coll" label="Cairns of Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782766" start="10404" end="10413" title="Land raid" label="Land raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311275" start="10416" end="10444" title="Religion of the Yellow Stick" label="Religion of the Yellow Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200853" start="10646" end="10659" title="William J. Watson" label="Watson, W. J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476915" wikidata="Q1313015" url="?curid=476915" title="Metrosideros">
<text>Metrosideros is a genus of approximately 60 trees, shrubs, and vines in the family Myrtaceae, mostly found in the Pacific region. Most of the tree forms are small, but some are exceptionally large, the New Zealand species in particular. The name derives from the Ancient Greek &quot;metra&quot; or &quot;heartwood&quot; and &quot;sideron&quot; or &quot;iron&quot;. Perhaps the best-known species are the pōhutukawa (&quot;M. excelsa&quot;), northern rātā (&quot;M. robusta&quot;) and southern rātā (&quot;M. umbellata&quot;) of New Zealand, and &quot;ōhia lehua&quot; (&quot;M. polymorpha&quot;) from the Hawaiian Islands.

==Distribution==

&quot;Metrosideros&quot; is one of the most widely spread flowering plant genera in the Pacific. New Caledonia has 21 species, New Zealand has 12, New Guinea has seven and Hawaii has 5. The genus is present on most other high Pacific Islands, including Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Samoa, Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Bonin Islands and Lord Howe Island, but absent from Micronesia. The genus is also represented by one species in the Philippines, one in South America (Chile and Argentina), and one outlier in South Africa.

&quot;Metrosideros&quot; seeds are very lightweight and easily dispersed by wind. The seeds can also survive freezing temperatures, and up to 30 days submerged in salt water, and still germinate, which probably accounts for their wide distribution. They are often found as pioneer trees on lava flows and on mountain ridges. Despite the clear propensity towards long-distance dispersal, the genus does not occur in mainland Australia.

==Fossil record==

For some time it had been hypothesised that &quot;Metrosideros&quot; evolved in New Zealand, and dispersed from there throughout the Pacific. This was due to the long fossil record of &quot;Metrosideros&quot; in New Zealand coupled with the absence of any &quot;Metrosideros&quot; fossils on other Gondwanan landmasses. The oldest conclusive fossil evidence of &quot;Metrosideros&quot; in New Zealand is fossil fruits from the Miocene aged Manuherikia sediments of Central Otago. There is a fossil pollen record going back much further, but it has been shown that &quot;Metrosideros&quot; pollen is very similar morphologically to many other genera within the family Myrtaceae and as such, fossil pollen cannot be reliably used as the oldest record of the genus.

The oldest conclusive record of &quot;Metrosideros&quot; are fossil fruits and flowers of &quot;Metrosideros leunigii&quot;, an extinct species, from Oligocene aged sediments in Tasmania, Australia. This is very curious considering that &quot;Metrosideros&quot; is one of the most widely spread plants in the Pacific, and is not present in Australia today. These fossils may also point towards an Australian origin for the genus.

==Cultivation==
&quot;Metrosideros&quot; are often cultivated for their showy flowers, as street trees or in home gardens. The flowers are generally red, but some cultivars have orange, yellow or white flowers. Some names listed in horticultural catalogues and other publications, such as &quot;M. villosa&quot; and &quot;M. vitiensis&quot;, are actually the names of varieties or cultivars (usually of &quot;M. collina&quot;) rather than valid scientific species. The pōhutukawa of New Zealand has several cultivars grown in Australia, Hawaii and California. It has been planted successfully in the north of Spain and on the Scilly Isles off the south-west coast of Britain, but the species is considered an invasive pest in parts of South Africa and in the Azores. &quot;Metrosideros kermadecensis&quot; is recently naturalised in Hawaii, and has the potential to become a pest. In turn, various cultivars of &quot;M. collina&quot; and &quot;M. polymorpha&quot; are widely grown in New Zealand under various names. &quot;Metrosideros umbellata&quot; occurs naturally south of mainland New Zealand in the Auckland Islands at 50° South latitude, and is the hardiest member of the genus, and a few cultivated specimens are growing in Scotland.

==&quot;Metrosideros&quot; species==
;New Caledonia 
* &quot;Metrosideros brevistylis&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros cacuminum&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros cherrieri&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros dolichandra&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros elegans&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros engleriana&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros humboldtiana&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros laurifolia&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros longipetiolata&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros microphylla&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros nitida&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros operculata&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros oreomyrtus&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros paniensis&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros patens&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros porphyrea&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros punctata&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros rotundifolia&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros tardiflora&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros tetrasticha&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros whitakeri&quot; 

South America
* &quot;Metrosideros stipularis&quot; 

South Africa
* &quot;Metrosideros angustifolia&quot; 
;New Zealand
* &quot;Metrosideros albiflora&quot; - Large white rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros bartlettii&quot; - Bartlett&#x27;s rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros carminea&quot; - Carmine rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros colensoi&quot; - Colenso&#x27;s rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros diffusa&quot; - White rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros excelsa&quot; - Pōhutukawa
* &quot;Metrosideros fulgens&quot; - Scarlet rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros kermadecensis&quot; - Kermadec pōhutukawa (Kermadec Islands)
* &quot;Metrosideros parkinsonii&quot; - Parkinson&#x27;s rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros perforata&quot; - Small white rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros robusta&quot; - Northern rātā
* &quot;Metrosideros umbellata&quot; - Southern rātā

New Guinea
* &quot;Metrosideros arfakensis&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros cordata&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros ovata&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros parallelinervis&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros ramiflora&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros regelii&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros whiteana&quot; 

Philippines
* &quot;Metrosideros halconensis&quot; 
;Hawaii
* &quot;Metrosideros macropus&quot; - &quot;Lehua mamo&quot; (Oahu)
* &quot;Metrosideros polymorpha&quot; - &quot;Ōhia lehua&quot;
* &quot;Metrosideros rugosa&quot; - &quot;Lehua papa&quot; (Oahu)
* &quot;Metrosideros tremuloides&quot; - &quot;Lehua āhihi&quot; (Oahu)
* &quot;Metrosideros waialealae&quot; (Kauai, Molokai, and Maui)

French Polynesia, Pitcairn and the Cook Islands
* &quot;Metrosideros collina&quot; 

Fiji, Samoa and Vanuatu
* &quot;Metrosideros gregoryi&quot; (Samoa)
* &quot;Metrosideros ochrantha&quot; (Fiji)
* &quot;Metrosideros tabwemasanaensis&quot; (Vanuatu)
* &quot;Metrosideros vitiensis&quot; 

Solomon Islands
* &quot;Metrosideros salomonensis&quot; 
* &quot;Metrosideros tetragyna&quot; 

Lord Howe Island
* &quot;Metrosideros nervulosa&quot; - Mountain rose
* &quot;Metrosideros sclerocarpa&quot; 

Ogasawara Islands
* &quot;Metrosideros boninensis&quot; 

==References==
==Further reading==
* Simpson, P., 2005. &quot;Pōhutukawa &amp; Rātā: New Zealand&#x27;s Iron-Hearted Trees&quot;. Te Papa Press. 346 pp.
* Wagner, W.L., D. R. Herbst, and S.H. Sohmer. 1999. &quot;Manual of the Flowering Plants of Hawaii&quot;. Revised edition. University of Hawaii Press and Bishop Museum Press, Honolulu. 1919 pp.
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="44" end="48" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="51" end="56" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="63" end="67" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="83" end="92" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="263" end="276" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="304" end="313" title="heartwood" label="heartwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q311747" start="404" end="414" title="pōhutukawa" label="pōhutukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q744244" start="441" end="454" title="Metrosideros robusta" label="northern rātā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461888" start="484" end="497" title="Metrosideros umbellata" label="southern rātā"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710783" start="551" end="561" title="Metrosideros polymorpha" label="ōhia lehua"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="605" end="621" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="739" end="752" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="769" end="780" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="789" end="799" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="814" end="820" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="868" end="883" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="895" end="910" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="912" end="919" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="921" end="925" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="927" end="932" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="934" end="946" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="948" end="964" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="966" end="979" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="984" end="1000" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="1018" end="1028" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1082" end="1093" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1102" end="1115" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1158" end="1170" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1708" end="1719" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="1926" end="1935" title="Gondwanan" label="Gondwanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2055" end="2062" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="2295" end="2304" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24894303" start="2488" end="2509" title="Metrosideros leunigii" label="Metrosideros leunigii"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="2542" end="2551" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q311747" start="3292" end="3302" title="pōhutukawa" label="pōhutukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3371" end="3381" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3432" end="3437" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="3449" end="3461" title="Scilly Isles" label="Scilly Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3490" end="3497" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="3582" end="3588" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291999" start="3596" end="3622" title="Metrosideros kermadecensis" label="Metrosideros kermadecensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461888" start="3846" end="3868" title="Metrosideros umbellata" label="Metrosideros umbellata"/>
<link wikidata="Q326951" start="3929" end="3945" title="Auckland Islands" label="Auckland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4056" end="4064" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4128" end="4152" title="Metrosideros brevistylis" label="Metrosideros brevistylis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4168" end="4190" title="Metrosideros cacuminum" label="Metrosideros cacuminum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4206" end="4228" title="Metrosideros cherrieri" label="Metrosideros cherrieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4244" end="4268" title="Metrosideros dolichandra" label="Metrosideros dolichandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15372850" start="4284" end="4304" title="Metrosideros elegans" label="Metrosideros elegans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4320" end="4343" title="Metrosideros engleriana" label="Metrosideros engleriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438216" start="4359" end="4384" title="Metrosideros humboldtiana" label="Metrosideros humboldtiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4400" end="4423" title="Metrosideros laurifolia" label="Metrosideros laurifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4439" end="4466" title="Metrosideros longipetiolata" label="Metrosideros longipetiolata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4482" end="4506" title="Metrosideros microphylla" label="Metrosideros microphylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4522" end="4541" title="Metrosideros nitida" label="Metrosideros nitida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825382" start="4557" end="4580" title="Metrosideros operculata" label="Metrosideros operculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4596" end="4619" title="Metrosideros oreomyrtus" label="Metrosideros oreomyrtus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4635" end="4657" title="Metrosideros paniensis" label="Metrosideros paniensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4673" end="4692" title="Metrosideros patens" label="Metrosideros patens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4708" end="4730" title="Metrosideros porphyrea" label="Metrosideros porphyrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459081" start="4746" end="4767" title="Metrosideros punctata" label="Metrosideros punctata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4783" end="4808" title="Metrosideros rotundifolia" label="Metrosideros rotundifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4824" end="4847" title="Metrosideros tardiflora" label="Metrosideros tardiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4863" end="4887" title="Metrosideros tetrasticha" label="Metrosideros tetrasticha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4903" end="4925" title="Metrosideros whitakeri" label="Metrosideros whitakeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q25353411" start="4956" end="4979" title="Metrosideros stipularis" label="Metrosideros stipularis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5009" end="5034" title="Metrosideros angustifolia" label="Metrosideros angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15373061" start="5063" end="5085" title="Metrosideros albiflora" label="Metrosideros albiflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473535" start="5119" end="5142" title="Metrosideros bartlettii" label="Metrosideros bartlettii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825377" start="5180" end="5201" title="Metrosideros carminea" label="Metrosideros carminea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15372333" start="5231" end="5252" title="Metrosideros colensoi" label="Metrosideros colensoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15372589" start="5289" end="5309" title="Metrosideros diffusa" label="Metrosideros diffusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q311747" start="5337" end="5357" title="Metrosideros excelsa" label="Metrosideros excelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677024" start="5385" end="5405" title="Metrosideros fulgens" label="Metrosideros fulgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291999" start="5435" end="5461" title="Metrosideros kermadecensis" label="Metrosideros kermadecensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15373651" start="5517" end="5541" title="Metrosideros parkinsonii" label="Metrosideros parkinsonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825383" start="5580" end="5602" title="Metrosideros perforata" label="Metrosideros perforata"/>
<link wikidata="Q744244" start="5636" end="5656" title="Metrosideros robusta" label="Metrosideros robusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461888" start="5687" end="5709" title="Metrosideros umbellata" label="Metrosideros umbellata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5752" end="5775" title="Metrosideros arfakensis" label="Metrosideros arfakensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5791" end="5811" title="Metrosideros cordata" label="Metrosideros cordata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5827" end="5845" title="Metrosideros ovata" label="Metrosideros ovata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5861" end="5889" title="Metrosideros parallelinervis" label="Metrosideros parallelinervis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5905" end="5927" title="Metrosideros ramiflora" label="Metrosideros ramiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5943" end="5963" title="Metrosideros regelii" label="Metrosideros regelii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5979" end="6000" title="Metrosideros whiteana" label="Metrosideros whiteana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6029" end="6053" title="Metrosideros halconensis" label="Metrosideros halconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13933201" start="6077" end="6098" title="Metrosideros macropus" label="Metrosideros macropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710783" start="6145" end="6168" title="Metrosideros polymorpha" label="Metrosideros polymorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825384" start="6208" end="6227" title="Metrosideros rugosa" label="Metrosideros rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6274" end="6298" title="Metrosideros tremuloides" label="Metrosideros tremuloides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6346" end="6369" title="Metrosideros waialealae" label="Metrosideros waialealae"/>
<link wikidata="Q781752" start="6460" end="6480" title="Metrosideros collina" label="Metrosideros collina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6521" end="6542" title="Metrosideros gregoryi" label="Metrosideros gregoryi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459079" start="6565" end="6587" title="Metrosideros ochrantha" label="Metrosideros ochrantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q89162850" start="6609" end="6638" title="Metrosideros tabwemasanaensis" label="Metrosideros tabwemasanaensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q91329986" start="6663" end="6685" title="Metrosideros vitiensis" label="Metrosideros vitiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6718" end="6743" title="Metrosideros salomonensis" label="Metrosideros salomonensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6759" end="6781" title="Metrosideros tetragyna" label="Metrosideros tetragyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13933203" start="6815" end="6837" title="Metrosideros nervulosa" label="Metrosideros nervulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15372386" start="6868" end="6892" title="Metrosideros sclerocarpa" label="Metrosideros sclerocarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15371743" start="6927" end="6950" title="Metrosideros boninensis" label="Metrosideros boninensis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476918" wikidata="Q808889" url="?curid=476918" title="Barretina">
<text>A barretina (; plural: &quot;barretines&quot;, diminutive of &quot;barret&quot; &quot;cap&quot;) is a traditional hat that was frequently worn by men in parts of the Christian cultures of the Mediterranean Sea such as Catalonia, the Valencian Community, the Balearic Islands, Provence, Corsica, Sicily, Malta, Sardinia, part of Naples, part of the Balkans and parts of Portugal. It was also worn by Muslim men in Majorca until the Christian conquest of the island in the Middle Ages.

==History==
In Catalonia and Ibiza, men wore barretinas until the 19th century, especially in rural areas. Even in the 1940s and the 1950s, children in rural areas still commonly wore it. 

It took the form of a bag, made of wool, usually red, or sometimes purple. 

Today, the &quot;barretina&quot; is no longer commonly worn in everyday life, but is still used in traditional dances, or as a symbol of Catalan identity. A watercolor image dated 1885 of a seller of newspapers (private collection) is perhaps one of the most iconic Catalan images, as it portrays a weathered man standing resolute, new independent newspapers falling from his portable wooden box, a look of tolerance and endurance in his face, while all the while wearing his barretina proudly.

Painter Salvador Dalí sometimes wore the &quot;barretina&quot; in the 20th century. Some Catalan folkloric characters also wear a barretina, as: the Catalan Christmas figurine &quot;caganer&quot;, the Christmas log or &quot;tió&quot;, as well as the fictional characters Patufet, first drawn on the En Patufet magazine by , and &quot;The Catalan&quot; drawn by .

==In popular culture==
Moments before the 2010 FIFA World Cup Final between Spain and the Netherlands, pitch invader Jimmy Jump rushed onto the field and attempted to place a barretina on the World Cup trophy before being apprehended by several security guards.

==See also==
*Tuque
*Revolt of the Barretines
*Phrygian cap
*Beret
== References ==

==External links==

* Description and history of the barretina
* Graphical history of the barretina
* Barretina.com, all you need to know about barretines and Catalan culture
* Colla de sa Bodega (traditional Ibiza clothing and dancing) .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q808889" start="2" end="11" title="Barretina" label="barretina"/>
<link wikidata="Q80151" start="114" end="117" title="hat" label="hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="166" end="183" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="192" end="209" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="218" end="227" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720" start="233" end="252" title="Valencian Community" label="Valencian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="258" end="274" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="276" end="284" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="286" end="293" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="295" end="301" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="303" end="308" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="310" end="318" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="328" end="334" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="348" end="355" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="369" end="377" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="399" end="405" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="413" end="420" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106980" start="421" end="463" title="Conquest of Majorca" label="until the Christian conquest of the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="471" end="482" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="710" end="714" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="1256" end="1269" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q36029" start="1430" end="1437" title="caganer" label="caganer"/>
<link wikidata="Q762108" start="1472" end="1475" title="tió" label="tió"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101919" start="1519" end="1526" title="Patufet" label="Patufet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374998" start="1547" end="1557" title="En Patufet" label="En Patufet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050223" start="1576" end="1599" title="¡Cu-Cut!" label="&amp;quot;The Catalan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208401" start="1654" end="1679" title="2010 FIFA World Cup Final" label="2010 FIFA World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="1688" end="1693" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="1702" end="1713" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198858" start="1715" end="1728" title="pitch invasion" label="pitch invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q212701" start="1729" end="1739" title="Jimmy Jump" label="Jimmy Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q517621" start="1804" end="1820" title="FIFA World Cup Trophy" label="World Cup trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795738" start="1889" end="1894" title="Tuque" label="Tuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139108" start="1896" end="1920" title="Revolt of the Barretines" label="Revolt of the Barretines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="1922" end="1934" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="1936" end="1941" title="Beret" label="Beret"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476919" wikidata="Q156659" url="?curid=476919" title="Archduke Franz Karl of Austria">
<text>Archduke Franz Karl Joseph of Austria (17 December 1802 – 8 March 1878) was a member of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine. He was the father of two emperors: Franz Joseph I of Austria and Maximilian I of Mexico. Through his third son Karl Ludwig, he was the grandfather of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria – whose assassination sparked the hostilities that led to the outbreak of World War I.

==Life==
===Early life and marriage===
Franz Karl was born in Vienna, the third son of Emperor Francis II of the Holy Roman Empire by his second marriage with Princess Maria Theresa from the House of Bourbon, daughter of King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies and Maria Carolina of Austria. On 4 November 1824 in Vienna, he married Princess Sophie of Bavaria from the House of Wittelsbach, a daughter of King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria by his second wife Caroline of Baden. Sophie&#x27;s paternal half-sister, Caroline Augusta of Bavaria was by this time Franz Karl&#x27;s stepmother, having married his thrice-widowed father in 1816. The Wittelsbachs condoned the unappealing manners of Sophie&#x27;s husband in consideration of the incapability of his elder brother Ferdinand and Sophie&#x27;s chance to become Austrian empress.

Franz Karl was an unambitious and generally ineffectual man, although he was, together with his uncle Archduke Louis, a member of the &quot;Geheime Staatskonferenz&quot; council, which after the death of Emperor Francis II ruled the Austrian Empire in the stead of his mentally ill brother Ferdinand from 1835 to 1848. The decisions, however, were actually made by the Chancellor Prince Klemens Wenzel von Metternich and his rival Count Franz Anton von Kolowrat-Liebsteinsky. His wife Sophie had already transferred her ambitions, when she urged Franz Karl to renounce his claims to the throne at the time of his brother&#x27;s abdication on 2 December 1848, allowing their eldest son Franz Joseph I to take the throne.

===Death and burial===
Archduke Franz Karl died in Vienna in 1878, six years after the death of his wife. He is buried at the Imperial Crypt at the Capuchin Church. Franz Karl was the last Habsburg whose viscera were entombed at the Ducal Crypt of St. Stephen&#x27;s Cathedral and whose heart was placed at the &quot;Herzgruft&quot; of the Augustinian Church according to a centuries-long family rite.
==Honors and awards==
He received the following awards:
==Children==
==See also==
* List of heirs to the Austrian throne

==Ancestors==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156659" start="0" end="37" title="Archduke Franz Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Karl Joseph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="92" end="118" title="House of Habsburg-Lorraine" label="House of Habsburg-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="155" end="180" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="185" end="207" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian I of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q78519" start="231" end="242" title="Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria" label="Karl Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="270" end="305" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="314" end="327" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="380" end="391" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="456" end="462" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="489" end="499" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="507" end="524" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164504" start="562" end="575" title="Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="585" end="601" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="620" end="651" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q158229" start="656" end="681" title="Maria Carolina of Austria" label="Maria Carolina of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="705" end="711" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q57653" start="724" end="750" title="Princess Sophie of Bavaria" label="Princess Sophie of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="760" end="780" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44319" start="801" end="831" title="Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170195" start="851" end="868" title="Caroline of Baden" label="Caroline of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57662" start="906" end="933" title="Caroline Augusta of Bavaria" label="Caroline Augusta of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="1164" end="1173" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q111975" start="1339" end="1344" title="Archduke Louis of Austria" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q872450" start="1362" end="1397" title="Secret State Conference" label="&amp;quot;Geheime Staatskonferenz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1461" end="1476" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="1518" end="1527" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="1615" end="1644" title="Klemens Wenzel von Metternich" label="Klemens Wenzel von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q78871" start="1665" end="1702" title="Franz Anton von Kolowrat-Liebsteinsky" label="Franz Anton von Kolowrat-Liebsteinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q662652" start="2075" end="2089" title="Imperial Crypt, Vienna" label="Imperial Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q697944" start="2097" end="2112" title="Capuchin Church, Vienna" label="Capuchin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="2153" end="2160" title="viscera" label="viscera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311218" start="2182" end="2193" title="Ducal Crypt (Vienna)" label="Ducal Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943" start="2197" end="2225" title="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Vienna" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785350" start="2266" end="2275" title="Herzgruft" label="Herzgruft"/>
<link wikidata="Q693869" start="2289" end="2307" title="Augustinian Church, Vienna" label="Augustinian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622133" start="2435" end="2471" title="List of heirs to the Austrian throne" label="List of heirs to the Austrian throne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476920" wikidata="Q443652" url="?curid=476920" title="Fife (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Fife]] is a council area and historic county in Scotland.

Fife may also refer to:
* Fife (instrument), a musical instrument similar to the piccolo
== Places ==
* Fife, Texas, U.S.
* Fife, Virginia, U.S.
* Fife, Washington
* Fife Lake, Saskatchewan, Canada
* Fife Lake, Michigan, U.S.
* Fife Street, A street in Kowloon, Hong Kong

==Other uses==
* Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe), a federation of cat registries
* Festival International du Film Espoir (FIFE), an annual film festival held in Ivory Coast
* USS &quot;Fife&quot;, a 1979 U.S. Navy ship
* Fife, the number 5 in the NATO phonetic alphabet
* Fife (cutlery), a combination utensil

==People with the surname==
* Allan Fife (born 1954), Australian businessman
* Austin E. and Alta S. Fife, pioneering Utah folklorists
* Catherine Fife (born 1968/1969), Canadian politician
* Connie Fife (born 1961), Cree Canadian poet and editor
* Dane Fife (born 1979), American basketball player
* Danny Fife (born 1949), American baseball player
* David Fife (1805–1877), Canadian farmer
* Dougie Fife (born 1990), Scottish rugby union player
* Fred J. Fife (born 1937), American politician and engineer
* Graeme Fife, English writer, playwright and broadcaster
* Irwin Fife (1894–1971), American inventor
* Ivy Fife (1905–1976), New Zealand painter
* James Fife, pirate active in the Caribbean
* Jason Fife (born 1981), American football player
* Jenna Fife (born 1995), Scottish footballer
* John Fife, human rights activist
* Josh Fife (born 2000), Australian racing driver
* Macduff of Fife (died 1298), played a small but significant role in the Wars of Scottish Independence
* Phyllis Fife (born 1948), American painter
* Ralph Fife (1920–2000), American football player
* Robert Fife (born 1954), Canadian journalist
* Rolf Einar Fife (born 1961), Norwegian diplomat
* Sam Fife (1926–1979), Christian leader
* Stephen Fife (born 1986), American baseball player
* Wal Fife (1929–2017), Australian politician
* William Fife (disambiguation), several

===Characters===
* Barney Fife, a fictional character in &quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot; portrayed by Don Knotts

==People with the given name==
* Fife Symington (born 1945), American businessman and politician

==See also==
* Fief, a central element of feudalism
* Fife Lake Township, Michigan, U.S.
* Fifeshire (disambiguation)
* Fifer (disambiguation)
* Fyfe, a name
* Fyffe (disambiguation)
* Phife Dawg, a musician
* Phyfe</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q443652" start="0" end="8" title="Fife (disambiguation)" label="[[Fife]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q443652" start="61" end="65" title="Fife (disambiguation)" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255516" start="87" end="104" title="Fife (instrument)" label="Fife (instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447350" start="165" end="176" title="Fife, Texas" label="Fife, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153479" start="185" end="199" title="Fife, Virginia" label="Fife, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510211" start="208" end="224" title="Fife, Washington" label="Fife, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447369" start="227" end="250" title="Fife Lake, Saskatchewan" label="Fife Lake, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388594" start="261" end="280" title="Fife Lake, Michigan" label="Fife Lake, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207691" start="289" end="300" title="Fife Street" label="Fife Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="351" end="383" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q130530024" start="425" end="462" title="Festival International du Film Espoir" label="Festival International du Film Espoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869367" start="517" end="537" title="USS Fife" label="USS &amp;quot;Fife&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190194" start="589" end="611" title="NATO phonetic alphabet" label="NATO phonetic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024237" start="614" end="628" title="Fife (cutlery)" label="Fife (cutlery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q76788845" start="683" end="693" title="Allan Fife" label="Allan Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823068" start="732" end="758" title="Austin E. and Alta S. Fife" label="Austin E. and Alta S. Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052672" start="790" end="804" title="Catherine Fife" label="Catherine Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676638" start="845" end="856" title="Connie Fife" label="Connie Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215804" start="902" end="911" title="Dane Fife" label="Dane Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220348" start="954" end="964" title="Danny Fife" label="Danny Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233641" start="1005" end="1015" title="David Fife" label="David Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301125" start="1047" end="1058" title="Dougie Fife" label="Dougie Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495557" start="1102" end="1114" title="Fred J. Fife" label="Fred J. Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592260" start="1163" end="1174" title="Graeme Fife" label="Graeme Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q28203110" start="1221" end="1231" title="Irwin Fife" label="Irwin Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q27924506" start="1265" end="1273" title="Ivy Fife" label="Ivy Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045301" start="1309" end="1319" title="James Fife" label="James Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162484" start="1354" end="1364" title="Jason Fife" label="Jason Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771981" start="1405" end="1415" title="Jenna Fife" label="Jenna Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233100" start="1451" end="1460" title="John Fife" label="John Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q86614318" start="1486" end="1495" title="Josh Fife" label="Josh Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723011" start="1536" end="1551" title="Macduff of Fife" label="Macduff of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555328" start="1640" end="1652" title="Phyllis Fife" label="Phyllis Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282092" start="1685" end="1695" title="Ralph Fife" label="Ralph Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344328" start="1736" end="1747" title="Robert Fife" label="Robert Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599713" start="1783" end="1798" title="Rolf Einar Fife" label="Rolf Einar Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407464" start="1833" end="1841" title="Sam Fife" label="Sam Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498545" start="1874" end="1886" title="Stephen Fife" label="Stephen Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961241" start="1927" end="1935" title="Wal Fife" label="Wal Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009024" start="1973" end="2002" title="William Fife (disambiguation)" label="William Fife (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861718" start="2032" end="2043" title="Barney Fife" label="Barney Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q699900" start="2163" end="2177" title="Fife Symington" label="Fife Symington"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="2243" end="2247" title="Fief" label="Fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447381" start="2282" end="2310" title="Fife Lake Township, Michigan" label="Fife Lake Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32920028" start="2319" end="2345" title="Fifeshire (disambiguation)" label="Fifeshire (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447393" start="2348" end="2370" title="Fifer (disambiguation)" label="Fifer (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21482525" start="2373" end="2377" title="Fyfe" label="Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478582" start="2388" end="2410" title="Fyffe (disambiguation)" label="Fyffe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370892" start="2413" end="2423" title="Phife Dawg" label="Phife Dawg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413022" start="2438" end="2443" title="Phyfe" label="Phyfe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476923" wikidata="Q2255516" url="?curid=476923" title="Fife (instrument)">
<text>A fife ( ) is a small, high-pitched, transverse aerophone, that is similar to the piccolo. The fife originated in medieval Europe and is often used in fife and drum corps, military units, and marching bands. Someone who plays the fife is called a fifer. The word &quot;fife&quot; comes from the German , meaning pipe, which comes from the Latin word .

The fife is a diatonically tuned instrument commonly consisting of a tube with six finger holes and an embouchure hole that produces sound when blown across. Modern versions of the fife are chromatic, having 10 or 11 finger holes that allow any note to be played. On a 10-hole fife, the index, middle and ring fingers of both hands remain in the same positions as on the six-hole fife, while both thumbs and both pinkies are used to play accidentals. An 11-hole fife has holes positioned similarly but adds a second hole under the right middle finger.

Fifes are made primarily of wood, such as blackwood, grenadilla, rosewood, mopane, pink ivory, cocobolo, boxwood, maple, or persimmon. Some fifes are entirely made of metal or plastic.

Military and marching fifes have metal reinforcing bands, called ferrules, around the ends to protect them from damage. A fife used in less strenuous conditions may have a lathe-turned, knob-like decoration at the ends for protection. Modern fifes may have two- or three-piece constructions, and may incorporate a sliding tuning joint made of metal or cork.

Fifes are most commonly used in fife and drum corps, but can also be found in folk music, particularly Celtic music. Some Caribbean music makes use of fifes, which are usually made from bamboo.

== Key and range ==
The names of different varieties of fife follow the conventions of transposing instruments:
* defining the key in which a transposing instrument sounds as the major key whose tonic is either the lowest pitch producible by that instrument without fingering or other manipulation, or the pitch produced when the player fingers a C on the staff.
* naming different subtypes of a given transposing instrument after the respective keys in which those subtypes sound.

These conventions are specific to transposing instruments. By contrast, non-transposing instruments use another convention. For example, although the trombone and the tuba each produce a B when played at their lowest harmonic position with the slide not extended or with no valves depressed, respectively, the trombone&#x27;s music parts are not transposed, and the tuba&#x27;s music parts are transposed only across octaves, such that the note sounded by a tuba bears the same name as the note read by the tubist.

* The standard &quot;B&quot; fife is an A transposing instrument, meaning that prevailing scoring conventions dictate that the C position on a fife-part staff should correspond to a concert A. The standard fife sounds a minor sixth above written, the equivalent of a major-third drop followed by an octave increase. The B name follows the same naming convention as with tin whistles, being named after the concert pitch produced with all six holes covered, or the instrument&#x27;s D.
* Fifes pitched (i.e., constructed so as to sound) in the keys of D and of C are also common.
* Fifes in various other keys are sometimes played in musical ensembles.

A convention specific to some fife music and contradictory to the standard is for fife music to be written in the key of D regardless of the key in which the fife in question sounds. The general effect is to define sounded notes in terms of scale degree, as with a movable-do system, and then to express any pitch having a given scale degree in the context of a given musical piece, regardless of that pitch&#x27;s absolute value, in terms of a staff position defined as corresponding to that scale degree. The more specific effect is to treat fife subtypes sounding in different keys as comparable to transposing-instrument subtypes (e.g., of clarinet) sounding in those keys except that the tonic of the key in which a given fife sounds is set as corresponding to D rather than C, such that the written key signature for fife music played in a given concert key would have two fewer sharps or two more flats than would the written key signature used in music written for other transposing-instrument subtypes sounding in the same key. 

Like the Irish flute and the tin whistle, the ancient fife is a six-hole simple system flute. These flutes are unable to play all chromatic pitches, while many of the chromatic pitches which they can play are grossly out of tune. Because of these restrictions on available notes, the common six-hole fife is for practical purposes capable of playing only in the written keys of D (concert B) major, G (concert E) major, A (concert F) major, and those keys’ relative minors.

An experienced fife player can play three full octaves, although the fingering patterns necessary for playing in the third octave can be daunting to a beginner. Marching bands typically play only in the second and third octave since these are the loudest and most penetrating.

==In folk music==
In medieval Europe, the fife was used in some folk music traditions to accompany dancing by all social classes.

The fife was one of the most important musical instruments in the United States&#x27; Colonial period, even more widespread than the violin or piano. The fife can still be heard in some Appalachian folk music, playing lively dance tunes. American slaves adopted fifes in their musical traditions, which derived from African music. The tradition developed into fife and drum blues, a genre that continued throughout the 20th century but has since died out. One of the most famous artists in the tradition was Othar Turner, a musician from Mississippi, who played blues on homemade cane fifes.

There remains an active and enthusiastic group, primarily in the northeastern United States, that continues to play fife and drum music in a folk tradition that has gone on since the American Civil War. The center of this activity is in eastern Connecticut. There is a loose federation of corps, though not a governing body, called The Company of Fifers and Drummers, which maintains a headquarters and museum in Ivoryton, Connecticut.

Fife alone, or fife and drum, is also used in numerous European countries, especially in the South of France (Occitania): Languedoc and the county of Nice; in Switzerland (notably Basel); and in Northern Ireland, where it is often accompanied by the lambeg drum.

Modern players of Celtic music, folk music, old-timey music, and folk-rock include fifing in their arrangements of tunes and songs. 

The Junkanoo festival of the Bahamas and Jamaica includes the music of bamboo fifes.

In the rural lands of northeast Brazil, people use a bamboo fife named Brazilian fife (in Brazil it is called or just ). This fife is a mix of Native American flute traditions with European fife traditions. The groups that use this instrument utilize only flute and percussive elements in their music, in a profusion of Native American, African and European traditions.

==In military music==


When played in its upper register, the fife is loud and piercing, yet also extremely small and portable. According to some reports, a band of fifes and drums can be heard up to away over artillery fire. Because of these qualities, European armies from the Renaissance on found it useful for signaling on the battlefield. Armies from Switzerland and southern Germany are known to have used the fife () as early as the 15th century. Swiss and German mercenaries were hired by monarchs throughout Western Europe, and they spread the practice of military fifing. The fife was a standard instrument in European infantries by the 16th century.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the protocols of the fifes and drums became intricately associated with infantry regiments only. They were not used as signaling instruments by the cavalry or artillery, which used trumpets, kettle drums or both. Each company in an infantry regiment was assigned two fifers and two drummers. When the battalion (5 companies) or regiment (10 companies) was formed up on parade or for movement en masse, these musicians would be detached from the companies to form a &quot;band&quot;. This is how the term &quot;band&quot; first came to refer to a group of musicians. In their individual companies, the signaling duties included orders to fire, retreat, advance, and so forth. By the 18th century, the military use of the fife was regulated by armies throughout Europe and its colonies. The rank of Fife Major was introduced, a noncommissioned officer responsible for the regiment&#x27;s fifers, just as a Drum Major was responsible for the drummers. Books of military regulations included standard fife calls to be used in battle or at camp. During the American Revolutionary War, the British and Americans used the so-called &quot;Scotch&quot; and &quot;English Duties&quot;, specified melodies associated with various military duties. American martial music was influenced by that of the British military throughout the late 18th and early 19th centuries.

By the early 19th century, warfare was changing and fifes were no longer practical as combat signaling devices, being gradually replaced by the infantry bugle. They were still used as signaling (as opposed to musical) instruments by American units during the Civil War, but were gradually phased out by the 1880s (the same case in France). A similar evolution occurred in the British Army. The US Marines were the last American units to drop fifers from their rolls. However, the British have an unbroken tradition of using fife and drum corps attached to their infantry regiments, with whom they still parade regularly. Germany also continued an unbroken tradition of fife and drum corps until the end of World War II. They were integral to the regular German Army, Air Force and Navy, and not merely part of the Hitler Youth and the Nazi Party organizations. Bands of fifes and drums were regularly at the head of regimental parades and ceremonies of the infantry regiments, military schools and naval and air bases. The tradition of fifes and drums, though, even carried on in the Cold War, as both the West German Bundeswehr and the East German National People&#x27;s Army formed dedicated sections.

Today the fife&#x27;s military legacy can be seen in marching bands, for example in English, Welsh and Irish military units and in the pipes and drums of Scottish regiments. There are fife and drum corps in Switzerland, and the United States &quot;Old Guard&quot; has a ceremonial one. British fife and drum bands play at ceremonies such as the Trooping of the Colour. Amateur historical reenactment groups and dedicated civil bands sometimes feature fife and drum corps sporting period military costumes from the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812, the Mexican War or the American Civil War.

Military fife and drum bands can be heard in Germany, where they are part of the Bundeswehr. The Bundeswehr Staff Band Berlin and the Bundeswehr Band Bonn have fifes and drums assigned, as do the bands attached to the Bundeswehr Military Music Service in the German Army, German Navy and the Luftwaffe.

The Chilean Army and Chilean Navy have dedicated fife, drum and bugle bands attached to the main military bands. They are seen especially at the annual parades on May 21 and September 18 and 19. This tradition is now adopted by various Chilean elementary and secondary schools and colleges, both public and private, which frequently appear at public events.

The Russian Army places fifes and drums at the front of major military parades such as those on Red Square in Moscow as part of a dedicated formation. In Argentina, only the military band of the Regiment of Patricians has fifers, in accordance with an 1809 military regulation of the Viceroy of Buenos Aires, which allowed every militia unit in Buenos Aires to have a drummer and two fifers. The Spanish Royal Guard also has fifers, who wear the 18th–19th century uniforms of the , and the Spanish Army&#x27;s 1st King&#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment of AHQ also has a dedicated fife and drum unit.

==Modern American manufacturers==

The modern era of fifing in the United States began in about 1880, with the popularizing of civilian fife and drum corps in a musical tradition that has come to be known as Ancient fife and drum (or simply Ancient). The rise of these corps led to a demand for fifes that were superior in intonation and better suited for group playing than those used during the Civil War. This call was answered by the Cloos Company of Brooklyn, New York, and their Crosby Model fife. These fifes were one piece, cylindrical bore instruments with six irregularly sized and placed tone-holes. Compared to fifes made before this time, Cloos fifes were easier to play, better tuned, and produced a much louder sound. 

After the death of Cloos Company founder George Cloos in 1910, the company continued to make fifes under the aegis of his son Frederick until it was bought out by Penzel-Mueller in 1946. Penzel-Mueller continued to make Cloos fifes for another six years after the buyout.

===McDonagh===

In 1958, a new model fife designed by fifer John McDonagh was manufactured in Germany. This model was used by the three corps affiliated with him: the New York Regimentals Fife and Drum Band, St. Benedict&#x27;s Jr. Fife and Drum Corps, and St. Anselm&#x27;s Jr. Fife and Drum Corps. All were located in the Bronx, New York. These fifes were not otherwise available to the public. In 1960, a second generation of model evolved, specifically labeled the McDonagh Model and made by Roy Seaman, a music repairman whom John met in Manhattan. This model quickly came into popularity. These fifes were mass-produced for sale to the entire fife and drum community. They were two-piece instruments with a dual conical bore – the foot joint tapered down from the joint to about an inch before terminus, where the bore cone reversed itself and opened up again slightly. They used the popular flute and piccolo designs of the 1830s, where &quot;cone&quot; flutes were popular and most common. The cone flutes had fallen out of favor to the cylindrical flutes designed by Boehm, though fifes and piccolos remained popular among folk music performers.

As would be expected, these fifes were notably more internally in tune than most previous fifes, since the designs of the 1830s fell from favor, and had the added value of being tunable with each other (by sliding the joint or the head cork). In addition, they gave the player greater dynamic control and could be played even louder than traditional fifes, the result of the lower cone in the bore. At first, only six hole (Model J) fifes were made, but by 1962, McDonagh designed and Seaman manufactured a 10-hole (Model L). Two of the holes were used by the right hand middle finger – covering only one of the two produced F. Some players found this quite difficult, so eventually (c. 1970s), an 11-hole model was introduced, the Model M, with both the original double right hand middle finger holes and a right hand thumb hole to choose from for the F. These were actually ideas derived from several makers of the days of the 19th century, including Giorgi, even though there was no need for F in traditional fife music.

Around this time, Roy Seaman had been deeply involved in the making of piccolos under his name, the body style of which resembled the McDonagh Model fife. Roy retired from actively manufacturing fifes and sold the operation of making McDonagh fifes to an apprentice, Larry Trout. Operating on his own, Trout soon chose to mark the fife with his own fish symbol, which replaced the script mark of Roy Seaman&#x27;s name. In time, the quality of the instrument eventually suffered and other models of fifes began to emerge in the United States.

McDonagh was involved with fife and drum activities for many years. That began to change by 1988 when McDonagh began to meet with some former fifing colleagues and newer players. John also renewed his collaborative friendship with Roy Seaman, who was now living in Arizona.

In 1997, John McDonagh, along with a newly formed fife study group, made changes to the original 1962 ten-hole fife. A new manufacturer, Wilson Woods, with oversight from Roy Seaman once again, produced the new fife, designated the Regimental Model. Along with this new fife, a number of fingering changes were suggested to take full advantage of the improved design. For a number of years, both Larry Trout and Wilson Woods made McDonagh fifes jointly – Trout the fish-marked familiar McDonagh Model and Wilson the Regimental Model. Eventually, both men discontinued making fifes as of 2003.

Most recently, The Cooperman Company, founded by Patrick H. Cooperman, took over the manufacture of McDonagh fifes. Cooperman had ventured himself into the concert-fifemaking world in about 1985 with his own version of a two-piece fife, as well as an acoustically correct one-piece version, through the assistance of a few key players. Though the fifes played and sold well, they had not reached the popularity of the McDonagh.

===Healy===

The early 1990s saw the emergence of the Healy Flute Company as a major player in the manufacture of fifes. Founder Skip Healy is a champion fife player and well known Irish flute player from Rhode Island. His fifes are two-piece, six or ten hole instruments with a Boehm style bore (cylindrical foot and truncated parabolic head) and large tone holes. Custom &quot;Swiss Cheese&quot; models feature even larger tone holes, to produce a stronger and more mellow tone when played in the lowest octave. Tuning is further refined than on the McDonagh. Healy fifes also offer more dynamic control than the McDonagh models.

===Ferrary, Model F, and Peeler===
Simultaneously with the emergence of the McDonagh fife, a maker named Ed Ferrary assumed the mantle of the now-defunct Cloos company, producing traditional 6-hole cylindrical fifes. For those who continue to play traditional fifes, the Ferrary became the fife of choice. After Mr. Ferrary&#x27;s death, his tooling and equipment were purchased for Ed Bednarz of Warehouse Point, Connecticut, who markets his fifes through outside sellers, including fellow Lancraft fifer Ed Boyle of Philadelphia and the well-known Ancient sutler, Leo Brennan of Madison, Connecticut. Bednarz brands his fifes with the name &quot;Model F&quot;. In October 2000, another Connecticut maker, Ron Peeler, established Peeler Fifes in Moodus, Connecticut, producing a Ferrary-style instrument as well as several other, more historically-oriented models copied from original early instruments.

===Cooperman===
The Cooperman Fife and Drum was founded in 1961. Cooperman fifes were based on the Cloos tradition, with variations intended to improve intonation. In 1975, Patrick Cooperman opened his full-time workshop in Centerbrook, Connecticut, making traditional fifes, drums and drumsticks. The Cooperman Company has remained in operation under the control of other family members since Patrick&#x27;s death in 1995, and in 2006 combined its Connecticut and Vermont operations under one roof in Bellows Falls, Vermont. Now known as the Cooperman Company, Cooperman continues to make student fifes in plastic and domestic hardwoods, as well as the original Cooperman model one piece fife in exotic woods. 

===Sweet and Yamaha===
Other manufacturers of Ancient fifes include Ralph Sweet of Enfield, Connecticut&#x27;s Sweetheart Flute Company, whose Cloos model fifes most closely resemble the original instrument. After Ralph Sweet&#x27;s death, his flute shop was taken over by Joseph Morneault, and is now known as Musique Morneaux. Ralph Sweet&#x27;s son, Walt D. Sweet, has also established his own manufactory, Walt Sweet Flutes. 

Plastic instruments referred to as &quot;fifes&quot; are available from Yamaha and Angel, but these are not true fifes and are more closely related to the piccolo. They are in the key of C and include a left-hand thumb hole used to play middle C. Books are published on playing this instrument through Just Flutes and Choral Seas Press.

==Historical re-enactor preferences==

Historical re-enactors find that the traditional fifes – Ferrary, Model F, Peeler, Cooperman, and Sweet fifes – are much better suited to their historical requirements while simultaneously allowing their fifers to play together without the discordance that can result when using instruments from multiple manufacturers. Those who play competitively usually choose McDonagh or Healy fifes, corresponding with a vaguely geographical delineation (New York, New Jersey and western Connecticut groups are more likely to choose McDonagh fifes while competitors in central-to-eastern Connecticut tend towards the Healys). The notable exception to this tendency, is the fife line of the Yalesville Ancient Fife and Drum Corps, who continue to use the six-hole, straight-bore metal fifes manufactured by Patrick Caccavale in Kensington, Connecticut from 1945 until his death in 1982.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
*

==External links==

*The Fife Museum
*Digitized copy of Compleat tutor for the fife: Containing the best &amp; easiest instructions to learn that instrument, with a collection of celebrated march&#x27;s &amp; airs perform&#x27;d in the Guards &amp; other regiments &amp; c published by Charles &amp; Samuel Thompson, 1765, from National Library of Scotland. JPEG, PDF, XML versions
*The Virginia State Garrison Fifes and Drums, a history of the development of the Virginia State Garrison Regiment fifes and drums and their representation today
*Fife traditional music in the county of Nice (France)
*Fife fingering guide
*Ulster Scots and Scots Irish Fifing Music
*The Company of Fifers and Drummers, organization of corps and individuals who perpetuate the Ancient (U.S.) fife and drum tradition
*Military Music in American and European Traditions, Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, The Metropolitan Museum of Art
*The Plymouth Fife and Drum Corps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2255516" start="2" end="6" title="Fife (instrument)" label="fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q659216" start="48" end="57" title="aerophone" label="aerophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="82" end="89" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752840" start="151" end="170" title="fife and drum corps" label="fife and drum corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078286" start="172" end="186" title="Military band" label="military units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="192" end="205" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255516" start="247" end="252" title="Fife (instrument)" label="fifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="295" end="301" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="339" end="344" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="367" end="375" title="diatonic" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245258" start="543" end="552" title="Total chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170" start="948" end="957" title="Dalbergia melanoxylon" label="blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170" start="959" end="969" title="grenadilla" label="grenadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="971" end="979" title="rosewood (timber)" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q641513" start="981" end="987" title="mopane" label="mopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q113881766" start="989" end="999" title="pink ivory" label="pink ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105430" start="1001" end="1009" title="cocobolo" label="cocobolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="1011" end="1018" title="boxwood (genus)" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="1020" end="1025" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q29526" start="1030" end="1039" title="persimmon" label="persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761748" start="1157" end="1164" title="ferrule" label="ferrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="1414" end="1426" title="Musical tuning" label="tuning joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752840" start="1483" end="1502" title="fife and drum corps" label="fife and drum corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="1529" end="1539" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="1554" end="1566" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q10563340" start="1573" end="1588" title="Caribbean music" label="Caribbean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="1637" end="1643" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="2687" end="2709" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3563" end="3573" title="Solfège#Modern use" label="movable-do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672931" start="4346" end="4357" title="Irish flute" label="Irish flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="4366" end="4377" title="tin whistle" label="tin whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="4467" end="4476" title="chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500499" start="4794" end="4809" title="Relative key" label="relative minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="4859" end="4865" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5120" end="5126" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="5154" end="5164" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="5189" end="5196" title="dancing" label="dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="5307" end="5315" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="5354" end="5360" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="5364" end="5369" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="5407" end="5429" title="Appalachian folk music" label="Appalachian folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="5459" end="5474" title="History of slavery in the United States" label="American slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="5537" end="5550" title="Music of Africa" label="African music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447390" start="5581" end="5600" title="fife and drum blues" label="fife and drum blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q323966" start="5729" end="5741" title="Othar Turner" label="Othar Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="5759" end="5770" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5997" end="6015" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="6059" end="6070" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099731" start="6227" end="6248" title="Ivoryton, Connecticut" label="Ivoryton, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q104285" start="6361" end="6370" title="Occitania" label="Occitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="6373" end="6382" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="6410" end="6421" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="6431" end="6436" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q745421" start="6501" end="6512" title="lambeg drum" label="lambeg drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="6533" end="6545" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="6547" end="6557" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="6559" end="6574" title="Old-time music" label="old-timey music"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="6580" end="6589" title="folk-rock" label="folk-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612069" start="6653" end="6661" title="Junkanoo" label="Junkanoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="6678" end="6685" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="6690" end="6697" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6767" end="6773" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6806" end="6820" title="Brazilian fife" label="Brazilian fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6878" end="6893" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="7317" end="7326" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7386" end="7397" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="7463" end="7474" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7488" end="7495" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="8631" end="8654" title="noncommissioned officer" label="noncommissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309091" start="8709" end="8719" title="Drum major (military)" label="Drum Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8857" end="8883" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9307" end="9321" title="Bugle#Uses" label="infantry bugle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="9557" end="9567" title="United States Marine Corps" label="US Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="10281" end="10291" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="10312" end="10339" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752840" start="10552" end="10571" title="Ancient Fife and Drum Corps" label="fife and drum corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737022" start="10616" end="10625" title="3rd U.S. Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard)" label="Old Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084150" start="10638" end="10652" title="Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps" label="ceremonial one"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142196" start="10713" end="10735" title="Trooping of the Colour" label="Trooping of the Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="10745" end="10767" title="historical reenactment" label="historical reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="10882" end="10899" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="10905" end="10916" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="10922" end="10933" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="11043" end="11053" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11059" end="11087" title="Bundeswehr Staff Band Berlin" label="Bundeswehr Staff Band Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11096" end="11116" title="Bundeswehr Band Bonn" label="Bundeswehr Band Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11180" end="11213" title="Bundeswehr Military Music Service" label="Bundeswehr Military Music Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745472" start="11270" end="11282" title="Chilean Army" label="Chilean Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208711" start="11287" end="11299" title="Chilean Navy" label="Chilean Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449830" start="11820" end="11842" title="Regiment of Patricians" label="Regiment of Patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="11920" end="11932" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596419" start="12135" end="12186" title="1st King&amp;#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment of AHQ" label="1st King&amp;#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment of AHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672931" start="17441" end="17452" title="Irish flute" label="Irish flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="17465" end="17477" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q755250" start="18290" end="18318" title="Warehouse Point, Connecticut" label="Warehouse Point, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12832963" start="19023" end="19047" title="Centerbrook, Connecticut" label="Centerbrook, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q816044" start="19301" end="19323" title="Bellows Falls, Vermont" label="Bellows Falls, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323139" start="19595" end="19615" title="Enfield, Connecticut" label="Enfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="20098" end="20105" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="21562" end="21590" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="22119" end="22149" title="The Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="The Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476925" wikidata="Q70748" url="?curid=476925" title="Ewa Paradies">
<text>Ewa Paradies (17 December 1920 – 4 July 1946) was a Nazi concentration camp overseer.

In August 1944, Paradies arrived at the Stutthof SK-III camp for training as an &quot;Aufseherin&quot;, or overseer. She soon finished training and became a wardress. In October 1944, she was reassigned to Stutthof&#x27;s Bromberg-Ost subcamp; and in January 1945, she was moved back to the main Stutthof camp. In April 1945, Paradies accompanied one of the last transports of women prisoners to the Lauenburg subcamp and fled. After she was captured, she was a defendant in the Stutthof trial. One witness testified: &quot;She ordered a group of female prisoners to undress in the freezing cold of winter, and then doused them with ice cold water. When the women moved, Paradies beat them.&quot;

== Execution ==
As punishment for her brutalities, including causing the deaths of some prisoners, Paradies was sentenced to death. She was publicly executed by short-drop hanging on Biskupia Górka Hill near Gdańsk on 4 July 1946 with ten other Stutthof guards and kapos (five women and six men in all); Paradies was the last woman to hang.

== See also ==

* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Daniel Patrick Brown. &quot;The Female Auxiliaries Who Assisted the SS in Running the Nazi Concentration Camp System&quot;. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing, Ltd., 2002. p. 288; 
* Jack G. Morrison: &quot;Ravensbrück: Everyday Life in a Women&#x27;s Concentration Camp 1939–45&quot;. Markus Wiener Publishers, 2000. p. 380; 
* Rochelle G. Saidel: &quot;The Jewish Women of Ravensbrück Concentration Camp&quot;. University of Wisconsin Press, 2004. p. 336; 

== External links ==

*ExecutedToday.com 1946: Eleven from the Stutthof concentration camp
*Death on the gallows (many photos)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70748" start="0" end="12" title="Ewa Paradies" label="Ewa Paradies"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="52" end="75" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="127" end="135" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="173" end="183" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps#Supervision levels and ranks" label="Aufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311396" start="244" end="252" title="wardress" label="wardress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973584" start="309" end="321" title="Bromberg-Ost" label="Bromberg-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="566" end="580" title="Stutthof trial" label="Stutthof trial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="964" title="Hanging#Short drop" label="short-drop hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="968" end="982" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="993" end="999" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q702997" start="1050" end="1054" title="kapo" label="kapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="1145" end="1186" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133206" start="1345" end="1365" title="Atglen, Pennsylvania" label="Atglen, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q100268165" start="1557" end="1575" title="Rochelle Saidel" label="Rochelle G. Saidel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476930" wikidata="Q511617" url="?curid=476930" title="Tiree">
<text>Tiree (; , ) is the most westerly island in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland. The low-lying island, southwest of Coll, has an area of and a population of around 650.

The land is highly fertile, and crofting, alongside tourism, and fishing are the main sources of employment for the islanders. Tiree, along with Colonsay, enjoys a relatively high number of total hours of sunshine during the late spring and early summer compared to the average for the United Kingdom. Tiree is a popular windsurfing venue; it is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Hawaii of the north&quot;. In most years, the Tiree World Classic surfing event is held here. People native to the island are known as Tirisdich.

== History ==

Tiree is known for the 1st-century-AD broch, for the prehistoric carved Ringing Stone and for the birds of the headland.

, abbot of Iona Abbey 679–704, recorded several stories relating to St Columba and the island of Tiree.

In one story, Columba warned a monk called Berach not to sail directly from Iona to Tiree, and instead to take a different route, and the monk went against his advice and sailed directly, but along the way, a huge whale came out of the sea and almost destroyed their boat. Columba gave the same warning to who replied that both he and the whale were in God&#x27;s hands, and Columba told him to go because his faith would save him. And set off for Tiree, and when the whale appeared, he raised his hands and blessed it and it went back down into the ocean.

In another story, claimed there to be a monastery on the island of Tiree that was called Artchain. The monastery had been founded by a priest called Findchan, who was very closely attached &quot;in a carnal way&quot; to . Columba took issue at Aed Dub&#x27;s ordination because he had previously killed a number of men and prophesied that Aed Dub would ultimately leave the priesthood and return to his sinful life as a murderer, only to be killed violently himself.

In another story, claimed that asked Columba to pray for a good wind to get him to Tiree, and it was given to him, and he crossed the sea from Iona to Tiree with full sail. In another story, Columba instructed a particular monk to go to the monastery on Tiree and do penance for seven years. In another story, Columba banished some demons from Iona who then went to the island of Tiree to afflict the monks there instead. also records there being more than one monastery on Tiree in that time period, and that had been abbot of one of these monasteries.

Writing in 1549, Donald Munro, High Dean of the Isles wrote of &quot;Thiridh&quot; that it was: .

In 1770, half of the island was held by fourteen farmers who had drained land for hay and pasture. Instead of exporting live cattle (which were often exhausted by the long journey to market and so fetched low prices), they began to export salt beef in barrels to get better prices. The rest of the island was let to 45 groups of tenants on co-operative joint farms: agricultural organisations probably dating from clan times. Field strips were allocated by annual ballot. Sowing and harvesting dates were decided communally. It is reported that in 1774, Tiresians were &#x27;well-clothed and well-fed, having an abundance of corn and cattle&#x27;.

Its name derives from , &#x27;land of the corn&#x27;, from the days of the 6th century Celtic missionary and abbot St Columba (d. 597). Tiree provided the monastic community on the island of Iona, southeast of the island, with grain. A number of early monasteries once existed on Tiree itself, and several sites have stone cross-slabs from this period, such as St Patrick&#x27;s Chapel, (NL 938 401) and Soroby (NL 984 416).

Skerryvore lighthouse, south west of Tiree, was built with some difficulty between 1838 and 1844 by Alan Stevenson.

A large Royal Air Force station was built on Tiree during World War II. The weather observations from squadron 518 collected helped inform Group Captain James Martin Stagg&#x27;s recommendation to General Dwight D. Eisenhower to delay the launching of the D-Day invasion of Normandy from 5 June to 6 June 1944. The airfield became Tiree Airport in 1947. There was also an RAF Chain Home radar station at Kilkenneth and an RAF Chain Home Low radar station at . These were preceded by a temporary RAF Advanced Chain Home radar station at Port Mor and an RAF Chain Home Beam radar station at Barrapol. Post-war there was RAF Scarinish ROTOR radar station at .

== Geology ==
Tiree is formed largely from gneiss forming the Lewisian complex, a suite of metamorphic rocks of Archaean to early Proterozoic age. Granite of Archaean age is found locally. Igneous intrusions of dolerite, felsite, lamprophyre and diorite of Palaeozoic age are encountered in places. The eastern part of the island is traversed by numerous normal faults most of which run broadly northwest–southeast. Quaternary sediments include raised beach deposits which are extensive across the island and incorporate areas of alluvium locally. There are considerable areas of blown sand in the west and behind the major bays elsewhere.

== Geography ==

The main village on Tiree is Scarinish.

The highest point on Tiree is Ben Hynish, to the south of the island, which rises to .

== Settlements ==
=== OS settlements ===
Places classified as settlements by the Ordnance Survey include:
* Balemartine
* Balephetrish
* Balephuil
* Balevullin
* Balinoe
* Barrapol
* Baugh
* Caolas
* Cornaigbeg
* Cornaigmore
* Crossapol
* Gott
* Heanish
* Heylipol
* Hough
* Hynish
* Kenovay
* Kilkenneth
* Kilmoluaig
* Kirkapol
* Mannal
* Middleton
* Moss
* Ruaig
* Salum
* Sandaig
* Scarinish
* Sraid Ruadh
* Vaul
* West Hynish

=== Not OS settlements ===
These places aren&#x27;t classified as settlements by the Ordnance Survey but are shown on the A-Z Great Britain Road atlas 2022
* Carnan
* Miodar

== Transport ==

Caledonian MacBrayne operate a ferry to Scarinish. The daily crossing from Oban on the mainland takes four hours. A call is made at Arinagour on Coll and once a week the ferry crosses to Castlebay on Barra. More limited services operate in Winter.

Tiree Airport is located at Crossapol. Loganair provide daily flights to Glasgow International and Hebridean Air Services fly to Coll and Oban.

Roads on Tiree, in common with many other small islands, are nearly all single-track roads. There are passing places, locally called &#x27;pockets&#x27;, where cars must wait to enable oncoming traffic to pass or overtake.


== Climate ==
As with the rest of western Scotland, Tiree experiences a maritime climate (Cfb) with cool summers and mild winters. Despite its being on the same latitude as Labrador on the opposite side of the Atlantic Ocean, snow and frost are rare, and short-lived when they occur. Weather data is collected at the island&#x27;s airport. The lowest temperature to occur in recent years was during the cold spell of December 2010. The extreme maritime moderation contributes to summer temperatures that are far below even coastal locations in continental Europe on similar latitudes. Winter temperatures are similar to those of coastal southern England.

== Economy ==
The Southern Hebrides agency states that &quot;while farming and, to a lesser extent, fishing, continue to provide most of the income of Tiree, tourism plays an increasing part in the island’s economy&quot;. The fertile machair lands of the island provide for good quality farming and crofting.

Tiree Community Development Trust owns and operates a 950 kW community-owned wind turbine project known as Tilley. This was the fourth such large-scale project in Scotland. The first three projects were on Gigha and Westray and at Findhorn Ecovillage. The Argyll Array, an offshore wind farm development was proposed for development around Skerryvore but was subsequently abandoned.

The island is a popular destination for family holidays. Tourists are attracted by the beaches, its many crofts, &quot;traditional blackhouses and white houses, many retaining their charming thatched roofs, as well as unique ‘pudding houses’ where white mortar contrasts with dark stone&quot;. A full dozen blackhouses, thatched with local marram grass, can still be found on Tiree.

Tiree is popular for windsurfing. The island regularly hosts the Tiree Wave Classic and was the venue for the Corona Extra PWA World Cup Finals in 2007. It is visited regularly by surfing clubs, including Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Glasgow university clubs. There is a radar station which tracks civil aircraft.

The island&#x27;s population was 653 as recorded by the 2011 census a drop of over 15% since 2001, when there were 770 usual residents. During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4% to 103,702.

Tiree has a rich distilling history and is home to a distillery, which was set up to re-establish the island&#x27;s whisky heritage and, , is producing Tyree Gin. The distillery has plans to make Scotch Whisky. An April 2020 article about the Tiree Whisky Company, producers of Tyree Gin, states that it began making gin on the island again in 2019 but did not mention a plan to make whisky on the island. In 2023 it was announced that the distillery had begun production of a Tiree whisky, aiming for first release in 2025. The company is said to be the first legal distillery on the island in over 200 years; distilling had been banned in 1802. In 2020, the company was marketing a Speyside whisky, The Cairnsmuir, but not made on Tiree.

== Culture and media ==
The island is known for its vernacular architecture, including a &#x27;blackhouse&#x27; and &#x27;white houses&#x27;, many retaining their traditional thatched roofs, and for its unique &#x27;pudding houses&#x27; or &#x27;spotted houses&#x27; where only the mortar is painted white.

Tiree has a declining but still considerable percentage of Gaelic speakers. In 2001, 368 residents (47.8%) spoke Gaelic. By 2011 the figure had decreased to 240 (38.3%), still the highest percentage of speakers in the Inner Hebrides.

Since 2010, the island has hosted the annual Tiree Music Festival, held in Crossapol in the fields beside the community hall &#x27;An Talla&#x27;. In 2012, when Tiree appeared in the BBC Programme &quot;Coast&quot; for a second time, the actions of RAF weather forecasters, flying hazardous missions far out into the storms of the Atlantic during World War II, were discussed.

Tiree is mentioned in the traditional Scottish song titled &quot;Dark Island&quot;, which tells a tale of a ship leaving Oban and passing the &quot;isle of my childhood&quot;, Tiree. Tiree is mentioned in Enya&#x27;s 1988 single &quot;Orinoco Flow&quot;. Tiree is also referenced in the song &quot;Western Ocean&quot; by Skipinnish, a traditional Scottish band co-founded by local Tirisdeach (Tiresian) Angus MacPhail.
Tiree is also mentioned in the song “Calls to Tiree” by Hamish Hawk.

The Tiree Songbook is an album of songs from , a 20th-century book collecting songs from Tiree, and new compositions about the island. The album won the Community Project of the Year award at the Scots Trad Music Awards in 2017.

==People connected to Tiree==
*Iain mac Ailein, or John MacLean, (1787-1848), was a Tiree bard and highly important figure in both Scottish Gaelic literature and that of Canadian Gaelic. According to Robert Dunbar, the Gaels of Tiree have a very long history of producing highly gifted songwriters and poets, but &quot;MacLean is ...considered by some to be the greatest of the Tiree bards.&quot;

== See also ==

* List of islands of Scotland
* List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree

== Notes ==
== References ==

== Further reading ==

* Banks, Noel, (1977) &quot;Six Inner Hebrides&quot;. Newton Abbott: David &amp; Charles. 

== External links ==

*Community Website – The Tiree Community Website
*Summit of Tiree – a computer-generated panorama
*Gordon Scott&#x27;s website keeps people up to date with Tiree events
* – large collection of photographs
*Vaul Golf Club – Golf on Isle of Tiree
*Tiree Baptist Church – Tiree Baptist Church
*Tiree Wave Classic – The Tiree Wave Classic
*An Tirisdeach – The Island&#x27;s local paper
*Tiree Music Festival – The Island&#x27;s Annual Music Festival
*Tiree Community Development Trust - Community Led Development Organisation
*An Iodhlann - Tiree&#x27;s Historical Centre - Museum &amp; Archive
*Tyree Gin - Tyree Gin
*Tiree Tea - Tiree Tea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="0" end="5" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="34" end="40" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="48" end="62" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="66" end="74" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="111" end="115" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094780" start="197" end="205" title="crofting" label="crofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="217" end="224" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="262" end="272" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q511539" start="310" end="318" title="Colonsay" label="Colonsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="546" end="552" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271556" start="746" end="751" title="Dun Mor Vaul" label="broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="761" end="772" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q198409" start="841" end="851" title="Iona Abbey" label="Iona Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="898" end="908" title="St Columba" label="St Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26033" start="1688" end="1703" title="homosexual clergy in the Catholic Church" label="in a carnal way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294895" start="2533" end="2545" title="Donald Monro (Dean)" label="Donald Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133209" start="2854" end="2863" title="salt beef" label="salt beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="2955" end="2967" title="co-operative" label="co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3351" end="3357" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="3373" end="3378" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="3379" end="3389" title="St Columba" label="St Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="3455" end="3459" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q867300" start="3690" end="3700" title="Skerryvore" label="Skerryvore"/>
<link wikidata="Q337045" start="3790" end="3804" title="Alan Stevenson" label="Alan Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3815" end="3830" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3865" end="3877" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043581" start="3909" end="3921" title="No. 518 Squadron RAF" label="squadron 518"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="3946" end="3959" title="Group Captain" label="Group Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161421" start="3960" end="3978" title="James Martin Stagg" label="James Martin Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4012" end="4032" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="4063" end="4068" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945992" start="4138" end="4151" title="Tiree Airport" label="Tiree Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="4183" end="4193" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4425" end="4438" title="RAF Scarinish" label="RAF Scarinish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277424" start="4439" end="4444" title="ROTOR" label="ROTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="4508" end="4514" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="4527" end="4543" title="Lewisian complex" label="Lewisian complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="4556" end="4572" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="4577" end="4585" title="Archean" label="Archaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="4595" end="4606" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="4612" end="4619" title="Granite" label="Granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="4654" end="4661" title="Igneous" label="Igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="4676" end="4684" title="dolerite" label="dolerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662981" start="4686" end="4693" title="felsite" label="felsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q774790" start="4695" end="4706" title="lamprophyre" label="lamprophyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q187408" start="4711" end="4718" title="diorite" label="diorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="4722" end="4732" title="Palaeozoic" label="Palaeozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="4820" end="4832" title="normal fault" label="normal fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="4881" end="4891" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="4892" end="4900" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="4910" end="4922" title="raised beach" label="raised beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="4995" end="5003" title="alluvium" label="alluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778620" start="5152" end="5161" title="Scarinish" label="Scarinish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5360" end="5371" title="Balemartine" label="Balemartine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5374" end="5386" title="Balephetrish" label="Balephetrish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5389" end="5398" title="Balephuil" label="Balephuil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5401" end="5411" title="Balevullin" label="Balevullin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5414" end="5421" title="Balinoe" label="Balinoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5424" end="5432" title="Barrapol" label="Barrapol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5435" end="5440" title="Baugh, Tiree" label="Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5443" end="5449" title="Caolas, Tiree" label="Caolas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5452" end="5462" title="Cornaigbeg" label="Cornaigbeg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5465" end="5476" title="Cornaigmore" label="Cornaigmore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5479" end="5488" title="Crossapol" label="Crossapol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5491" end="5495" title="Gott, Tiree" label="Gott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5498" end="5505" title="Heanish" label="Heanish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5508" end="5516" title="Heylipol" label="Heylipol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5519" end="5524" title="Hough, Tiree" label="Hough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5527" end="5533" title="Hynish" label="Hynish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5536" end="5543" title="Kenovay" label="Kenovay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5546" end="5556" title="Kilkenneth" label="Kilkenneth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5559" end="5569" title="Kilmoluaig" label="Kilmoluaig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5572" end="5580" title="Kirkapol" label="Kirkapol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750725" start="5583" end="5589" title="Mannal" label="Mannal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5592" end="5601" title="Middleton, Tiree" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5604" end="5608" title="Moss, Tiree" label="Moss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5611" end="5616" title="Ruaig" label="Ruaig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5619" end="5624" title="Salum, Tiree" label="Salum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5627" end="5634" title="Sandaig, Tiree" label="Sandaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778620" start="5637" end="5646" title="Scarinish" label="Scarinish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5649" end="5660" title="Sraid Ruadh" label="Sraid Ruadh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5663" end="5667" title="Vaul" label="Vaul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5670" end="5681" title="West Hynish" label="West Hynish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5841" end="5847" title="Carnan, Tiree" label="Carnan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5850" end="5856" title="Miodar" label="Miodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="5875" end="5895" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="5906" end="5911" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="5950" end="5954" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777863" start="6007" end="6016" title="Arinagour" label="Arinagour"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="6020" end="6024" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="6062" end="6071" title="Castlebay" label="Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="6075" end="6080" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945992" start="6124" end="6137" title="Tiree Airport" label="Tiree Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="6163" end="6171" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8721" start="6197" end="6218" title="Glasgow International Airport" label="Glasgow International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695948" start="6223" end="6245" title="Hebridean Air Services" label="Hebridean Air Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654014" start="6253" end="6257" title="Coll Airport" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902212" start="6262" end="6266" title="Oban Airport" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289288" start="6341" end="6359" title="single-track roads" label="single-track roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="6566" end="6582" title="maritime climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6584" end="6587" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="7038" end="7056" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28527" start="7384" end="7391" title="machair" label="machair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402801" start="7449" end="7457" title="croft (land)" label="crofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q506284" start="7666" end="7671" title="Gigha" label="Gigha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506018" start="7676" end="7683" title="Westray" label="Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152741" start="7691" end="7710" title="Findhorn Ecovillage" label="Findhorn Ecovillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="7742" end="7751" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q867300" start="7800" end="7810" title="Skerryvore" label="Skerryvore"/>
<link wikidata="Q191051" start="8249" end="8260" title="windsurfing" label="windsurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809193" start="8293" end="8311" title="Tiree Wave Classic" label="Tiree Wave Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="8494" end="8499" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206814" start="8521" end="8535" title="civil aircraft" label="civil aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="8594" end="8605" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="8697" end="8712" title="List of Scottish islands" label="Scottish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="9553" end="9576" title="vernacular architecture" label="vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q880313" start="9596" end="9606" title="blackhouse" label="blackhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="9783" end="9789" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="9868" end="9874" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624765" start="10089" end="10109" title="Tiree Music Festival" label="Tiree Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138078" start="10247" end="10252" title="Coast (TV series)" label="Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397073" start="10543" end="10547" title="Oban South and the Isles (ward)" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q38257" start="10627" end="10631" title="Enya" label="Enya"/>
<link wikidata="Q942178" start="10657" end="10669" title="Orinoco Flow" label="Orinoco Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853336" start="10743" end="10753" title="Skipinnish" label="Skipinnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q112006757" start="10897" end="10908" title="Hamish Hawk" label="Hamish Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435791" start="11107" end="11130" title="Scots Trad Music Awards" label="Scots Trad Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q107907781" start="11172" end="11187" title="Iain mac Ailein" label="Iain mac Ailein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894514" start="11272" end="11298" title="Scottish Gaelic literature" label="Scottish Gaelic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="11311" end="11326" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Canadian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="11360" end="11365" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="11557" end="11584" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964970" start="11587" end="11655" title="List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree" label="List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Mull, Coll and Tiree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476932" wikidata="Q1929568" url="?curid=476932" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation">
<text>The Pine Ridge Indian Reservation (), also called Pine Ridge Agency, is an Oglala Lakota Indian reservation located in the U.S. state of South Dakota, with a small portion extending into Nebraska. Originally included within the territory of the Great Sioux Reservation, Pine Ridge was created by the Act of March 2, 1889, 25 Stat. 888. in the southwest corner of South Dakota on the Nebraska border. It consists of of land area and is one of the largest reservations in the United States.

The reservation encompasses the entirety of Oglala Lakota County and Bennett County, the southern half of Jackson County, and a small section of Sheridan County added by Executive Order No. 2980 of February 20, 1904. Of the 3,142 counties in the United States, these are among the poorest. Only of land are suitable for agriculture. The 2000 census population of the reservation was 15,521. A 2009 study by Colorado State University and accepted by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development has estimated the resident population to reach 28,787.

Pine Ridge is the site of several events that mark milestones in the history between the Sioux of the area and the U.S. government. Stronghold Table, a mesa in what is today the Oglala-administered portion of Badlands National Park, was the location of the last of the Ghost Dances. U.S. authorities repressed this movement, eventually leading to the Wounded Knee Massacre on December 29, 1890. A mixed band of Miniconjou Lakota and Hunkpapa Sioux, led by Chief Spotted Elk, sought sanctuary at Pine Ridge after fleeing the Standing Rock Agency, where Sitting Bull had been killed during efforts to arrest him. The families were intercepted and attacked by a heavily armed detachment of the Seventh Cavalry, which killed many women and children as well as warriors. This was the last large engagement between U.S. forces and Native Americans and marked the end of the western frontier.

Changes accumulated in the last quarter of the 20th century: in 1971 the Oglala Sioux Tribe (OST) started Oglala Lakota College, a tribal college, which offers 4-year degrees. In 1973 decades of discontent at the Pine Ridge Reservation resulted in a grassroots protest that escalated into the Wounded Knee Incident, gaining national attention. Members of the Oglala Lakota, the American Indian Movement and supporters occupied the town in defiance of federal and state law enforcement in a protest that turned into an armed standoff lasting 71 days. This event inspired American Indians across the country and gradually led to changes at the reservation. It has revived some cultural traditions and encouraged language training. In 1981 Tim Giago (Lakota) started the &quot;Lakota Times&quot; at Pine Ridge.

Located at the southern end of the Badlands, the reservation is part of the mixed grass prairie, an ecological transition zone between the short-grass and tall-grass prairies; all are part of the Great Plains. A great variety of plant and animal life flourishes on and adjacent to the reservation, including the endangered black-footed ferret. The area is also important in the field of paleontology; it contains deposits of Pierre Shale formed on the seafloor of the Western Interior Seaway, evidence of the marine Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary, and one of the largest deposits of fossils of extinct mammals from the Oligocene epoch.

==History==

===19th century===

====Great Sioux Reservation====

As stipulated in the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868), the U.S. government built Indian agencies for the various Lakota and other Plains tribes. These were forerunners to the modern Indian reservations. The Red Cloud Agency was established for the Oglala Lakota in 1871 on the North Platte River in Wyoming Territory. The location was one mile (1.6 km) west of the present town of Henry, Nebraska. The location of the Red Cloud Agency was moved to two other locations before being settled at the present Pine Ridge location. Pine Ridge Reservation was originally part of the Great Sioux Reservation established by the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie. It encompassed approximately 60 million contiguous acres () of western South Dakota (all of what is now called West River), northern Nebraska and eastern Wyoming.

====Exclusion of the Black Hills====
In 1874, George Armstrong Custer led the U.S. Army Black Hills Expedition, which set out on July 2 from Fort Abraham Lincoln in the Dakota Territory, with orders to travel to the previously uncharted Black Hills of South Dakota. Its mission was to look for suitable locations for a fort, find a route to the southwest, and to investigate the potential for gold mining. After the discovery of gold was made public, miners began invading Sioux Territory.

&quot;Custer&#x27;s florid descriptions of the mineral and timber resources of the Black Hills, and the land&#x27;s suitability for grazing and cultivation ... received wide circulation, and had the effect of creating an intense popular demand for more settlers to invade the Black Hills.&quot; Initially the U.S. military tried to turn away trespassing miners and settlers. Eventually President Grant, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Secretary of War, &quot;decided that the military should make no further resistance to the occupation of the Black Hills by miners.&quot; These orders were to be enforced &quot;quietly&quot;, and the President&#x27;s decision was to remain &quot;confidential&quot;.

As more settlers and gold miners encroached upon the Black Hills, the Government determined it had to acquire the land from the Sioux, and appointed a commission to negotiate the purchase. The negotiations failed, as the Sioux resisted giving up what they considered sacred land. The U.S. resorted to military force. They declared the Sioux Indians &quot;hostile&quot; for failing to obey an order to return from an off-reservation hunting expedition by a specific date. In the dead of winter, the Sioux found the overland travel was impossible.

The consequent military expedition to remove the Sioux from the Black Hills included an attack on a major encampment of several bands on the Little Bighorn River. Led by General Custer, the attack ended in his defeat. It was an overwhelming victory of chiefs Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse over the 7th Cavalry Regiment, a conflict often called Custer&#x27;s Last Stand. US forces were vastly outnumbered.

In 1876 the U.S. Congress decided to open up the Black Hills to development and break up the Great Sioux Reservation. In 1877, it passed an act to make 7.7 million acres (31,000 km2) of the Black Hills available for sale to homesteaders and private interests. In 1889 Congress divided the remaining area of Great Sioux Reservation into five separate reservations, defining the boundaries of each in its Act of March 2, 1889, 25 Stat. 888. Pine Ridge was established at that time.

====Wounded Knee Massacre====
The Wounded Knee Massacre occurred on December 29, 1890, near Wounded Knee Creek (Lakota: &quot;Cankpe Opi Wakpala&quot;). On the day before, a detachment of the U.S. 7th Cavalry Regiment commanded by Major Samuel M. Whitside intercepted Spotted Elk&#x27;s (Big Foot) band of Miniconjou Lakota and 38 Hunkpapa Lakota near Porcupine Butte and escorted them westward to Wounded Knee Creek where they made camp. The rest of the 7th Cavalry Regiment, led by Colonel James Forsyth, surrounded the encampment, supported by four Hotchkiss guns.

On the morning of December 29, 1890, the troops went into the camp to disarm the Lakota. One version of events claims that during the process, a deaf tribesman named Black Coyote was reluctant to give up his rifle, saying he had paid a lot for it. A scuffle over Black Coyote&#x27;s rifle escalated and a shot was fired, which resulted in the 7th Cavalry opening firing indiscriminately from all sides, killing men, women, and children, as well as some of their fellow troopers. Those few Lakota warriors who still had weapons began shooting back at the troopers, who quickly suppressed the Lakota fire. The surviving Lakota fled, but U.S. cavalrymen pursued and killed many who were unarmed.

In the end, U.S. forces killed at least 150 men, women, and children of the Lakota Sioux and wounded 51 (four men, and 47 women and children, some of whom died later); some estimates placed the number of dead at 300. Twenty-five troopers also died, and thirty-nine were wounded (six of the wounded would also die). Many Army deaths were believed to have been caused by friendly fire, as the shooting took place at close range in chaotic conditions.

The site has been designated a National Historic Landmark and is administered by the National Park Service.

===20th century===

====White Clay Extension====
In 1882, at the urging of Valentine McGillycuddy—the US Indian Agent at the Pine President Agency—President Chester A. Arthur issued an executive order establishing the White Clay Extension, an area of land in Nebraska extending south of the reservation&#x27;s border and wide approximately perpendicular to the road leading north into the town of Pine Ridge on the reservation. This road is today&#x27;s Nebraska Highway 87. McGillycuddy lobbied for the buffer zone to prevent white peddlers from engaging in the illegal sale of &quot;knives, guns, and alcohol&quot; to the Oglala Lakota residents of Pine Ridge.

A law passed in Congress in 1832 banned the sale of alcohol to Native Americans. The ban was ended in 1953 by Public Law 277, signed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The amended law gave Native American tribes the option of permitting or banning alcohol sales and consumption on their lands. The OST and many other tribes chose to exclude alcohol from their reservations because of the problems for their people.

In 1887, when Congress enacted the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887—breaking up the reservations and allotting a plot to the registered head of each family—the Whiteclay Extension was specifically exempted. On March 2, 1889, the U.S. Congress enacted the &quot;Great Sioux Agreement of March 2, 1889, 25 Stat. 888,&quot; breaking up the Great Sioux Reservation and setting boundaries for the six reduced reservations. In this act, the White Clay Extension was incorporated again within the boundaries of the Pine Ridge Agency. &quot;Provided, That the said tract of land in the State of Nebraska shall be reserved, by Executive order, only so long as it may be needed for the use and protection of the Indians receiving rations and annuities at the Pine Ridge Agency.&quot;

On January 25, 1904, President Theodore Roosevelt signed an executive order returning the of the White Clay Extension to the public domain. The town of Whiteclay in Sheridan County, Nebraska, just over the border from the reservation, was founded in the former &quot;Extension&quot; zone. Merchants quickly started selling alcohol to the Oglala Sioux.

On February 20, 1904, Roosevelt amended the executive order to return back to Pine Ridge: &quot;the section of land embracing the Pine Ridge Boarding School irrigation ditch and the school pasture&quot;.

====Bennett County Land dispute====
In 1975 in &quot;Cook v. Parkinson&quot; 525 F.2d 120 (8th Cir. 1975) ruled that Bennett County was not considered part of the Pine Ridge Reservation. However, &quot;the United States participated only as amicus before the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in &quot;Cook v. Parkinson&quot;, 525 F.2d 120 (8th Cir. 1975) and is not bound by that decision because it did not participate in the litigation. The United States was a party in &quot;United States v. Bennett County&quot;, 394 F.2d 8 (8th Cir. 1968), in which the State of South Dakota had to obtain permission from the Department of Interior in order to fix roads or condemn property in Bennett County, consistent with the property&#x27;s reservation status as well as &quot;Putnam v. United States&quot; 248 F.2d 292 (8th Cir. 1957) which ruled that &quot;Bennett County is within the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation created by the Act of Congress of March 2, 1889, 25 Stat. 888.&quot;

The Federal Government recognizes Bennett County as being entirely within the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. In 2004, in State of South Dakota v. Acting Great Plains Regional Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs Docket Number IBIA3-24-A the State of South Dakota argued against an Oglala Sioux Tribal member&#x27;s application to the BIA to return a 10-acre tract of land in Bennett County into Federal Trust arguing it was outside of the Boundary of the Pine Ridge Reservation. The judge ruled in favor of the applicant and Bureau of Indian Affairs&#x27; affirmant that Bennett County is indeed within the boundaries of the Reservation.

====Indian Reorganization Act====
In the 1930s, President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s administration made changes in federal policy to improve conditions for American Indians. In response to complaints about corruption and injustices in the BIA management of reservations, Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, permitting tribal nations to reorganize with self-government. It encouraged them to adopt a model of elected representative governments and elected tribal chairmen or presidents, with written constitutions. While tribes welcomed taking back more control of their government, this change eroded the power and structure of the traditional hereditary leaders of the clan system.

The Oglala Sioux Tribe developed a tribal government along democratic constitutional lines, with a chairman to be elected for a two-year term. This short term makes it difficult for leaders to accomplish longer-term projects, but the tribe has not changed its constitution. The BIA still has had the ability to oversee some tribal operations, including the police. Historically BIA tribal police were often assigned from other Indian tribes rather than representing local people and understanding their culture, which created tensions.

Many traditionalists among the Oglala Lakota never supported the new style of government. Tribal elders were still respected, and there were multiple lines of authority and influence among different groups on the reservation. Political factions also formed between those who were mixed-bloods or had urban experiences, and those who were full-bloods and tended to be more traditional in practices and culture.

The people continued to be under assimilation pressure: through the early part of the century, many children were sent away to Indian boarding schools where they were usually required to speak English and were prohibited from speaking Lakota. They were usually expected to practice Christianity rather than native religions. In the late 20th century, many of these institutions were found to have had staff who abused the children in their care.

====Taking of Badlands Bombing Range====

In 1942 the federal government took privately held Pine Ridge Indian Reservation land owned by tribal members in order to establish the Badlands Bombing Range of . The largest portion is located in Oglala Lakota County. It also leased communally held Oglala Sioux Tribe (OST) land for this defense installation.

Among the 125 families evicted was that of Pat Cuny, an Oglala Sioux. He fought in World War II in the Battle of the Bulge after surviving torpedoing of his transport in the English Channel. Dewey Beard, a Miniconjou Sioux survivor of the Wounded Knee Massacre, who supported himself by raising horses on his allotment received in 1907 was also evicted. The small federal payments were insufficient to enable such persons to buy new properties. In 1955, the 97-year-old Beard testified of earlier mistreatment at Congressional hearings about this project. He said, for &quot;fifty years I have been kicked around. Today there is a hard winter coming. ... I might starve to death.&quot;

Since 1960, the U.S. has returned portions of the bombing range to the OST. The 1968 Public Law 90-468 returned to the OST and set aside former tribal lands as the Badlands National Monument. The smaller Air Force Retained Area is within the boundaries of the reservation.

A 2008, the USAF &amp; OST agreement initiated &quot;a three-month $1.6 million project to remove unexploded ordnance&quot; from the bombing range.

====Wounded Knee Occupation====

In the early 1970s, tribal tensions rose and some members turned to the American Indian Movement (AIM) for help. Longstanding divisions on the reservation resulted from deep-seated political, ethnic and cultural differences. Many residents did not support the elected tribal government. Many residents were upset about what they described as the autocratic and repressive actions by the tribal president Dick Wilson, elected in 1972.

On February 21, the tribal council was called into session to consider the removal of Wilson through impeachment. Five hundred Oglala members were in attendance. He was criticized for favoring family and friends with jobs and benefits, not consulting with the tribal council, and creating a private militia, known as the Guardians of the Oglala Nation (GOONs), to suppress political opponents. He used tribal funds to pay for this force. Wilson&#x27;s response was to screen a right wing propaganda film.&lt;ref name=&quot;Koster 1974 https://archive.org/details/roadtowoundedkne00burn/page/224 224–225&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

After a series of meetings held in the Calico community near the Pine Ridge Agency, the old traditional chiefs and the Oglala Sioux Civil Rights Organization (OSCRO) called down to AIM in Rapid City and asked them to come to Pine Ridge. A meeting was arranged between Wilson and Russell Means. Five of Wilson&#x27;s supporters cornered Means in the parking lot. Means escaped. Women elders such as Ellen Moves Camp, founder of the Oglala Sioux Civil Rights Organization (OSCRO), called for action. They organized a public protest for the next day.

About 200 AIM and Oglala Lakota activists occupied the hamlet of Wounded Knee on February 27, 1973. They demanded the removal of Wilson, restoration of treaty negotiations with the U.S. government, and correction of U.S. failures to enforce treaty rights. Visits by the U.S. senators from South Dakota, FBI agents and United States Department of Justice (DOJ) representatives, were attended by widespread media coverage, but the Richard Nixon administration was preoccupied internally with Watergate.

As the events evolved, the activists at Wounded Knee had a 71-day armed stand-off with U.S. law enforcement. AIM leaders at the site were Russell Means, Dennis Banks, Clyde Bellecourt, and Carter Camp. Traditional spiritual leaders of the Lakota, such as Frank Fools Crow, were also prominent. Fools Crow led Oglala Lakota spiritual ceremonies and practice in their ways for participants. Joseph H. Trimbach of the FBI and Steve Frizell of DOJ led the government.

Casualties of gunfire included a U.S. Marshal, who was seriously wounded and paralyzed; and the deaths of Frank Clearwater, a Cherokee from North Carolina, and Buddy Lamont, a local Oglala Lakota. After Lamont&#x27;s death, the Oglala Lakota elders called an end to the occupation. Some Lakota have alleged that Ray Robinson, a civil rights activist, was killed during the Wounded Knee occupation, as he disappeared there.

The stand-off ended, but Wilson remained in office. The U.S. government said it could not remove an elected tribal official as the Oglala Sioux Tribe had sovereignty.
Ensuing open conflict between factions caused numerous deaths. The murder rate between March 1, 1973, and March 1, 1976, was 170 per 100,000; it was the highest in the country. More than 60 opponents of the tribal government allegedly died violent deaths in the three years following the Wounded Knee Incident, a period called the &quot;Reign of Terror&quot; by many residents. Among those killed was Pedro Bissonette, executive director of the civil rights organization OSCRO.

Residents accused officials of failing to try to solve the deaths. In 2000, the FBI released a report regarding the 57 alleged unsolved violent deaths on Pine Ridge Reservation and accounted for most of the deaths, and disputed the claims of unsolved murders. The report stated that only 4 deaths were unsolved and that some deaths were not murders. AIM representatives criticized the FBI report.

====Pine Ridge Shootout====

During this period of increased violence, on June 26, 1975, the reservation was the site of an armed confrontation between AIM activists and the FBI, which became known as the &#x27;Pine Ridge Shootout&#x27;. Two FBI agents, Jack R. Coler and Ronald A. Williams, were killed and executed at close range. The agents had been following a car when they were shot at by its occupants and others. AIM activist Joe Stuntz was later killed by responding police. Stuntz was found wearing Coler&#x27;s FBI jacket.

In two separate trials, the U.S. prosecuted participants in the firefight for the deaths of the agents. AIM members Robert Robideau and Dino Butler were acquitted after asserting that they had acted in self-defense. Leonard Peltier was extradited from Canada and tried separately because of the delay. He was convicted on two counts of first–degree murder for the deaths of the FBI agents, and sentenced to two consecutive terms of life in prison. Native American activist Leonard Peltier was released from a Florida prison after spending 50 years behind bars. President Joe Biden commuted the double life sentence for Peltier, who was convicted of killing two FBI agents in 1975, which Peltier has claimed was an act of self-defense. Peltier will serve the remainder of his sentence on house arrest, but lead counsel Jenipher Jones calls it a step in the right direction.

“One which ensures dignity for Leonard, something which has long been denied him legally, medically and socially, but will now be restored in the way of quality of quality medical care, family, community and cultural ties.” Peltier flew to his home in North Dakota on the Turtle Mountain Reservation after his release.

====Murder of Anna Mae Aquash====
On February 24, 1976, the body of Anna Mae Aquash, a Mi&#x27;kmaq activist and the most prominent woman in AIM, was found in the far northeast corner of the Pine Ridge Reservation. Missing since December 1975, she had been shot execution-style. At the time, some AIM people said that she was a government informant, but the FBI has denied that. In 1974, AIM had discovered that Douglas Durham, then head of security, was an FBI informant. Three federal grand juries were called to hear testimony on the Aquash murder: in 1976, 1982 and 1994, but it was more than a quarter of a century before any suspects were indicted and tried for the crime.

Two AIM members, Arlo Looking Cloud and John Graham, were convicted of her murder in 2004 and 2010 respectively, and sentenced to life in prison. Bruce Ellison, Leonard Peltier&#x27;s lawyer since the 1970s, invoked his Fifth Amendment rights and refused to testify at the grand jury hearings on Looking Cloud, or at his trial in 2004. At trial, the federal prosecutor referred to Ellison as a co-conspirator in the Aquash case.

===21st century===
Alcoholism among residents has been a continuing problem in the life of the reservation since its founding. Since 1999, activists from the Pine Ridge Reservation, AIM, and Nebraskans for Peace have worked to have beer sales shut down in nearby Whiteclay, Nebraska, a border town. Whiteclay sells millions of cans of beer annually, primarily to residents from the reservation in South Dakota, where alcohol possession and consumption is prohibited. In 2008, the documentary &quot;The Battle for Whiteclay,&quot; about the toll of alcoholism and activists&#x27; efforts to control beer sales, was released, which has attracted wide attention. The Nebraska legislature allocated funds in late 2010 for increased police patrols in Pine Ridge by the county sheriff&#x27;s office, based away in Rushville.

While other tribes and reservations also prohibited alcohol at one time, many have since legalized its sales on their reservations. They use the revenues generated to improve health care and life on the reservation, and they prefer to directly control the regulation of alcohol sales and police its use. A 2007 survey found that 63% of federally recognized tribes in the lower 48 states have legalized liquor sales on their reservations. They include the nearby Sicangu Oyate or Brulé Sioux at the Rosebud Indian Reservation, also located in South Dakota. In 2006, the Omaha Nation in northeastern Nebraska started requiring payment of tribal license fees and sales taxes by liquor stores located in towns within its reservation boundaries in order to benefit in the revenues generated by alcohol sales.

Activists at Pine Ridge have worked to persuade Nebraska to enforce its own laws and support the tribe&#x27;s prohibition. In 2004 the Oglala Sioux Tribe voted down a referendum to legalize alcohol sales, and in 2006 the tribal council voted to maintain the ban on alcohol sales, rather than taking on the benefits and responsibility directly.

At a discussion at Bellevue University on April 2, 2010, Lance Morgan, CEO of Ho-Chunk, Inc.—the development corporation of the Winnebago Reservation—said the Oglala Sioux needed to concentrate on economic development. He believes that poverty is at the heart of its people&#x27;s problems. The Winnebago used revenues from a casino and alcohol sales at their reservation in eastern Nebraska to build an economic development corporation. It now employs 1,400 people in 26 subsidiaries. With its revenues, the Winnebago have been able to build a hospital, a new school and $1 million in new housing. Kevin Abourezk reported that Stew Magnuson—the author of &quot;The Death of Raymond Yellow Thunder&quot;, a study of issues related to the Pine Ridge reservation and its border towns—described alcohol prohibition at the reservation &quot;as a complete failure.&quot; Magnuson said, &quot;Whenever you have prohibition, you&#x27;re going to have places like Whiteclay.&quot; He thought prohibition contributed to bootlegging on the reservation.

On February 9, 2012, the Oglala Sioux Tribe filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court of Nebraska against the four liquor stores in Whiteclay, Nebraska, as well as the beverage distributors and the brewery companies who make it. The suit, &quot;Oglala Sioux Tribe v. Jason Schwarting, Licensee of Arrowhead Inn, Inc. et al&quot;, sought $500 million in damages for the &quot;cost of health care, social services and child rehabilitation caused by chronic alcoholism on the reservation, which encompasses some of the nation&#x27;s most impoverished counties.&quot; The suit claims that the defendants knowingly and willingly sell excessive amounts of alcohol, knowing that most of it is smuggled onto the reservation, in violation of Pine Ridge Indian Reservation and Federal law. The defendants listed in the suit are the following:
*Anheuser-Busch InBev Worldwide, Inc.
*SAB Miller d/b/a Miller Brewing Company
*Molson Coors Brewing Company
*Miller Coors, LLC
*Pabst Brewing Company
*Pivo, Inc. d/b/a High Plains Budweiser. President, Treasurer: Jeffrey J. Scheinost. Secretary: Cynthia A. Scheinost. Director: Marykate Scheinost
*Dietrich Distributing Co., Inc. President, Director, Treasurer: John D. Dietrich
*Coors Distributing of West Nebraska d/b/a Coors of West Nebraska; President, Treasurer, Director: James K. Raymond, Treasurer, Director: Evelyn K. Raymond
*Klemm Distributing Inc.: President: Robert (Bob) F. Klemm, Secretary: Barrett R. Klemm d/b/a Arrowhead Distributing, Inc. President: Patrick A, O&#x27;Neal. Secretary: Greg Burkholder, Treasurer: Kent O&#x27;Neal
*Jason Schwarting d/b/a Arrowhead Inn, Inc. President: Jason Schwarting, Secretary: Vic Clarke
*Sanford Holdings, LLC d/b/a D&amp;S Pioneer Service. Corporation Members: Doug Sanford, Steve Sanford
*Stuart J. Kozal d/b/a/ Jumping Eagle Inn. Owners: Stuart J. Kozal, Lillie I. Norman
*Clay M. Brehmer and Daniel J. Brehmer d/b/a State Line Liquor

On August 14, 2013, voters voted to end prohibition and legalize alcohol, so the tribe can use the profits for education and detoxification and treatment centers.

==Demographics==

In a 2005 interview, Cecilia Fire Thunder, the first female president of the Oglala Sioux Tribe, noted, &quot;[Sixty-eight] percent of the college graduates on the reservation are women. Seventy percent of the jobs are held by women. Over 90 percent of the jobs in our schools are held by women.&quot;
* The 2010 U.S. Census counted 18,834 individuals living on the Pine Ridge Reservation. The vast majority, 16,906, identified as American Indian. Much of the non-Native population is found in the community of Martin, South Dakota
* 89% of residents are unemployed.
* 53.75% of the residents live below the Federal poverty level.
* Average per capita income in Oglala Lakota County is $8,768 and ranks as the &quot;poorest&quot; county in the nation.
* The infant mortality rate is five times higher than the national average.
* Native American amputation rates due to diabetes are three to four times higher than the national average.
* Death rate due to diabetes is three times higher than the national average. 
* Teen suicide is four times the national average.
* The average life expectancy on Pine Ridge is 66.81 years, the lowest in the United States. In 2004, the average life expectancy was just 48 years for men and 52 years for women.

==Tribal government==

The reservation is governed by the eighteen-member Oglala Sioux Tribal Council, who are elected officials rather than traditional clan life leaders, in accordance with the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. The Executive Officers of the council are the President (also called Chairman), Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer. Primary elections are held in October and the General election in November.

The President and Vice-President are elected at large by voters to a term of office of two years; the Secretary and Treasurer are appointed by the Tribal Council. Council members serve a term of two years. There are nine election districts on the reservation. One representative is elected for each 1,000 tribe members.

A Constitution was approved on January 15, 1936, with amendments approved on December 24, 1969; December 3, 1985; July 11, 1997.

===Politics===
While many residents have continued to struggle with the tribal government, BIA and other federal representatives, some have become more politically active in other ways. In 2002, the Pine Ridge Reservation was part of a statewide voter registration campaign organized by the Democratic Party. That year, Oglala Lakota candidates won offices in Bennett County; since the 1990s, Native Americans (mostly Lakota) have become a majority of the county&#x27;s population. Charles Cummings was elected as county sheriff, Gerald &#x27;Jed&#x27; Bettelyoun to one of the positions as county commissioner, and Sandy Flye became the first Native American elected to a seat on the county school board. Statewide turnout by Native Americans helped elect the Democratic candidate Tim Johnson to the U.S. Senate by a narrow margin.

In 1992, John Yellow Bird Steele was elected president of the OST, the first of what would become a record-setting seven terms as president. Despite winning seven elections, Steele only won re-election once, in 2002. In most cases, he was defeated when seeking re-election, only to come back and defeat his successor in the next election (or, in the case of the 2006 election, to defeat the person serving out the rest of his successor&#x27;s term).

In 2004, Cecilia Fire Thunder became the first woman elected president of the OST, defeating the incumbent Steele and Russell Means. In 2005 she led negotiations with Nebraska to strengthen law enforcement in Whiteclay by hiring more Oglala tribal police and having them deputized by Nebraska to patrol in the town. The town sells massive quantities of alcohol to the Lakota, although it is illegal on the reservation. The &quot;historic agreement&quot; was signed by Fire Thunder following approval by the tribal council, the Nebraska Governor Dave Heineman and State Attorney General Jon Bruning.

On March 21, 2006, Fire Thunder announced her plan to bring a Planned Parenthood clinic to the reservation to improve health services to women. The South Dakota state legislature had recently passed a stringent abortion law. In May 2006, the Oglala Sioux tribal council unanimously voted to ban all abortions on the reservation, regardless of the circumstances. The council also voted to suspend Fire Thunder for 20 days pending an impeachment hearing.

On June 29, 2006, the tribal council voted to impeach Fire Thunder: it said that founding the clinic was outside her authority and she had failed to consult with them. Her two-year term would have expired in October 2006. In November 2006, state voters reviewed the law passed by the state legislature, and they overwhelmingly defeated the ban on abortions without exceptions, by 55.57 percent to 44.43 percent. A ban with exceptions was proposed in 2008, and state voters rejected that by a margin of 55.21 percent to 44.79 percent.

The U.S. Congress supported Fire Thunder&#x27;s tribal law enforcement initiative, earmarking $200,000 over two years to pay for the increased cost of OST police patrols in Whiteclay. By May 2007, the tribe had spent none of the money. Fire Thunder&#x27;s impeachment and tribal political conflict appeared to prevent its implementing the agreement. During 2006 and 2007, tribal activists tried to blockade the road inside the reservation to confiscate beer being illegally brought in. The OST police chief complained of having insufficient money and staff to control the beer traffic. The tribe lost the earmarked funds and let the initiative lapse.

In November 2008, Theresa Two Bulls, a Democratic State Senator for South Dakota since 2004, became the second woman elected president of the OST. She succeeded Steele and defeated Russell Means. When the reservation had a rash of suicides in late 2009, she declared a state of emergency and organized a call-in to President Barack Obama. She organized services during a blizzard to assist residents in outlying areas on the reservation.

Steele was re-elected in 2010, defeating Two Bulls. Bryan Brewer was elected as Tribal president in November 2012, defeating the incumbent Steele with 52% of the vote. A retired educator and school administrator, he was new to tribal politics. He worked to develop housing and discourage alcoholism, even leading a protest against Whiteclay alcohol sales. The journalist Brian Ecoffey noted that Brewer represented a &quot;new direction&quot; for the tribe, as he had not held political office before. Steele then defeated Brewer in 2014, starting what would be Steele&#x27;s last term.

Troy &quot;Scott&quot; Weston represented the Porcupine District in the 2010 and 2012 administrations; Weston was elected OST President in 2016 beating Steele, the incumbent, in a landslide victory. The &quot;Rapid City Journal&quot; reported that nearly 2/3 of voters at the polls cast their ballot for Weston.

In national elections, Pine Ridge is politically divided: the western half of the reservation (Oglala Lakota County) votes overwhelmingly Democratic at the national level, while the eastern half (Bennett and Jackson Counties) trends heavily Republican. In local politics, the Oglala are active in electing tribal members to the State House and Senate, with both Democrats and Republicans finding success on the reservation.

===Federal, state, and tribal law===
The Oglala Sioux Tribe maintains legal jurisdiction over all crimes committed on the reservation by tribal members, non-reservation Indians, and those willing to relinquish authority to the tribal courts. Felony crimes and others which have been specifically assumed by the federal government, as defined by various acts of the U.S. Congress, are outside their jurisdiction and are prosecuted by the BIA and FBI. The ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States in &quot;Ex parte Crow Dog&quot; (1883) marked the high point of Indian sovereignty in law enforcement on reservations; since then federal legislation and subsequent Supreme Court decisions have reduced Native American sovereignty in this area.

Public Law 280, enacted by Congress in 1953 and substantially amended in 1968, allows for states to assume jurisdiction on Indian reservations if approved by referendum by the affected reservations. In South Dakota, Public Law 280 is applied only to state highways running through reservations.

Landmark cases affecting tribal criminal law include:
*: On August 5, 1881, Crow Dog, a Brulé Lakota subchief, shot and killed the Oglala principal chief Chief Spotted Tail, on the Rosebud Indian Reservation. A grand jury was convened, and Crow Dog was tried and convicted in Dakota Territorial court in Deadwood, South Dakota, and sentenced to death. In 1883 his lawyers petitioned for &quot;writs of habeas corpus&quot; and &quot;certiorari&quot;; his case was argued in November 1883 before the U.S. Supreme Court. In a unanimous decision, the court ruled that, according to the provisions of the Treaty of Fort Laramie, the Dakota Territorial court had no jurisdiction over the Rosebud reservation; it overturned Crow Dog&#x27;s conviction. In response to this ruling, Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in 1884, defining crimes that would be prosecuted under federal law.
*Major Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1: Congress gave federal authorities concurrent jurisdiction over seven major crimes committed on a reservation, regardless of whether one of the parties was Indian. This legislation reduced the criminal jurisdiction previously held by tribal courts.
*: Congress left to the Indian Tribal Courts jurisdiction over all crimes not taken by the Federal government.
*&quot;Iron Crow v. Oglala Sioux Tribe&quot;, 231 F.2d 89 (8th Cir. 1956): Indian Tribal Courts have inherent jurisdiction over all matters not taken over by the Federal government.
*: Indian Tribes do not have inherent criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians absent Congressional authority.
*: Indian Tribes have inherent powers to punish offenses against Tribal laws when committed by Tribal members.

====Law enforcement====
In traditional Sioux society, law enforcement was performed by members of the warrior societies, such as the Kit Foxes, Badgers and Crow Owners, known as the &quot;akicitas.&quot; They maintained order in camp and during communal buffalo hunts. Each band would appoint one society as the official &quot;akicita&quot; group for the year. This custom prevailed for a short time after the Sioux were forced onto the reservations.

In 1878, Congress authorized the formation of an Indian police force to provide law enforcement in Indian territory and upon reservations. They were superseded by police assigned and managed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). The BIA police force is composed of members of various Native American tribes from throughout the United States, and personnel often do not belong to the nations they oversee.

Since the late 1970s, the Oglala Sioux Tribe has received Federal funding to maintain its own reservation police, supplemented by BIA personnel. The FBI has jurisdiction for any felony crimes committed upon the reservation. After the reservation police respond to the initial call, a BIA police person initiates the investigation and notifies the FBI.

The OST is developing a new Tribal Justice Center, to include the tribal courts and a restorative justice courtroom. The latter concept relates to traditional Lakota ideas about restoring the victim and offender to balance within the community. In practice, it is intended to bring together the affected parties in facilitated communication, together with members of the community; to settle on a form of reparation or compensation by the offender that is satisfactory to the victim, which may include money, public apology, and/or community service work; and to bring the offender quickly back within the community with its support for the future. As the process is being used at Kahnawake, a Mohawk reserve in Canada, the First Nation community works to intervene and settle issues before arrest.

==Social issues and economy==

Pine Ridge is the eighth-largest reservation in the United States and it is the poorest. The population of Pine Ridge suffer health conditions, including high mortality rates, depression, alcoholism, drug abuse, malnutrition and diabetes, among others. Reservation access to health care is limited compared to urban areas, and it is not sufficient. Unemployment on the reservation hovers between 80% and 85%, and 49% of the population live below the federal poverty level. Many of the families have no electricity, telephone, running water, or sewage systems; and many use wood stoves to heat their homes, depleting limited wood resources.

===Health and healthcare===
The population on Pine Ridge has among the shortest life expectancies of any group in the Western Hemisphere: approximately 47 years for males and 52 years for females in 2004. The infant mortality rate is five times the United States national average, and the adolescent suicide rate is four times the United States national average. Members of the reservation suffer from a disproportionately high rate of poverty and alcoholism. By 2011, a gang culture formed among Native American teenagers on the reservation. Young residents leave the reservation for larger cities.

The Pine Ridge Comprehensive Health Facility is the on-reservation hospital run by the Indian Health Service. The inpatient hospital also has an outpatient clinic, dental clinic, and a surgery suite. The emergency room is staffed by two physicians as well as two physician assistants and a hospitalist in triage. The &quot;Sick Kids&quot; clinic is also based at the facility, with pediatricians on staff. During the Covid-19 pandemic, the hospital increased its capacity to provide respiratory and critical care, with assistance from Stanford Center for Innovation in Global Health.

In June 2011, the OST broke ground on a long-planned 60-bed nursing home facility, to be completed within two years. It was developed in cooperation with the federal government, the states of Nebraska and South Dakota. In October 2016, the Oglala Lakota Nursing Home, $6.5-million, 80-bed nursing home for the care of their elderly, opened in White Clay, South Dakota. The tribe borrowed money for a loan for the facility from the Mdewakanton Shakopee tribe, agreeing to &quot;an independent advisory board and an experienced outside management firm.&quot; It is working with Native American Health Management, LLC (NAHM), to gain training for staff and oversight of operations until people gain experience.

====Alcoholism====
Alcoholism is widespread on the reservation, affecting an estimated 85 percent of the families. Tribal police estimate that 90 percent of the crimes are alcohol-related.

Because of historic problems with alcohol use by its members, the Oglala Sioux Tribe has prohibited the sale and possession of alcohol on the Pine Ridge Reservation since 1832. The exception was a brief period in the 1970s when on-reservation sales were tried. The town of Whiteclay, Nebraska (just over the South Dakota-Nebraska border), previously had approximately 12 residents and four liquor stores, which sold over 4.9 million 12-ounce cans of beer in 2010 almost exclusively to Oglala Lakota from the reservation (nearly 170 cans per person). The Whiteclay liquor stores were shut down by the state of Nebraska in 2017, though the store owners are appealing to have the stores reopened.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is a spectrum of anatomical structural anomalies, and behavioral, neurocognitive disabilities resulting from the exposure of a fetus to alcohol in the womb. The most severe manifestation within this spectrum is fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). A quarter of the children born on the reservation are diagnosed with either FASD or FAS, resulting in lifelong challenges.

===Education===
The state of education on the reservation is severely lacking in multiple areas. The school drop-out rate is over 70%, and the teacher turnover rate is eight times that of the U.S. national average.

In 1971 the tribe founded the Oglala Lakota College, one of the earliest tribal colleges in the nation, and part of Native American institution building of the last 40 years. First started as a two-year community college, it has expanded to offer four-year baccalaureate degrees, as well as a master&#x27;s in Lakota leadership. It is operated by tribal people, with a tribal board. In 2011, it had an enrollment of 1,400. Since 1994, tribal colleges have been classified as land-grant colleges by the U.S. Congress.

Oglala Lakota County School District (formerly the Shannon County School District) serves all areas in Oglala Lakota County. It includes:
*Lakota Tech High School
*Batesland Elementary School (preK-8th)
*Red Shirt School
*Rockyford Elementary School
*Wolf Creek Elementary School

Bennett County School District 03-1 serves areas in Bennett County.

The Kadoka School District 36-2 serves the portion of Jackson County that is a part of the reservation.

The portion in Sheridan County, Nebraska is zoned to Gordon-Rushville Public Schools.

Bureau of Indian Education (BIE)-operated and affiliated schools include:
*Crazy Horse School (K-12th)
*Little Wound School (K-12)
*Pine Ridge School (K-12)
*American Horse School (K-8)
*Porcupine School (K-8)
*Wounded Knee District School

Other K-12 Schools operating on the Reservation include:
*Lakota Waldorf School
*Loneman Day School (Isnawica Owayawa)
*Head Start at Oglala Lakota College

Private schools include:
*Red Cloud Indian School that consists of three schools: Our Lady of Lourdes School (K–8), Red Cloud Elementary (K-8) and Red Cloud High School.

==== Lakota Immersion Childcare ====
Globally, there are currently only 2,000 Lakota language speakers, and fewer than 1,000 at Pine Ridge. The age of the average Lakota speaker is 60, making it a &quot;critically endangered&quot; language.

In the fall of 2012, a new program was founded to combat the loss of the language and create a young generation of fluent Lakota speakers. Peter Hill, a former elementary teacher at the reservation who speaks Lakota, started the early childcare language immersion program from his own basement, initially serving five students with crowdsourced funding. In the program, students and teachers speak exclusively Lakota, with children eventually learning English as a second language. Over the last six years, the childcare program has expanded significantly to serve students ages one to five, and has additionally begun offering kindergarten and first grade. A continuing challenge for the school is creating teaching materials, since textbooks and other teaching resources are not typically printed in Lakota. Thus, creating new materials like children&#x27;s books, apps, or videos, as well as translation of existing works into the language is crucial.

Beyond the immersion childcare, other efforts are underway to bring Lakota into community members&#x27; lives in relevant ways: basketball games are frequently announced in Lakota, after new words were coined and the coach began using them in practices and drills with the teams. The first news website written entirely in Lakota was launched in 2016.

===Economy===
As of 2011, the reservation has little economic development or industry. No discount stores are located on the reservation. Though its people receive $80 million per annum in federal monies, such as Social Security and veterans benefits, most of this money is spent largely in stores located off the reservation in Nebraska border towns, creating no net benefit for the tribe. As the journalist Stephanie Woodward noted, little money changes hands within the reservation.

As an example of the money that goes outside the reservation to border towns, the owner of Whiteclay&#x27;s grocery store, Arrowhead Foods, said he &quot;did more than a million dollars in business last year, with an entirely Native American clientele.&quot; Similarly, Nebraska State Senator LeRoy J. Louden, whose district includes Whiteclay, noted the recent construction of a Walmart superstore at Chadron, Nebraska, another border town. He said, &quot;That store was built because of the reservation.&quot;

The tribe has prohibited the sale and consumption of alcohol on the reservation. Still, Pine Ridge residents support four liquor stores across reservation borders in the town of Whiteclay, Nebraska In 2010, these businesses paid $413,932 in federal and state excise taxes on the sale of liquor, according to the Nebraska State Liquor Commission. Some residents have argued that the climbing rate of alcoholism on the reservation shows the failure of the prohibition policy. They argue that if the tribe legalized alcohol sales, it could keep much of their people&#x27;s wealth from flowing to Nebraska, allowing for such monies to instead be directed toward the reservation&#x27;s economy and health care services and new projects like building a detoxification facility and rehab clinic.

Despite the lack of formal employment opportunities on Pine Ridge, considerable agricultural production takes place on the reservation. Only a small percentage of the tribe directly benefits from agriculture, as land is leased to agricultural producers. According to the USDA, in 2002 there was nearly $33 million in receipts from agricultural production on Pine Ridge. Less than one-third of that income went to members of the tribe.

Most employment on the reservation is provided by community institutions, such as the tribal Oglala Lakota College, and other schools; the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA); and the U.S. Indian Health Service (IHS). In October 2016, the tribe opened an 80-bed nursing home; at full operation, it should employ 100 staff. The tribe is working on building a justice center and has advertised an art competition to decorate its spaces, including the tribal courts and a restorative justice courtroom.

Enterprises owned by the Oglala Sioux tribe include the Prairie Wind Casino, a Parks and Recreation Department, guided hunting, and cattle ranching and farming. The Oglala Sioux Tribe also operates the White River Visitor Center near the Badlands National Park. It has one radio station, KILI-FM in Porcupine.

In 1973 at the time of the Wounded Knee Incident, not one Native American worked for a South Dakota newspaper. In 1981 the Lakota journalist Tim Giago founded and published the independent &quot;Lakota Times&quot; on the reservation. (Most such newspapers have been owned by tribal governments.) He renamed it &quot;Indian Country Today&quot; in 1992, as he was providing more national coverage of Native American news.

In 1998 he sold the paper to the Oneida Nation; it was then the largest independent Native American paper in the country. It continues to operate the paper as part of a media network; &quot;Indian Country Today&quot; features regular political coverage that notes the increasing number of Native Americans gaining office at the local and state levels. Giago founded the Native American Journalists Association (NAJA) and has worked to recruit Native American students into journalism through its foundation, as well as to establish Indian studies in journalism schools.

Connie Smith started the &quot;Lakota Country Times,&quot; a weekly newspaper which she owns. It is the official legal newspaper for the Pine Ridge and Rosebud reservations. It also publishes material online. In 2009 it won first place for general excellence of its website from NAJA, and in 2010 won three prizes, including two for best articles.

Lakota Federal Credit Union, established to serve the financial needs of residents of the reservation, was established in 2012.

====Industrial hemp====

After doing research and noting the worldwide market for hemp, in July 1998, the Tribal Council approved &#x27;industrial hemp agriculture&#x27; for the reservation. With demand high for the crop, three Lakota farmers, Tom Cook, his wife Loretta Afraid of Bear and American Horse, grandson of Chief American Horse, formed the Slim Butte Land-Use Association. To emphasize the issue of Sioux sovereignty in land use, they publicly announced the first planting of industrial hemp seeds on April 29, 2000, on the 132nd anniversary of the signing of the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty, which established the reservation. The Association believed production of industrial hemp-based concrete could help solve the severe shortage of suitable dwellings on the reservation, as it is a sustainable construction material, and work for the unemployed. Hemp can also be processed to yield oil for cooking and other products.

Congress in 1968 prohibited the cultivation of &quot;Cannabis&quot;-related crops, including hemp, as part of anti-drug legislation, although hemp does not have the psychoactive properties of cannabis as a drug. Industrial hemp is legal in Canada. The law in the U.S. is enforced by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). In August 2000 and July 2001, federal DEA agents destroyed industrial hemp crops on the Pine Ridge reservation. After the raid destroyed his crops, the farmer Alex White Plume appealed a DEA court order that prohibited his growing the crop, but the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court ruling in &quot;United States v. White Plume&quot; (8th Cir. 2006), that the Lakota had to comply with DEA registration process and get a permit to cultivate hemp. The former crop is currently growing wild in the area.

The North Dakota legislature has authorized hemp growing statewide and issued the nation&#x27;s first two state licenses to grow hemp. The licensed farmers may face DEA legal problems if they do not acquire DEA permits. As the DEA had not yet acted on their requests, in June 2007 the men filed a lawsuit seeking federal court permission to grow the crop without being subject to federal criminal charges.

====Private enterprise at Pine Ridge====
Members of the tribe have developed a variety of private enterprises, from arts to modern technologies. Numerous artists maintain private studios and use diverse media in both traditional Lakota artforms, such as parfleche and beadwork, and contemporary styles.

The Oglala are becoming involved in start-up tech companies, such as Lakota Solar Enterprises (LSE), started on the Pine Ridge Reservation in 2006 by Henry Red Cloud (a fifth-generation descendant of Chief Red Cloud) with help from the non-profit org Trees, Water and People. Lakota Solar Enterprises is active in education and training for the advancement of renewable and sustainable energy and technology with a focus of bringing employment opportunities to members of OST as well as other tribal nations throughout the United States. Such technologies include: solar heating and electricity; compressed earth blocks for structural use; geothermal heating; solar assisted irrigated farming, cellulose insulation, and wind generated power.

==Tourism==
=== History ===

*Wounded Knee Massacre and burial site. The events at Wounded Knee represents a significant event in Native American and United States history; it was the last significant clash between Native Americans and U.S. troops and was considered to be the closing of the Western Frontier. The trail that Spotted Elk and his band took on the reservation is marked with signs, including the spot where they surrendered to U.S. troops and were escorted to a site by Wounded Knee Creek.
*Stronghold Table: a remote mesa in what is now the Stronghold (South) Unit of Badlands National Park, which is administered by the tribe. Site of the last Ghost Dances prior to the Wounded Knee Massacre.
*Red Cloud Cemetery: location of the grave of Chief Red Cloud, as well as Bloody Knife (1840–1876), Chief of the Indian Scouts of the 7th Cavalry under General George Armstrong Custer. Bloody Knife was killed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn while assigned to Major Marcus Reno&#x27;s detachment.

=== Cultural tourism ===

*Oglala Lakota Nation Pow Wow, an annual pow wow featuring dancers from various parts of the U.S.
*Badlands Ranch Resort: Started as private enterprise, it was purchased in July 2009 by the Oglala Sioux Tribe. It is located at the base of Badlands National Park.

=== Ecotourism ===

The Oglala Sioux Park &amp; Recreation Authority offers eco-tours and hunting trips on the reservation as well as engaging in wildlife conservation work.
*Geology: The Badlands (&quot;Makhóšiča&quot;)- formed by erosion, represent over 65 million years of the earth&#x27;s geological history starting from the late Cretaceous when the entire middle of the United States was covered by the Western Interior Seaway. The Pine Ridge area contain one of the largest deposits of mammal fossils from the Oligocene epoch.
*Paleontology: One of the most complete fossil accumulations in North America is found within the badlands. The rocks and fossils preserve evidence of ancient ecosystems and give scientists clues about how early mammal species lived.
*Flora: Pine Ridge is located in the Great Plains region, which encompasses the nation&#x27;s largest grassland ecosystem. the northern portion of the reservation and Badlands National Park contain one of the largest expanses of mixed grass prairie in the United States.
*Fauna: In addition to bison, the reservation is also home to pronghorn (&quot;Antilocapra americana&quot;). There is a colony of endangered black-footed ferret, the only ferret native to North America, in the Conata Basin, which is also home to black-tailed prairie dogs.
*White River: A Missouri River tributary that flows through Nebraska and South Dakota. A variety of fish species suitable for sportfishing live in the river.

=== Casino ===

Prairie Wind Casino, which began operation in 1994 in three doublewide trailers, was upgraded with the completion of a $20 million casino, a 78-room hotel and a full-service restaurant in early 2007. The casino provides 250 jobs, most held by tribal residents, with revenues helping support education and social welfare efforts.
==Geography==
Located in southwest South Dakota, the reservation takes of space. The nearest urban center, Rapid City, South Dakota, is from the center of the reservation.

The most inland point in North America is located within the reservation, near the town of Allen, and is from the nearest coastline.

Bennett County and Oglala Lakota County make up much of the reservation. The reservation takes up the southern portion of Jackson County. A small portion is in Sheridan County, Nebraska.

=== Topography ===
The topography is generally rolling mixed grass prairie, interspersed in various location, especially to the north, into typical badlands topography. The higher elevations of the prairie are covered by wind blown sands that form dunes, blowouts, and thin sheets. The southern part of the reservation is crossed by Pine Ridge, which is probably a fault scarp, and which supports the growth of scattered pine and cedar trees. Well-developed sandhills are the dominant features along the southern boundary of the reservation, which extend into the sandhills region of Nebraska.

Only of the more than of the reservation are considered land suitable for agricultural uses, and the climate, soil and water conditions are challenging. Many farmers among the Lakota can do little more than gain a subsistence living from the land.

The White River flows through the reservation. It was named for the water&#x27;s white-gray color, a result of eroded sand, clay, and volcanic ash carried by the river. Draining a basin of about , the stream flows through a region of sparsely populated hills, plateaus, and badlands. It flows west to east through the reservation.

===Geology===
Deposition of sediments in the Badlands began 69 million years ago when an ancient sea, the Western Interior Seaway, stretched across what is now the Great Plains. After the sea retreated, successive land environments, including rivers and flood plains, continued to deposit sediments. Although the major period of deposition ended 28 million years ago, significant erosion of the Badlands did not begin until half a million years ago.

=== Climate ===
==Flora and fauna==
=== Flora ===
The mixed grass prairie contains both ankle-high and waist-high grasses, and fills a transitional zone between the moister tall-grass prairie to the east and the more arid short-grass prairie to the west.

Biologists have identified more than 400 different plant species growing in Badlands National Park. Each plant species is adapted to survive the conditions prevalent in the mixed-grass prairie ecosystem. The climate here is one of extremes: hot, cold, dry, windy and stormy with blizzards, floods, droughts, and fires. Grasses dominate the landscape.

The short-grass and tall-grass prairies intergrade just east of an irregular line that runs from northern Texas to Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska, northwestward into west-central North Dakota and South Dakota. The perimeter is not well defined because of the array of short-stature, intermediate, and tall-grass species that make up an ecotone between the short-grass and tall-grass prairies (Bragg and Steuter 1996). In general, the mixed-grass prairie is characterized by the warm-season grasses of the short-grass prairie to the west and the cool- and warm-season grasses, which grow much taller, to the east. Because of this ecotonal mixing, the number of plant species found in mixed-grass prairies exceeds that in other prairie types. Since 2000, hemp has grown wild here, following a failed attempt in growing it commercially, as a local ordinance allows. The attempt was shut down by the DEA and several other agencies.

=== Fauna ===
The mixed grass prairie is home to a variety of animals. In Badlands National Park, scientists have recorded the presence of 37 mammal species, nine reptile species, six amphibian species, 206 bird species, and 69 butterfly species. The rare swift fox and endangered black footed ferret are among two of the various mammal species found in the Badlands region. Both species feed on the black-tailed prairie dog.

==Transportation==

===Roads===

* passes east to west through Jackson County and Pennington County just north of the reservation with multiple exits in both counties
* is an east–west U.S. highway which passes through the reservation. The western terminus is in Orin, Wyoming, at an interchange with Interstate 25. Its eastern terminus of U.S. 18 is in downtown Milwaukee, Wisconsin. However, U.S. 18 runs concurrent with other U.S. routes from its western terminus to Mule Creek Junction, Wyoming. U.S. 18 is one of the original United States highways of 1926.
* , also known as the &quot;Rimrock Highway&quot; or &quot;Rimrock Drive&quot; connects Rapid City, South Dakota, with U.S. Highway 385 at Pactola Junction, just north of Pactola Lake. One of the most scenic drives in the Black Hills, SD 44 follows Rapid Creek, a blue-ribbon trout fishery, much of the way, and also follows much of the alignment of the old Rapid City, Black Hills and Western Railroad, also known as the Crouch Line. SD 44 passes through the Jackson County portion of the reservation
* (not shown on FDOT map) is a state route that runs north to south through the Jackson County portion of the reservation. It begins at the Nebraska border north of Merriman, Nebraska, as a continuation of Nebraska Highway 61. It runs to the North Dakota border, where it continues as North Dakota Highway 49. It is 250 miles (402 kilometers) in length.
* (not shown on FDOT map) is a short state highway in Oglala Lakota County which turns into Nebraska Highway 87 (N-87), SD 407-N-87, serves as a connector route between U.S. Route 18 (U.S. 18) in Pine Ridge, South Dakota, and U.S. 20 in Rushville, Nebraska.

===Airports===
Pine Ridge Airport, owned by the Oglala Sioux Tribe, is located two miles (3 km) east of the town of Pine Ridge. The unattended airport has four asphalt runways; runways 12&amp;30 are , runways 6&amp;24 (currently closed) are . The airport is in poor repair and is used predominately for government flights. The nearest commercial airport to Pine Ridge is Chadron Municipal Airport (CDR / KCDR) in Chadron, Nebraska, approximately south. The nearest major airport is Rapid City Regional Airport, in Rapid City, South Dakota, approximately NE. The closest international airport is Denver International Airport in Denver, Colorado approximately SW.

===Public transportation===
On January 30, 2009, the Oglala Sioux Tribe of Pine Ridge held the grand opening of their public transportation system, a bus service with multiple vehicles to cover the entire reservation.

==Communities==
===Nebraska===
*Whiteclay

===South Dakota===
*Allen
*Batesland
*Kyle
*Manderson-White Horse Creek
*Oglala
*Pine Ridge
*Porcupine
*Wakpamni Lake
*Wanblee
*Wounded Knee

==Notable leaders and residents==
*Albert Afraid of Hawk (1879-1900, Oglala). member of Buffalo Bill&#x27;s &quot;Wild West Show&quot;. 
* American Horse (&quot;Wašícuŋ Tašuŋke&quot;), an Oglala Lakota chief during the Sioux Wars of the 1870s.
* Amos Bad Heart Bull (&quot;Waŋblí Wapaha&quot;), a ledger artist and tribal historian
* SuAnne Big Crow (1974-1992) led the Pine Ridge High School basketball team to state championship in 1989
* William &quot;Hawk&quot; Birdshead, (Oglala, Hunkpapa, Cheyenne, Arapaho) philanthropist, suicide prevention, award winning filmmaker
* Black Elk (Heȟaka Sapa; 1863–1950), an Oglala holy man, and second cousin to Crazy Horse
* Alice Blue Legs, (1925–2003) master quillworker 
* Regina Brave, an Oglala Lakota activist
* Tokala Clifford, actor
* Chief Crazy Horse (&quot;Tašuŋke Witko&quot;), war chief of the Oglala, c. 1870
*
* Pat Cuny (Oglala), 83rd Infantry Division US Soldier
* Sarah Eagle Heart, Emmy Award-winning producer, writer, and activist
* Cecilia Fire Thunder, first woman elected as president of the Oglala Sioux Tribe 
* Tim Giago (1934-2022) Newspaper Publisher, Writer 
*Brady Jandreau, former rodeo rider and star of &quot;The Rider&quot; (2017)
* Kicking Bear (Oglala), chief of the Miniconjou Lakota Sioux tribe. 
* Eddie Little Sky, actor.
* Little Wound (&quot;Taópi Čík&#x27;ala&quot;: 1835–1899, Oglala). 
* Chief Long Wolf (1833–1892), warrior of Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Sioux Wars. 
* Old Chief Smoke (&quot;Šóta&quot;; 1774–1864), an early Oglala chief and Shirt Wearer
* Chief Red Cloud (1822–1909, Oglala), a chief
*Philip N. Hogen, United States Attorney for the District of South Dakota 1981–1991
*Ed McGaa (Eagle Man), author, attorney and veteran 
* Ola Mildred Rexroat, only Native American pilot in the Women Airforce Service Pilots 
*William Mervin &quot;Billy&quot; Mills, also known as &quot;Makata Taka Hela&quot;, is the second Native American to win an Olympic gold medal and the only American ever to win the Olympic gold in the 10,000 meter run
**
**
* Sean Sherman, food educator, caterer, author of &quot;The Sioux Chef&#x27;s Indigenous Kitchen&quot;
* Teton Saltes, Member of the Oglala Sioux Tribe and NFL offensive lineman
* Chief Spotted Elk, called &quot;Big Foot&quot; by the U.S. soldiers. His band of Miniconjou Sioux were massacred at Wounded Knee in 1890.
* Touch the Clouds, Oglala chief
* JoAnn Tall, environmental activist at Pine Ridge
* Theresa Two Bulls, legislature, state senator (2004–2008), president of Oglala Sioux Tribe (2008–2010)
* Richard Wilson (April 29, 1934 – January 31, 1990), tribal chairman (1972 to 1976) during the Wounded Knee Incident
* John Yellow Bird Steele, President of the Oglala Sioux Tribe (1992-2010)
* They Even Fear His Horses (&quot;Tȟašúŋke Kȟokípȟapi&quot;) (1836–1893)
* Charles Trimble (Oglala Lakota Nation), activist and former executive director of the National Congress of American Indians (1972–1978)
*
*

==References==
==Further reading==
* Glover, Vic (2004), &quot;Keeping Heart on Pine Ridge.&quot; Natives Voices. .
* Hedges, Chris and Joe Sacco (2012). &quot;Days of Destruction, Days of Revolt.&quot; Nation Books. .
* Laughland, Oliver and Tom Silverstone. &quot;Liquid genocide: alcohol destroyed Pine Ridge reservation - then they fought back.&quot; &quot;The Guardian.&quot; September 29, 2017.
* Magnuson, Stew (2009), &quot;The Death of Raymond Yellow Thunder: And Other True Stories from the Nebraska–Pine Ridge Border Towns&quot;, Texas Tech University Press, .
* Reinhardt, Akim D. (2007), &quot;Ruling Pine Ridge: Oglala Lakota Politics from the IRA to Wounded Knee.&quot; Texas Tech University Press, 2007. .
* Wagoner, Paula L. (2002) &quot;They Treated Us Just Like Indians: The Worlds of Bennett County, South Dakota,&quot; University of Nebraska Press
*Extensive photo essay on Pine Ridge made for National Geographic Magazine
*TED talk about Pine Ridge
*&quot;Native Americans in South Dakota: An Erosion of Confidence in the Justice System&quot;, South Dakota Advisory Commission to U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 2000
*Starita, Joe (2002) &quot;The Dull Knifes of Pine Ridge : A Lakota Odyssey&quot;, University of Nebraska Press.

==External links==
*&quot;Oglala Sioux Tribe&quot;
*&quot;The Lakota Country Times&quot;
*Friends of Pine Ridge Reservation

Databases
*USDA 2002 Census of Agriculture for Native American Reservations
*Pine Ridge Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, South Dakota/Nebraska United States Census Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="4" end="33" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="50" end="67" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="75" end="88" title="Oglala Lakota" label="Oglala Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="89" end="107" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="123" end="133" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="137" end="149" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="187" end="195" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599966" start="245" end="268" title="Great Sioux Reservation" label="Great Sioux Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q495201" start="534" end="554" title="Oglala Lakota County" label="Oglala Lakota County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484231" start="559" end="573" title="Bennett County, South Dakota" label="Bennett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495620" start="596" end="610" title="Jackson County, South Dakota" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495969" start="635" end="650" title="Sheridan County, Nebraska" label="Sheridan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626755" start="767" end="778" title="Lowest-income counties in the United States" label="the poorest"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="827" end="838" title="United States Census, 2000" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="897" end="922" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="943" end="1000" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="1146" end="1151" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1172" end="1187" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="1209" end="1213" title="mesa" label="mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="1235" end="1241" title="Oglala" label="Oglala"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="1266" end="1288" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="1326" end="1337" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="1408" end="1429" title="Wounded Knee Massacre" label="Wounded Knee Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737293" start="1468" end="1478" title="Miniconjou" label="Miniconjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520094" start="1490" end="1498" title="Hunkpapa" label="Hunkpapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q682632" start="1513" end="1530" title="Spotted Elk" label="Chief Spotted Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="1581" end="1601" title="Standing Rock Agency" label="Standing Rock Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="1609" end="1621" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1882" end="1898" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080082" start="2050" end="2071" title="Oglala Lakota College" label="Oglala Lakota College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="2075" end="2089" title="Tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal college"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202299" start="2237" end="2258" title="Wounded Knee Occupation" label="Wounded Knee Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="2322" end="2346" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803539" start="2681" end="2690" title="Tim Giago" label="Tim Giago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150076" start="2718" end="2730" title="Lakota Times" label="Lakota Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="2788" end="2796" title="Badlands" label="Badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883971" start="2829" end="2848" title="mixed grass prairie" label="mixed grass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="2949" end="2961" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="3076" end="3095" title="black-footed ferret" label="black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="3140" end="3152" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192447" start="3178" end="3190" title="Pierre Shale" label="Pierre Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083697" start="3221" end="3244" title="Western Interior Seaway" label="Western Interior Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="3262" end="3298" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="marine Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="3371" end="3386" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="3476" end="3505" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303914" start="3659" end="3675" title="Red Cloud Agency" label="Red Cloud Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755015" start="3729" end="3747" title="North Platte River" label="North Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q377304" start="3751" end="3768" title="Wyoming Territory" label="Wyoming Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373423" start="3833" end="3848" title="Henry, Nebraska" label="Henry, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599966" start="4027" end="4050" title="Great Sioux Reservation" label="Great Sioux Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="4170" end="4182" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="4210" end="4220" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="4232" end="4240" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="4253" end="4260" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="4309" end="4332" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q662506" start="4351" end="4373" title="Custer&amp;#x27;s 1874 Black Hills Expedition" label="Black Hills Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438425" start="4404" end="4424" title="Fort Abraham Lincoln" label="Fort Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="4432" end="4448" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="4500" end="4511" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="4515" end="4527" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="5161" end="5186" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="5196" end="5212" title="Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="6269" end="6281" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="6286" end="6297" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="6307" end="6327" title="7th Cavalry Regiment" label="7th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="6353" end="6378" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Custer&amp;#x27;s Last Stand."/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="6639" end="6651" title="Homestead Act" label="homesteaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537" start="7008" end="7014" title="Lakota language" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="7088" end="7113" title="7th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="U.S. 7th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412927" start="7133" end="7151" title="Samuel Whitside" label="Samuel M. Whitside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737293" start="7202" end="7212" title="Miniconjou" label="Miniconjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520094" start="7227" end="7235" title="Hunkpapa" label="Hunkpapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230021" start="7248" end="7263" title="Porcupine Butte" label="Porcupine Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q538575" start="7388" end="7401" title="James W. Forsyth" label="James Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q227562" start="7448" end="7461" title="Hotchkiss gun" label="Hotchkiss gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="8528" end="8541" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="8640" end="8666" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910982" start="8793" end="8815" title="Valentine McGillycuddy" label="Valentine McGillycuddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613569" start="8823" end="8835" title="Indian Agent" label="Indian Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="8875" end="8892" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="8903" end="8918" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393783" start="9172" end="9191" title="Nebraska Highway 87" label="Nebraska Highway 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="9528" end="9548" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="9833" end="9860" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Severalty Act of 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599966" start="10130" end="10153" title="Great Sioux Reservation" label="Great Sioux Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10599" end="10617" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="10720" end="10729" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q495969" start="10733" end="10758" title="Sheridan County, Nebraska" label="Sheridan County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="12801" end="12822" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="13037" end="13062" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="13435" end="13439" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="14266" end="14278" title="mixed race" label="mixed-bloods"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="14917" end="14921" title="Takings Clause" label="took"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841006" start="15022" end="15044" title="Badlands Bombing Range" label="Badlands Bombing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q495201" start="15084" end="15104" title="Oglala Lakota County, South Dakota" label="Oglala Lakota County"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="15137" end="15155" title="Oglala Sioux Tribe" label="Oglala Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="15302" end="15321" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="15373" end="15388" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268172" start="15390" end="15401" title="Dewey Beard" label="Dewey Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737293" start="15405" end="15415" title="Miniconjou" label="Miniconjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="16050" end="16076" title="Badlands National Monument" label="Badlands National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="16414" end="16438" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209850" start="16746" end="16757" title="Dick Wilson (tribal chairman)" label="Dick Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="16878" end="16889" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="17076" end="17083" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614114" start="17098" end="17128" title="Guardians of the Oglala Nation" label="Guardians of the Oglala Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26311204" start="17801" end="17817" title="Ellen Moves Camp" label="Ellen Moves Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="18270" end="18305" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18381" end="18394" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="18442" end="18451" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319799" start="18592" end="18605" title="Russell Means" label="Russell Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q250161" start="18607" end="18619" title="Dennis Banks" label="Dennis Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896365" start="18621" end="18637" title="Clyde Bellecourt" label="Clyde Bellecourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486655" start="18709" end="18725" title="Frank Fools Crow" label="Frank Fools Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="19045" end="19053" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158719" start="19231" end="19243" title="Ray Robinson (activist)" label="Ray Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="19247" end="19259" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349324" start="21038" end="21053" title="Robert Robideau" label="Robert Robideau"/>
<link wikidata="Q439054" start="21138" end="21153" title="Leonard Peltier" label="Leonard Peltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="22048" end="22060" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856437" start="22068" end="22095" title="Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation" label="Turtle Mountain Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q459256" start="22184" end="22199" title="Anna Mae Aquash" label="Anna Mae Aquash"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="22203" end="22215" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq people" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q26465818" start="22813" end="22831" title="Arlo Looking Cloud" label="Arlo Looking Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q27718550" start="22836" end="22847" title="John Graham (Canadian activist)" label="John Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="23016" end="23031" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984818" start="23417" end="23437" title="Nebraskans for Peace" label="Nebraskans for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="23489" end="23508" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="23724" end="23748" title="The Battle for Whiteclay" label="The Battle for Whiteclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q936177" start="24034" end="24043" title="Rushville, Nebraska" label="Rushville"/>
<link wikidata="Q992401" start="24508" end="24521" title="Sicangu Oyate" label="Sicangu Oyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813702" start="24544" end="24570" title="Rosebud Indian Reservation" label="Rosebud Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="24615" end="24627" title="Omaha Nation" label="Omaha Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="24986" end="25004" title="Oglala Sioux Tribe" label="Oglala Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25253" end="25265" title="Lance Morgan" label="Lance Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025560" start="25324" end="25345" title="Winnebago Reservation" label="Winnebago Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25824" end="25837" title="Stew Magnuson" label="Stew Magnuson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299248" start="25871" end="25893" title="Raymond Yellow Thunder" label="Raymond Yellow Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q128738" start="27071" end="27107" title="Anheuser-Busch InBev" label="Anheuser-Busch InBev Worldwide, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4995" start="27109" end="27148" title="SAB Miller" label="SAB Miller d/b/a Miller Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319685" start="27150" end="27178" title="Molson Coors Brewing Company" label="Molson Coors Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="27180" end="27197" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller Coors, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="27199" end="27220" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="28207" end="28218" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943718" start="28370" end="28390" title="Cecilia Fire Thunder" label="Cecilia Fire Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="28426" end="28444" title="Oglala Sioux Tribe" label="Oglala Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="28657" end="28673" title="2010 U.S. Census" label="2010 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="28780" end="28795" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q281028" start="28860" end="28880" title="Martin, South Dakota" label="Martin, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q495201" start="29011" end="29031" title="Oglala Lakota County" label="Oglala Lakota County"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="29750" end="29754" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="29792" end="29817" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q484231" start="30837" end="30851" title="Bennett County" label="Bennett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q925052" start="31259" end="31270" title="Tim Johnson (U.S. Senator)" label="Tim Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102581513" start="31320" end="31343" title="John Yellow Bird Steele" label="John Yellow Bird Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943718" start="31771" end="31791" title="Cecilia Fire Thunder" label="Cecilia Fire Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q319799" start="31880" end="31893" title="Russell Means" label="Russell Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="31971" end="31980" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q381821" start="32307" end="32320" title="Dave Heineman" label="Dave Heineman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270451" start="32348" end="32359" title="Jon Bruning" label="Jon Bruning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="32424" end="32442" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782901" start="34021" end="34038" title="Theresa Two Bulls" label="Theresa Two Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q319799" start="34184" end="34197" title="Russell Means" label="Russell Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="34234" end="34241" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="34328" end="34340" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q103867468" start="34494" end="34506" title="Bryan Brewer" label="Bryan Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103980318" start="35030" end="35059" title="Troy &amp;quot;Scott&amp;quot; Weston" label="Troy &amp;quot;Scott&amp;quot; Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="36010" end="36023" title="Felony" label="Felony crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="36236" end="36270" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257439" start="36517" end="36531" title="Public Law 280" label="Public Law 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q992401" start="36901" end="36913" title="Brulé" label="Brulé Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="36944" end="36950" title="Oglala Lakota" label="Oglala"/>
<link wikidata="Q267752" start="36973" end="36985" title="Spotted Tail" label="Spotted Tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813702" start="36994" end="37020" title="Rosebud Indian Reservation" label="Rosebud Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="37024" end="37034" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q262483" start="37117" end="37139" title="Deadwood, South Dakota" label="Deadwood, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="37206" end="37228" title="writ of habeas corpus" label="writs of habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="37245" end="37255" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="37413" end="37435" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738046" start="37606" end="37622" title="Major Crimes Act" label="Major Crimes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738046" start="37693" end="37709" title="Major Crimes Act" label="Major Crimes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144839" start="38092" end="38123" title="Iron Crow v. Oglala Sioux Tribe" label="Iron Crow v. Oglala Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440359" start="38135" end="38139" title="F.2d" label="F.2d"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="39039" end="39055" title="Indian territory" label="Indian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="39525" end="39531" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165392" start="39786" end="39805" title="restorative justice" label="restorative justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014394" start="40381" end="40390" title="Kahnawake" label="Kahnawake"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="40394" end="40400" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="40424" end="40436" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="40690" end="40704" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="40707" end="40717" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="40719" end="40729" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="40731" end="40741" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="40743" end="40755" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="40760" end="40768" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="40981" end="41002" title="Poverty in the United States" label="federal poverty level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370219" start="41104" end="41114" title="wood stove" label="wood stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="41252" end="41269" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="41381" end="41402" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="41472" end="41479" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="41620" end="41630" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521192" start="41643" end="41655" title="Gangs in the United States" label="gang culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020429" start="41860" end="41881" title="Indian Health Service" label="Indian Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="42190" end="42207" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="Covid-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="42308" end="42355" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford Center for Innovation in Global Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="43530" end="43549" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="43952" end="43983" title="Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder" label="Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="44202" end="44224" title="Fetal Alcohol Syndrome" label="fetal alcohol syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080082" start="44602" end="44623" title="Oglala Lakota College" label="Oglala Lakota College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="44645" end="44660" title="Tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="45047" end="45065" title="land-grant college" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q108049159" start="45090" end="45126" title="Oglala Lakota County School District" label="Oglala Lakota County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q108113172" start="45229" end="45252" title="Lakota Tech High School" label="Lakota Tech High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q108280691" start="45371" end="45406" title="Bennett County School District 03-1" label="Bennett County School District 03-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45444" end="45471" title="Kadoka School District 36-2" label="Kadoka School District 36-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45598" end="45629" title="Gordon-Rushville Public Schools" label="Gordon-Rushville Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998378" start="45632" end="45658" title="Bureau of Indian Education" label="Bureau of Indian Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q108113049" start="45707" end="45725" title="Crazy Horse School" label="Crazy Horse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q108113026" start="45736" end="45755" title="Little Wound School" label="Little Wound School"/>
<link wikidata="Q108113093" start="45764" end="45781" title="Pine Ridge School" label="Pine Ridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709779" start="46056" end="46079" title="Red Cloud Indian School" label="Red Cloud Indian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537" start="46279" end="46294" title="Lakota language" label="Lakota language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506432" start="48532" end="48547" title="LeRoy J. Louden" label="LeRoy J. Louden"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="48619" end="48626" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q955662" start="48641" end="48658" title="Chadron, Nebraska" label="Chadron, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="48930" end="48949" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="49813" end="49817" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="50117" end="50141" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020429" start="50162" end="50183" title="Indian Health Service" label="Indian Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165392" start="50442" end="50461" title="restorative justice" label="restorative justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="50712" end="50734" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330858" start="50762" end="50769" title="KILI" label="KILI-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787175" start="50773" end="50782" title="Porcupine, South Dakota" label="Porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="50915" end="50925" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803539" start="50926" end="50935" title="Tim Giago" label="Tim Giago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150076" start="50980" end="50992" title="Lakota Times" label="Lakota Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150076" start="51101" end="51121" title="Indian Country Today" label="Indian Country Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093670" start="51239" end="51252" title="Oneida Nation" label="Oneida Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324827" start="51576" end="51615" title="Native American Journalists Association" label="Native American Journalists Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51808" end="51828" title="Lakota Country Times" label="Lakota Country Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="52391" end="52406" title="industrial hemp" label="industrial hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q465027" start="52573" end="52593" title="American Horse" label="Chief American Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="53241" end="53249" title="Cannabis" label="Cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="53281" end="53285" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="53380" end="53398" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis as a drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="53475" end="53506" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717982" start="53673" end="53689" title="Alex White Plume" label="Alex White Plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055026" start="54049" end="54073" title="North Dakota Legislative Assembly" label="North Dakota legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113845" start="54706" end="54715" title="parfleche" label="parfleche"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="56082" end="56104" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="56159" end="56170" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241481" start="56282" end="56294" title="Bloody Knife" label="Bloody Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976010" start="56477" end="56488" title="Marcus Reno" label="Marcus Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="56576" end="56583" title="pow wow" label="pow wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="57316" end="57331" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="57604" end="57616" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883971" start="57796" end="57815" title="mixed grass prairie" label="mixed grass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="57900" end="57909" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="57979" end="57998" title="black-footed ferret" label="black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58048" end="58060" title="Conata Basin" label="Conata Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q247142" start="58084" end="58108" title="black-tailed prairie dog" label="black-tailed prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126786" start="58112" end="58123" title="White River (Missouri River)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="58127" end="58141" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="58171" end="58179" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="58184" end="58196" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q283534" start="58237" end="58249" title="Recreational fishing" label="sportfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="58722" end="58746" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q752003" start="58797" end="58826" title="Pole of inaccessibility" label="inland point in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524515" start="58879" end="58884" title="Allen, South Dakota" label="Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q484231" start="58922" end="58936" title="Bennett County, South Dakota" label="Bennett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495201" start="58941" end="58961" title="Oglala Lakota County, South Dakota" label="Oglala Lakota County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495620" start="59044" end="59058" title="Jackson County, South Dakota" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495969" start="59082" end="59107" title="Sheridan County, Nebraska" label="Sheridan County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="59133" end="59143" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883971" start="59165" end="59184" title="mixed grass prairie" label="mixed grass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="59258" end="59266" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="59358" end="59362" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182724" start="59365" end="59373" title="Blowout (geology)" label="blowouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887481" start="59384" end="59390" title="Sand sheet" label="sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q475080" start="59475" end="59486" title="fault scarp" label="fault scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401280" start="59674" end="59702" title="Sand Hills (Nebraska)" label="sandhills region of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="60228" end="60235" title="badland" label="badland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083697" start="60392" end="60415" title="Western Interior Seaway" label="Western Interior Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="60450" end="60462" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883971" start="60791" end="60810" title="mixed grass prairie" label="mixed grass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613" start="61681" end="61688" title="ecotone" label="ecotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="62098" end="62102" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q263706" start="62530" end="62539" title="swift fox" label="swift fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="62555" end="62574" title="black footed ferret" label="black footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q247142" start="62674" end="62698" title="black-tailed prairie dog" label="black-tailed prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="62886" end="62898" title="U.S. highway" label="U.S. highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452078" start="62964" end="62977" title="Orin, Wyoming" label="Orin, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="63002" end="63015" title="Interstate 25" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="63064" end="63084" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="63108" end="63118" title="Concurrency (road)" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933879" start="63171" end="63199" title="Mule Creek Junction, Wyoming" label="Mule Creek Junction, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="63232" end="63253" title="United States highway" label="United States highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="63352" end="63376" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139503" start="63383" end="63399" title="U.S. Highway 385" label="U.S. Highway 385"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123135" start="63435" end="63447" title="Pactola Lake" label="Pactola Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="63486" end="63497" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983995" start="63622" end="63666" title="Rapid City, Black Hills and Western Railroad" label="Rapid City, Black Hills and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="63906" end="63914" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368653" start="63931" end="63949" title="Merriman, Nebraska" label="Merriman, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392275" start="63972" end="63991" title="Nebraska Highway 61" label="Nebraska Highway 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788582" start="64157" end="64170" title="state highway" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q495201" start="64174" end="64194" title="Oglala Lakota County, South Dakota" label="Oglala Lakota County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393783" start="64212" end="64231" title="Nebraska Highway 87" label="Nebraska Highway 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633018" start="64289" end="64302" title="U.S. Route 18 (South Dakota)" label="U.S. Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086753" start="64316" end="64340" title="Pine Ridge, South Dakota" label="Pine Ridge, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395067" start="64346" end="64353" title="U.S. Route 20 (Nebraska)" label="U.S. 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q936177" start="64357" end="64376" title="Rushville, Nebraska" label="Rushville, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195323" start="64394" end="64412" title="Pine Ridge Airport" label="Pine Ridge Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836114" start="64750" end="64775" title="Chadron Municipal Airport" label="Chadron Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q955662" start="64792" end="64809" title="Chadron, Nebraska" label="Chadron, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876124" start="64861" end="64888" title="Rapid City Regional Airport" label="Rapid City Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="64974" end="65002" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="65006" end="65022" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q964386" start="65293" end="65302" title="Whiteclay, Nebraska" label="Whiteclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524515" start="65324" end="65329" title="Allen, South Dakota" label="Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494810" start="65331" end="65340" title="Batesland, South Dakota" label="Batesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028181" start="65342" end="65346" title="Kyle, South Dakota" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914242" start="65348" end="65375" title="Manderson-White Horse Creek, South Dakota" label="Manderson-White Horse Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889041" start="65377" end="65383" title="Oglala, South Dakota" label="Oglala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086753" start="65385" end="65395" title="Pine Ridge, South Dakota" label="Pine Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787175" start="65397" end="65406" title="Porcupine, South Dakota" label="Porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115394" start="65423" end="65430" title="Wanblee, South Dakota" label="Wanblee"/>
<link wikidata="Q509380" start="65432" end="65444" title="Wounded Knee, South Dakota" label="Wounded Knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q202285" start="65534" end="65546" title="Buffalo Bill" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q465027" start="65585" end="65599" title="American Horse" label="American Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="65634" end="65647" title="Oglala Lakota" label="Oglala Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778746" start="65665" end="65675" title="Sioux Wars" label="Sioux Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747828" start="65692" end="65711" title="Amos Bad Heart Bull" label="Amos Bad Heart Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811620" start="65743" end="65753" title="ledger art" label="ledger art"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560087" start="65780" end="65795" title="SuAnne Big Crow" label="SuAnne Big Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q61862936" start="65887" end="65921" title="William &amp;quot;Hawk&amp;quot; Birdshead" label="William &amp;quot;Hawk&amp;quot; Birdshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="65924" end="65930" title="Oglala" label="Oglala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520094" start="65932" end="65940" title="Hunkpapa" label="Hunkpapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="65942" end="65950" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="65952" end="65959" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q436655" start="66023" end="66032" title="Black Elk" label="Black Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56167036" start="66114" end="66129" title="Alice Blue Legs" label="Alice Blue Legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60287063" start="66165" end="66177" title="Regina Brave" label="Regina Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q543386" start="66182" end="66195" title="Oglala Lakota" label="Oglala Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="66232" end="66249" title="Crazy Horse" label="Chief Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q271975" start="66335" end="66357" title="83rd Infantry Division (United States)" label="83rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q115492487" start="66371" end="66388" title="Sarah Eagle Heart" label="Sarah Eagle Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="66390" end="66400" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943718" start="66442" end="66462" title="Cecilia Fire Thunder" label="Cecilia Fire Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803539" start="66526" end="66535" title="Tim Giago" label="Tim Giago"/>
<link wikidata="Q29877021" start="66625" end="66646" title="The Rider (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Rider&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193604" start="66656" end="66668" title="Kicking Bear" label="Kicking Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737293" start="66692" end="66702" title="Miniconjou" label="Miniconjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336234" start="66726" end="66742" title="Eddie Little Sky" label="Eddie Little Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652599" start="66753" end="66765" title="Little Wound" label="Little Wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="66862" end="66890" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778746" start="66899" end="66909" title="Sioux Wars" label="Sioux Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083649" start="66914" end="66929" title="Old Chief Smoke" label="Old Chief Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q312721" start="67002" end="67017" title="Red Cloud" label="Chief Red Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q45326592" start="67048" end="67063" title="Philip N. Hogen" label="Philip N. Hogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056673" start="67065" end="67120" title="United States Attorney for the District of South Dakota" label="United States Attorney for the District of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335146" start="67132" end="67140" title="Ed McGaa" label="Ed McGaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115526" start="67186" end="67205" title="Ola Mildred Rexroat" label="Ola Mildred Rexroat"/>
<link wikidata="Q353220" start="67241" end="67270" title="Women Airforce Service Pilots" label="Women Airforce Service Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="67273" end="67311" title="Billy Mills" label="William Mervin &amp;quot;Billy&amp;quot; Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="67371" end="67386" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="67397" end="67404" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="67405" end="67415" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628476" start="67474" end="67490" title="Athletics at the 1964 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 10000 metres" label="10,000 meter run"/>
<link wikidata="Q64541096" start="67499" end="67511" title="Sean Sherman" label="Sean Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809772" start="67553" end="67593" title="The Sioux Chef&amp;#x27;s Indigenous Kitchen" label="The Sioux Chef&amp;#x27;s Indigenous Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106512436" start="67602" end="67614" title="Teton Saltes" label="Teton Saltes"/>
<link wikidata="Q682632" start="67677" end="67694" title="Spotted Elk" label="Chief Spotted Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548384" start="67817" end="67833" title="Touch the Clouds" label="Touch the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204022" start="67850" end="67860" title="JoAnn Tall" label="JoAnn Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782901" start="67901" end="67918" title="Theresa Two Bulls" label="Theresa Two Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209850" start="68006" end="68020" title="Dick Wilson (tribal chairman)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202299" start="68100" end="68121" title="Wounded Knee Incident" label="Wounded Knee Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092436" start="68199" end="68224" title="They Even Fear His Horses" label="They Even Fear His Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274616" start="68532" end="68545" title="Chris Hedges" label="Hedges, Chris"/>
<link wikidata="Q335397" start="68550" end="68559" title="Joe Sacco" label="Joe Sacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="68775" end="68787" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476935" wikidata="Q62818" url="?curid=476935" title="Jenny-Wanda Barkmann">
<text>Jenny-Wanda Barkmann(30 May 1922 – 4 July 1946) was a German overseer in Nazi concentration camps during World War II. She was tried and executed for crimes against humanity after the war.

== Biography ==
Barkmann was born in 1922 and is believed to have spent her childhood in Hamburg. 

In 1944, she volunteered with the SS as an &quot;Aufseherin&quot;, a concentration camp overseer, in the Stutthof SK-III women&#x27;s subcamp in Poland, where she brutalized prisoners, sometimes to death. She also selected women and children for the gas chambers. She was so merciless that the women prisoners nicknamed her the Beautiful Spectre.

Barkmann fled Stutthof and hid out in Gdańsk, where she was arrested at a train station in May 1945 for her criminal wartime acts. In 1946, she became a defendant in the first Stutthof Trial, where she and other defendants were convicted for their crimes at the camp. After she was found guilty she declared, &quot;Life is indeed a pleasure, and pleasures are usually short.&quot;
Barkmann was publicly executed by short-drop hanging along with ten other defendants from the trial on Biskupia Górka Hill near Gdańsk on 4 July 1946. Former Stutthof prisoners volunteered to conduct the executions. She was 24 years old.

== See also ==
* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62818" start="0" end="20" title="Jenny-Wanda Barkmann" label="Jenny-Wanda Barkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="73" end="97" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="105" end="117" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="279" end="286" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="339" end="349" title="Aufseherin" label="Aufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="395" end="410" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof SK-III"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="435" end="441" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="504" end="512" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany#S" label="selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="540" end="551" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="676" end="682" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="814" end="828" title="Stutthof Trial" label="Stutthof Trial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1053" end="1071" title="Hanging#Short drop" label="short-drop hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="1122" end="1136" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="1275" end="1316" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476943" wikidata="Q1517778" url="?curid=476943" title="Synchronous Data Link Control">
<text>Synchronous Data Link Control (SDLC) is a computer serial communications protocol first introduced by IBM as part of its Systems Network Architecture (SNA). SDLC is used as layer 2, the data link layer, in the SNA protocol stack. It supports multipoint links as well as error correction. It also runs under the assumption that an SNA header is present after the SDLC header. SDLC was mainly used by IBM mainframe and midrange systems; however, implementations exist on many platforms from many vendors. In the United States and Canada, SDLC can be found in traffic control cabinets. SDLC was released in 1975, based on work done for IBM in the early 1970s. 

SDLC operates independently on each communications link in the network and can operate on point-to-point multipoint or loop facilities, on switched or dedicated, two-wire or four-wire circuits, and with full-duplex and half-duplex operation. A unique characteristic of SDLC is its ability to mix half-duplex secondary stations with full-duplex primary stations on four-wire circuits, thus reducing the cost of dedicated facilities.

This de facto standard has been adopted by ISO as High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC) in 1979 and by ANSI as Advanced Data Communication Control Procedures (ADCCP). The latter standards added features such as the Asynchronous Balanced Mode, frame sizes that did not need to be multiples of bit-octets, but also removed some of the procedures and messages (such as the TEST message).

Intel used SDLC as a base protocol for BITBUS, still popular in Europe as fieldbus and included support in several controllers (i8044/i8344, i80152). The 8044 controller is still in production by third-party vendors. Other vendors putting hardware support for SDLC (and the slightly different HDLC) into communication controller chips of the 1980s included Zilog, Motorola, and National Semiconductor. As a result, a wide variety of equipment in the 1980s used it and it was very common in the mainframe-centric corporate networks which were the norm in the 1980s. The most common alternatives for SNA with SDLC were probably DECnet with Digital Data Communications Message Protocol (DDCMP), Burroughs Network Architecture (BNA) with Burroughs Data Link Control (BDLC), and ARPANET with IMPs.

== Differences between SDLC and HDLC ==
HDLC is mostly an extension of SDLC, but some features were deleted or renamed.

=== HDLC features not in SDLC ===
Features present in HDLC, but not SDLC, are:
* frames not a multiple of 8 bits long are illegal in SDLC, but optionally legal in HDLC.
* HDLC optionally allows addresses more than 1 byte long.
* HDLC has an option for a 32-bit frame check sequence.
* asynchronous response mode, and the associated SARM and SARME U frames,
* asynchronous balanced mode, and the associated SABM and SABME U frames,
* and several other frame types created for HDLC:
** the selective reject (SREJ) S frame,
** the reset (RSET) command, and
** the nonreserved (NR0 through NR3) U frames.
Also not in SDLC are later HDLC extensions in ISO/IEC 13239 such as:
* 15- and 31-bit sequence numbers,
* the set mode (SM) U frame,
* 8-bit frame check sequence,
* a frame format field preceding the address,
* an information field in mode set U frames, and
* the &quot;unnumbered information with header check&quot; (UIH) U frame.
=== Naming differences ===
HDLC renamed some SDLC frames. The HDLC names were incorporated into later versions of SDLC:
=== HDLC extensions added to SDLC ===
Some features were added in HDLC, and subsequently added back to later versions of SDLC.
* Extended (modulo-128) sequence numbers and the corresponding SNRME U frame, were added to SDLC after the publication of the HDLC standard.

=== SDLC features not in HDLC ===
Two U frames in SDLC which do not exist in HDLC are:
* BCN (Beacon): When a secondary loses carrier (stops receiving any signal) from the primary, it begins transmitting a stream of &quot;beacon&quot; responses, identifying the location of the communication failure. This is particularly useful in SDLC loop mode.
* CFGR (Configure for test) command and response: The CFGR command contains a 1-byte payload which identifies some special diagnostic operation to be performed by the secondary. The least significant bit indicates that the diagnostic mode should start (1) or stop (0). A payload byte of 0 stops all diagnostic modes. The secondary echoes the byte in its response.
** 0: Stop all diagnostic modes.
** 2 (off)/3 (on): Beacon test. Disable all output, causing the next recipient to lose carrier (and begin beaconing).
** 4 (off)/5 (on): Monitor mode. Disable all frame generation, becoming silent, but do not stop carrier or loop mode operation.
** 8 (off)/9 (on): Wrap mode. Enter local loopback, connecting the secondary&#x27;s input to its own output for the duration of the test.
** 10 (off)/11 (on): Self-test. Perform local diagnostics. CFGR response is delayed until the diagnostics complete, at which time the response is 10 (self-test failed) or 11 (self-test successful).
** 12 (off)/13 (on): Modified link test. Rather than echoing TEST commands verbatim, generate a TEST response consisting of a number of copies of the first byte of the TEST command.
Several U frames are almost entirely unused in HDLC, existing primarily for SDLC compatibility:
* Initialization mode, and the associated RIM and SIM U frames, are so vaguely defined in HDLC as to be useless, but are used by some peripherals in SDLC.
* Unnumbered poll (UP) is almost never used in HDLC, its function having been superseded by asynchronous response mode. UP is an exception to the usual rule in normal response mode that a secondary must receive the poll flag before transmitting; while a secondary &quot;must&quot; respond to any frame with the poll bit set, it &quot;may&quot; respond to a UP frame with the poll bit clear if it has data to transmit. If the lower-level communication channel is capable of avoiding collisions (as it is in loop mode), UP &quot;to the broadcast address&quot; allows multiple secondaries to respond without having to poll them individually.
The TEST U frame was not included in early HDLC standards, but was added later.

==== Loop mode ====
A special mode of SDLC operation which is supported by e.g. the Zilog SCC but was not incorporated into HDLC is SDLC loop mode. In this mode, a primary and a number of secondaries are connected in a unidirectional ring network, with each one&#x27;s output connected to the next&#x27;s input. Each secondary is responsible for copying all frames which arrive at its input so that they reach the rest of the ring and eventually return to the primary. Except for this copying, a secondary operates in half-duplex mode; it only transmits when the protocol guarantees it will receive no input.

When a secondary is powered off, a relay connects its input directly to its output. When powering on, a secondary waits for an opportune moment and then goes &quot;on-loop&quot; inserting itself into the data stream with a one-bit delay. A similar opportunity is used to go &quot;off-loop&quot; as part of a clean shutdown.

In SDLC loop mode, frames arrive in a group, ending (after the final flag) with an all-ones idle signal. The first seven 1-bits of this (the pattern 01111111) constitute a &quot;go-ahead&quot; sequence (also called EOP, end of poll) giving a secondary permission to transmit. A secondary which wishes to transmit uses its 1-bit delay to convert the final 1 bit in this sequence to a 0 bit, making it a flag character, and then transmits its own frames. After its own final flag, it transmits an all-ones idle signal, which will serve as a go-ahead for the next station on the loop.

The group starts with commands from the primary, and each secondary appends its responses. When the primary receives the go-ahead idle sequence, it knows that the secondaries are finished and it may transmit more commands.

The beacon (BCN) response is designed to help locate breaks in the loop. A secondary which does not see any incoming traffic for a long time begins sending &quot;beacon&quot; response frames, telling the primary that the link between that secondary and its predecessor is broken.

Because the primary also receives a copy of the commands it sent, which are indistinguishable from responses, it appends a special &quot;turnaround&quot; frame at the end of its commands to separate them from the responses. Any unique sequence which will not be interpreted by the secondaries will do, but the conventional one is a single all-zero byte. This is a &quot;runt frame&quot; with an address of 0 (reserved, unused) and no control field or frame check sequence. (Secondaries capable of full-duplex operation also interpret this as a &quot;shut-off sequence&quot;, forcing them to abort transmission.)

== Notes ==
==References==
*
*
*

== External links ==
*Cisco page on Synchronous Data Link Control and Derivatives
*Bitbus/fieldbus community site.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1517778" start="0" end="29" title="Synchronous Data Link Control" label="Synchronous Data Link Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517778" start="31" end="35" title="Synchronous Data Link Control" label="SDLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="42" end="50" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="51" end="57" title="serial communication" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="58" end="81" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="102" end="105" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503167" start="121" end="149" title="Systems Network Architecture" label="Systems Network Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q194134" start="186" end="201" title="data link layer" label="data link layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757693" start="214" end="228" title="protocol stack" label="protocol stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="633" end="636" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="749" end="763" title="point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554265" start="764" end="774" title="Point-to-multipoint communication (telecommunications)" label="multipoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422221" start="778" end="782" title="Current loop" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858791" start="821" end="829" title="Two-wire circuit" label="two-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474968" start="833" end="842" title="Four-wire circuit" label="four-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="862" end="873" title="full-duplex" label="full-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="878" end="889" title="half-duplex" label="half-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1097" end="1105" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="1135" end="1138" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q847021" start="1142" end="1170" title="High-Level Data Link Control" label="High-Level Data Link Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="1193" end="1197" title="ANSI" label="ANSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686173" start="1201" end="1247" title="Advanced Data Communication Control Procedures" label="Advanced Data Communication Control Procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q847021" start="1305" end="1331" title="Asynchronous Balanced Mode" label="Asynchronous Balanced Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="1476" end="1481" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141640" start="1515" end="1521" title="BITBUS" label="BITBUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141640" start="1550" end="1558" title="fieldbus" label="fieldbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203262" start="1833" end="1838" title="Zilog" label="Zilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="1840" end="1848" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q432492" start="1854" end="1876" title="National Semiconductor" label="National Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152931" start="2102" end="2108" title="DECnet" label="DECnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q638006" start="2114" end="2158" title="Digital Data Communications Message Protocol" label="Digital Data Communications Message Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="2250" end="2257" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="2263" end="2267" title="Interface Message Processors" label="IMPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071926" start="6277" end="6286" title="Zilog SCC" label="Zilog SCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q719775" start="6427" end="6439" title="ring network" label="ring network"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="6838" end="6843" title="relay" label="relay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476945" wikidata="Q134385" url="?curid=476945" title="Fugu">
<text>The fugu (; ; ) in Japanese, bogeo (; -魚) or bok () in Korean, and hétún () in Standard Modern Chinese is a pufferfish, normally of the genus &quot;Takifugu&quot;, &quot;Lagocephalus&quot;, or &quot;Sphoeroides&quot;, or a porcupinefish of the genus &quot;Diodon&quot;, or a dish prepared from these fish.

Fugu possesses a potentially fatal poison known as tetrodotoxin, therefore necessitating meticulous preparation to eliminate poisonous components and prevent the fish meat from being contaminated.

The restaurant preparation of fugu is strictly controlled by law in Japan, Korea and several other countries, and only chefs who have qualified after three or more years of rigorous training are allowed to prepare the fish. Domestic preparation occasionally leads to accidental death.

Throughout Japan, fugu is served as sashimi and nabemono. The liver was served as a traditional dish named &quot;fugu-kimo&quot;, being widely thought to be a tasty part, but it is also the most poisonous, and serving this organ in restaurants was banned in Japan in 1984. 

In the gastronomic domains of East Asian cuisine, fugu has emerged as a highly renowned delicacy, garnering widespread acclaim in establishing itself as one of the most celebrated dishes in Japanese and Korean cuisine. Fugu has also been gradually emerging as a prized seafood delicacy in the Chinese culinary landscape as well.

== Diversity ==

There are close to 200 species in the family Tetraodontidae (pufferfish), a family of primarily marine and estuarine fish of the order Tetraodontiformes. However, only some of them are eaten and traded as &quot;fugu&quot;.

==Toxicity==
Fugu contains lethal amounts of the poison tetrodotoxin in its organs, especially the liver, ovaries, eyes, and skin. The poison, a sodium channel blocker, paralyzes the muscles while the victim stays fully conscious; the poisoned victim is unable to breathe and eventually dies from asphyxiation. There is no known antidote for fugu poison. The standard treatment is to support the respiratory and circulatory systems until the poison is metabolized and excreted by the victim&#x27;s body.

Researchers have determined that a fugu&#x27;s tetrodotoxin comes from eating other animals infested with tetrodotoxin-laden bacteria, to which the fish develops insensitivity over time. Whether tetrodotoxin is sequestered from or produced by symbiotic bacteria is still debated. As such, efforts have been made in research and aquaculture to allow farmers to produce safe fugu. Farmers now produce poison-free fugu by keeping the fish away from the bacteria – see below.

===Tetrodotoxin===

Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a natural product that has been isolated not only from pufferfish, but also octopuses, crabs, shellfish, frogs, newts, and other aquatic animals (see below). It is a potent neurotoxin that shuts down electrical signaling in nerves; it acts via interaction with components of the sodium channels in the cell membranes of those cells. Its ability to cross the blood–brain barrier is uncertain. In the case of the pufferfish host, at least (see below), their insusceptibility to the poison is thought to result from cysteine asperagine amino acid substitutions in the sequence of their specific types of sodium channel proteins.

TTX is not produced by pufferfish and the other aquatic animals from which it has been isolated. Rather, bacteria such as &quot;Alteromonas&quot;, &quot;Shewanella&quot;, and &quot;Vibrio&quot; species infect or cohabit with the animal species from which TTX is isolated, and a bacterial biosynthetic pathway for its production has been rationalized.

In animal studies with mice, the median lethal dose of TTX was found to be 232 μg per kg body weight. Tetrodotoxin levels are affected by preparation (removal of most toxic materials, treatments such as curing and pickling, see below); it is, however, reportedly not significantly affected by cooking.

Despite its toxicity, TTX has clinical therapeutic applications, being evaluated in phase II and III clinical trials to be effective for treating cancer-related pain without increasing serious adverse events.

==Consumption==

===History===
The inhabitants of Japan have eaten fugu for centuries. Fugu bones have been found in several shell middens, called &quot;kaizuka&quot;, from the Jōmon period that date back more than 2,300 years. The Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1868) prohibited the consumption of fugu in Edo and its area of influence. It became common again as the power of the Shōgunate weakened. In western regions of Japan, where the government&#x27;s influence was weaker and fugu was easier to obtain, various cooking methods were developed to safely eat them. During the Meiji Era (1867–1912), fugu was again banned in many areas. According to one fugu chef in Tokyo, the Emperor of Japan has never eaten fugu due to an unspecified &quot;centuries old ban&quot;.

In China, the use of the pufferfish for culinary purposes was already well-established by the Song dynasty as one of the &quot;three delicacies of the Yangtze&quot; (), alongside saury and Reeve&#x27;s shad, and appears in the writings of the polymath Shen Kuo as well as in the encyclopedic work &quot;Taiping Guangji&quot;. The scholar-statesman Su Shi famously remarked that the taste is worthy of death ().

In 1774 James Cook during his second voyage, together with Johann Reinhold Forster and Georg Forster, ate some liver of a fish bartered from a native of an island in New Caledonia, likely a pufferfish. All three suffered symptoms of poisoning but survived.

===Species===
The &quot;torafugu&quot;, or tiger pufferfish (&quot;Takifugu rubripes&quot;), is the most prestigious edible species and the most poisonous. Other species are also eaten; for example, &quot;Higanfugu&quot; (&quot;T. pardalis&quot;), &quot;Shōsaifugu&quot; (&quot;T. vermicularis&quot; syn. &quot;snyderi&quot;), and &quot;Mafugu&quot; (&quot;T. porphyreus&quot;). The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan provides a list that shows which species&#x27; body parts can be consumed. The list names safe genera including pufferfish of the &quot;Lagocephalus&quot; and &quot;Sphoeroides&quot; genera and the related porcupinefish (&quot;Harisenbon&quot;) of the family &quot;Diodontidae&quot;.

===Regulations===
Strict fishing regulations are now in place to protect fugu populations from depletion. Most fugu is now harvested in the spring during the spawning season and then farmed in floating cages in the Pacific Ocean. The largest wholesale fugu market in Japan is in Shimonoseki.

Fugu prices rise in autumn and peak in winter, the best season, because they fatten to survive the cold. Live fish arrive at a restaurant, surviving in a large tank, usually prominently displayed. Prepared fugu is also often available in grocery stores, which must display official license documents. Whole fish may not be sold to the general public.

Since 1958, fugu chefs must earn a license to prepare and sell fugu to the public. This involves a two- or three-year apprenticeship. The licensing examination process consists of a written test, a fish-identification test, and a practical test, preparing and eating the fish. Only about 35 percent of the applicants pass. Small miscalculations result in failure or, in rare cases, death. Consumers believe that this training process makes it safer to eat fugu in restaurants or markets. Non-poisonous fugu can be produced by keeping the fish away from the bacteria that makes them poisonous.

Since October 2012, restaurants in Japan have been permitted to sell fugu that has been prepared and packaged by a licensed practitioner elsewhere.

China began issuing trial permits for serving fugu to restaurants in 2003. In 2016, the Chinese government abolished the permit system and allowed all restaurants to buy and serve farmed fish (without organs), now widely available. By 2019, such restaurants have become commonplace. China also allowed ordinary households to buy processed (organ-removed) whole fish online starting in 2017.

The Saga Prefecture in Japan has petitioned the Food Safety Commission of Japan three times to reconsider its ban on fugu liver, stating that its farmed fugu is non-toxic. The FSCJ has rejected the proposals thrice due to &quot;data insufficient to prove safety&quot;. NYT reported in 2008 that there is a well-known underground &quot;fugu-kimo&quot; scene in another Japanese town, Usuki, Ōita.

===Cost===
In the case of torafugu, the most common fugu, the cost is between JP¥1000–JP¥4000 (US$7–29) per kilogram, depending on the season and quality, as of 2022. The expense encourages chefs to slice the fish very carefully to obtain the largest possible amount of meat. A special knife, called &quot;fugu hiki&quot;, is usually stored separately from other knives.

In China, packaged farmed fugu cost CN¥330 (US$50) per kilogram .

===Treatment===

The symptoms of tetrodotoxin poisoning include dizziness, exhaustion, headache, nausea, or difficulty breathing. The person remains conscious but cannot speak or move. In high doses, breathing stops and asphyxiation follows.

There is no known antidote, and treatment consists of emptying the stomach, administering activated charcoal to bind the toxin, and putting the person on life support until the poison has worn off. Toxicologists have been working on developing an antidote for tetrodotoxin.

===Incidents===
Between 1996 and 2006, statistics from the Tokyo Bureau of Social Welfare and Public Health indicate 20–44 annual incidents of &quot;fugu&quot; poisoning in Japan, some affecting multiple diners. Annually, 34–64 people were hospitalized and 0–6 died, with an average fatality rate of 6.8%. Of the 23 incidents reported in Tokyo from 1993 through 2006, only one took place in a restaurant; all others involved people catching and eating the fish. Poisonings through amateur preparation can result from confusion between types of puffer, as well as improper methods. Some may also represent deliberate suicide attempts; Engelbert Kaempfer, a German physician who resided in Japan in the 1690s, reported that an unusually toxic variety of puffer was sometimes sought out by individuals who wished to take their own lives.

Much higher figures were reported in earlier years, peaking in 1958 when 176 people died from eating fugu in a single year. According to the Fugu Research Institute, 50% of the victims were poisoned by eating the liver, 43% from eating the ovaries, and 7% from eating the skin. One of the most famous victims was the Kabuki actor and &quot;Living National Treasure&quot; Bandō Mitsugorō VIII, who in 1975 died after eating four servings of &quot;fugu kimo&quot; (fugu liver), the sale of which was prohibited by local ordinances at the time. Bandō claimed to be able to resist the poison, but died several hours after returning to his hotel.

On August 23, 2007, a doctor in Thailand reported that unscrupulous fish sellers sold puffer meat disguised as salmon, which caused fifteen deaths over three years. About 115 people were taken to different hospitals. Fugu had been banned in Thailand five years prior to the deaths.

In March 2008, a fisherman in the Philippines died and members of his family became ill from pufferfish. The previous year, four people in the same town died and five others had fallen ill after eating the same variety of pufferfish.

In February 2009, a Malaysian fisherman died and four others were hospitalised after they consumed a meal of pufferfish when they ran out of food while at sea.

In November 2011, a chef at two-Michelin star &quot;Fugu Fukuji&quot; in Tokyo was suspended from his post. The chef served fugu liver to a customer who, despite being warned of the risks, specifically asked that it be provided. The 35-year-old customer subsequently required hospital treatment for mild symptoms of tetrodotoxin paralysis, but made a full recovery.

Five men were poisoned at a restaurant in Wakayama in March 2015 after specifically asking for liver.

In December 2020, 3 people in the Philippines died, while 4 more were hospitalized after eating pufferfish.

In March 2023, an elderly woman and her husband in Malaysia died after consuming pufferfish purchased from a fishmonger.

In January 2024, a Brazilian man, 46, died after eating pufferfish gifted to him by a friend.

==Preparations==
=== China ===
 fugu is still considered a delicacy and served across restaurants in Beijing. Within the Chinese culinary sphere, fugu is generally prepared as a soup or braised whole. 

=== Japan ===
* Sashimi — The most popular dish is fugu sashimi, also called &quot;Fugu sashi&quot; or &quot;tessa&quot;. Knives with exceptionally thin blades are used for cutting fugu into translucent slices, a technique known as .
* Milt — The soft roe (&quot;Shirako&quot;) of the blowfish is a highly prized food item in Japan, and it is often found in department stores. Along with cod milt, it is one of the most popular kinds of soft roe, and it is often grilled and served with salt.
* Fried — Fugu can be eaten deep fried as &quot;Fugu Kara-age&quot;.
* Smoked — Fugu-fin sake. Sake infused with the smoked fin of the blowfish (fugu) to give a distinctive smoky, fishy flavour known as &quot;Hire-zake&quot;.
* Stew — Vegetables and fugu can be simmered as &quot;Fugu-chiri&quot;, also called &quot;tetchiri&quot;, in which case the fish&#x27;s very light taste is hard to distinguish from the vegetables and the broth.
* Salad — If the spikes in the skin are pulled out, the skin can be eaten as part of a salad called &quot;yubiki.&quot;

In the cuisine of Hakusan, Ishikawa, ovaries are served after reducing the toxin level by salting and pickling for three years, in a dish named &quot;blowfish ovaries pickled in rice-bran paste&quot; . The dish is only made in specific regions of Ishikawa Prefecture (Mikawa district, Ono district, Kanaiwa district, and Wajima), and only the traditional method is permitted. Non-professionals are warned against attempting the process. After one year of pickling, about 10% of the toxin is suggested to remain, and after the full three years the product is &quot;only sold after having been checked for safety through a toxicity inspection, and other tests.&quot;

=== Korea ===
In Korean cuisine, edible pufferfish are prepared in various ways including &quot;gui&quot; (grilling), &quot;jorim&quot; (simmering), &quot;jjim&quot;, &quot;Bulgogi&quot;, Hoe&quot; (raw fish) and &quot;guk&quot; (soup).

==Availability==
===East Asia===
Despite the comparatively lower consumption rate of the fish in comparison to other East Asian nations, the prevalence of fugu restaurants has experienced a significant surge across Chinese urban areas since 2016. The fish is only sold in a processed form (without organs) with a test certificate from the fishery. In 2023, processed raw farmed fugu across China is sold to ordinary customers online.

Most Japanese cities have one or more fugu restaurants, perhaps in clusters because of earlier restrictions, as proximity made it easier when transporting the seafood delicacy so as to preserve its long-term freshness upon being served to potential patrons. A famous restaurant specializing in fugu is &quot;Takefuku&quot;, in the upscale Ginza district in Tokyo with &quot;Zuboraya&quot; being another popular restaurant chain in Osaka that both offer the celebrated seafood delicacy. The fugu is cleaned of its most toxic parts in Japan and freeze-flown to the United States under license in clearly customized plastic containers. Fugu chefs who cook in American restaurants are trained under the same rigorous and stringent specifications as in Japan. Pufferfish native to American waters, particularly the genus &quot;Spheroides&quot;, have also been consumed as a seafood delicacy, sometimes resulting in poisoning incidents.

In South Korea, fugu is known as &quot;bok-eo&quot; (복어), the seafood delicacy is very popular in southern port cities such as Busan and Changwon. It is prepared in a number of ways resulting in a variety of dishes ranging from soups, raw fish and salads, all of which command a high price. Fugu &quot;Bulgogi&quot; and &quot;Jorim&quot; are popular in Daegu.

===Europe===
Sale of fish belonging to this family (Tetraodontidae) is forbidden altogether in the European Union. In Switzerland, the importation of fugu is legal, but only as long as it is purchased exclusively for private consumption.

=== North America ===
==== United States ====
Fugu chefs who cook in American restaurants are trained under the same rigorous and stringent specifications as in Japan. Pufferfish native to American waters, particularly the genus &quot;Spheroides&quot;, have also been consumed as a seafood delicacy, sometimes resulting in poisoning incidents. Japanese restaurateur Nobuyoshi Kuraoka waged a five-year legal battle with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to allow the exclusive import of the Japanese Tiger puffer into his Manhattan restaurant, with the license finally being granted to him in 1989. By 2003, only seventeen restaurants in the United States were licensed to serve fugu; fourteen in New York State, twelve of which are in New York City.

==Social aspects==

In the Kansai region of Japan, the slang word &quot;teppō&quot;, () meaning musket, rifle or gun, is used for the fish. This is a play of words on the verb &quot;ataru&quot; (), which can mean to be poisoned or shot. In Shimonoseki region, the ancient pronunciation &quot;fuku&quot; is more common instead of the modern &quot;fugu&quot;. The former is also a homonym for &quot;good fortune&quot; whereas the latter is one for &quot;disabled.&quot; The Tsukiji fish market fugu association holds a service each year at the height of the fugu season, releasing hundreds of caught fugu into the Sumida River. A similar ceremony is also held at another large market in Shimonoseki.

A &quot;rakugo&quot;, or humorous short story, tells of three men who prepared a fugu stew but were unsure whether it was safe to eat. To test the stew, they gave some to a beggar. When it did not seem to do him any harm, they ate the stew. Later, they met the beggar again and were delighted to see that he was still in good health. After that encounter, the beggar, who had hidden the stew instead of eating it, knew that it was safe and he could eat it. The three men had been fooled by the wise beggar.

Lanterns can be made from the bodies of preserved fugu. These are occasionally seen outside of fugu restaurants, as children&#x27;s toys, as folk art, or as souvenirs. Fugu skin is also made into everyday objects like wallets or waterproof boxes.

==Aquaculture==
Scientists at Nagasaki University have succeeded in culturing non-toxic torafugu by restricting the fish&#x27;s diet. The experiment included raising over 5,000 fish between the years 2001–2004, and analyzing the toxicity of muscle, skin, gonads, livers, and other organs. The team concluded that the amount of tetrodotoxin in all those parts was non-toxic, and it would allow for the safe preparation of &quot;fugu-kimo&quot; (puffer liver). Usuki, a town in Ōita Prefecture, has become known for selling non-poisonous fugu by 2008.

Blowfish, specifically the obscure pufferfish and the torafugu, has been farmed in China since 1993 under the state-owned Tianzheng company. , most such fish is exported to Japan and South Korea, with a small domestic luxury market that has been operating under license since 2003.

== See also ==
*Cuisine of China
*Cuisine of Japan
*Cuisine of Korea
*Delicacy
*Fugu Plan
*&quot;One Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Blue Fish&quot;
*Shanghai Fugu Agreement

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
*Sueyoshi´, Sueyoshi&#x27;s pages on fishes. Retrieved Sep 11, 2004
* 


== External links ==
* Personal Account of surviving a fugu poisoning
* BBC article with video of fugu preparation
* Fugu eaten from the Red Sea, with no poisoning at all
* &quot;A Delicacy to Die For&quot; at National Geographic Magazine
*Saveur Magazine video of Manhattan&#x27;s Restaurant Nippon&#x27;s Fugu dishes. 
*Subtitled documentary on Nobuyoshi Kuraoka&#x27;s 5-year battle with the FDA to serve Fugu at his Manhattan restaurant.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134385" start="4" end="8" title="Fugu" label="fugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="19" end="27" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="55" end="61" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="79" end="102" title="Standard Modern Chinese" label="Standard Modern Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="108" end="118" title="tetraodontidae" label="pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q387587" start="148" end="156" title="Takifugu" label="Takifugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q959135" start="170" end="182" title="Lagocephalus" label="Lagocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944587" start="199" end="210" title="Sphoeroides" label="Sphoeroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q329334" start="223" end="236" title="porcupinefish" label="porcupinefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809104" start="256" end="262" title="Diodon" label="Diodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379842" start="358" end="370" title="tetrodotoxin" label="tetrodotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="573" end="578" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="580" end="585" title="South Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="827" end="834" title="sashimi" label="sashimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962004" start="839" end="847" title="nabemono" label="nabemono"/>
<link wikidata="Q211837" start="1548" end="1565" title="Tetraodontiformes" label="Tetraodontiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q379842" start="1693" end="1705" title="tetrodotoxin" label="tetrodotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="1736" end="1741" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="1743" end="1750" title="ovary" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553303" start="1782" end="1804" title="sodium channel blocker" label="sodium channel blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="1806" end="1815" title="paralysis" label="paralyzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="1934" end="1942" title="asphyxia" label="asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="2021" end="2028" title="Symptomatic treatment" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="2033" end="2044" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="2049" end="2067" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="2089" end="2100" title="metabolized" label="metabolized"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2267" end="2275" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878491" start="2385" end="2403" title="symbiotic bacteria" label="symbiotic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q379842" start="2635" end="2647" title="Tetrodotoxin" label="Tetrodotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901227" start="2659" end="2674" title="natural product" label="natural product"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="2830" end="2840" title="neurotoxin" label="neurotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="2857" end="2877" title="action potential" label="electrical signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="2881" end="2886" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="2936" end="2950" title="ion channel" label="sodium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="2959" end="2972" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="3015" end="3034" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="3389" end="3397" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762368" start="3412" end="3423" title="Alteromonas" label="Alteromonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243676" start="3437" end="3447" title="Shewanella" label="Shewanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q753490" start="3465" end="3471" title="Vibrio" label="Vibrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="3669" end="3687" title="median lethal dose" label="median lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="4040" end="4055" title="Clinical trial" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="4274" end="4286" title="shell midden" label="shell midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="4326" end="4338" title="Jōmon period" label="Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="4381" end="4399" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="4450" end="4453" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="4524" end="4530" title="Shōgun" label="Shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="4723" end="4732" title="Meiji Era" label="Meiji Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="4824" end="4840" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="5010" end="5022" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347237" start="5095" end="5100" title="saury" label="saury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453475" start="5105" end="5122" title="Tenualosa" label="Reeve&amp;#x27;s shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="5168" end="5176" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184316" start="5219" end="5234" title="Taiping Guangji" label="Taiping Guangji"/>
<link wikidata="Q36020" start="5264" end="5270" title="Su Shi" label="Su Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="5336" end="5346" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881842" start="5354" end="5371" title="Second voyage of James Cook" label="his second voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q213570" start="5387" end="5410" title="Johann Reinhold Forster" label="Johann Reinhold Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q58062" start="5415" end="5428" title="Georg Forster" label="Georg Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="5494" end="5507" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065355" start="5653" end="5670" title="Takifugu rubripes" label="Takifugu rubripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191238" start="5969" end="6016" title="Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Japan)" label="Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6112" end="6118" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="6129" end="6139" title="pufferfish" label="pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q959135" start="6153" end="6165" title="Lagocephalus" label="Lagocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944587" start="6182" end="6193" title="Sphoeroides" label="Sphoeroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q329334" start="6223" end="6236" title="porcupinefish" label="porcupinefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747027" start="6460" end="6468" title="spawn (biology)" label="spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="6517" end="6530" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="6581" end="6592" title="Shimonoseki" label="Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q160420" start="8086" end="8101" title="Saga Prefecture" label="Saga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q845792" start="8465" end="8476" title="Usuki, Ōita" label="Usuki, Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065355" start="8505" end="8513" title="torafugu" label="torafugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q649317" start="8785" end="8794" title="Tako hiki" label="fugu hiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="9138" end="9150" title="asphyxiation" label="asphyxiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="9179" end="9187" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957662" start="9251" end="9269" title="Activated charcoal (medication)" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624498" start="9315" end="9327" title="life support" label="life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="9359" end="9372" title="toxicology" label="Toxicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q58042" start="10070" end="10088" title="Engelbert Kaempfer" label="Engelbert Kaempfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10413" end="10436" title="Fugu Research Institute" label="Fugu Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="10589" end="10595" title="Kabuki" label="Kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137360" start="10612" end="10636" title="Living National Treasure (Japan)" label="Living National Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854801" start="10643" end="10663" title="Bandō Mitsugorō VIII" label="Bandō Mitsugorō VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="11626" end="11639" title="Michelin star" label="Michelin star"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314" start="12003" end="12011" title="Wakayama Prefecture" label="Wakayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="12491" end="12498" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="12576" end="12583" title="braised" label="braised"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="12649" end="12656" title="sashimi" label="sashimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271982" start="12829" end="12833" title="Milt" label="Milt"/>
<link wikidata="Q219426" start="12845" end="12848" title="roe" label="roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="13114" end="13124" title="deep fried" label="deep fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="13175" end="13179" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q696407" start="13662" end="13679" title="Hakusan, Ishikawa" label="Hakusan, Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29560" start="13734" end="13741" title="Salting (food)" label="salting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="13746" end="13754" title="pickling" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135539" start="13811" end="13837" title="Nukazuke" label="pickled in rice-bran paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q131281" start="13891" end="13910" title="Ishikawa Prefecture" label="Ishikawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845728" start="13912" end="13927" title="Mikawa, Ishikawa" label="Mikawa district"/>
<link wikidata="Q823896" start="13965" end="13971" title="Wajima, Ishikawa" label="Wajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="14327" end="14341" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="14350" end="14360" title="Tetraodontidae" label="pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615325" start="14406" end="14409" title="gui (food)" label="gui"/>
<link wikidata="Q909700" start="14434" end="14439" title="jorim" label="jorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10817668" start="14465" end="14469" title="jjim" label="jjim"/>
<link wikidata="Q683682" start="14483" end="14490" title="Bulgogi" label="Bulgogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q701767" start="14498" end="14501" title="Hoe (food)" label="Hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q909643" start="14529" end="14532" title="guk (food)" label="guk"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="15322" end="15327" title="Ginza" label="Ginza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="15340" end="15345" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="15414" end="15419" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="15918" end="15929" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="16042" end="16047" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243327" start="16052" end="16060" title="Changwon" label="Changwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q683682" start="16217" end="16224" title="Bulgogi" label="Bulgogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q909700" start="16241" end="16246" title="Jorim" label="Jorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="16268" end="16273" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16375" end="16389" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="16394" end="16405" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="17216" end="17230" title="New York (state)" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17255" end="17268" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="17298" end="17304" title="Kansai" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="17375" end="17380" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="17384" end="17387" title="gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="17511" end="17522" title="Shimonoseki" label="Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q160843" start="17650" end="17657" title="homonym" label="homonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q859471" start="17743" end="17762" title="Tsukiji fish market" label="Tsukiji fish market"/>
<link wikidata="Q222149" start="17883" end="17895" title="Sumida River" label="Sumida River"/>
<link wikidata="Q877342" start="17978" end="17984" title="rakugo" label="rakugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="18478" end="18485" title="Lantern" label="Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q114892" start="18756" end="18775" title="Nagasaki University" label="Nagasaki University"/>
<link wikidata="Q845792" start="19185" end="19190" title="Usuki, Ōita" label="Usuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="19202" end="19217" title="Ōita Prefecture" label="Ōita Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049891" start="19304" end="19322" title="obscure pufferfish" label="obscure pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="19576" end="19592" title="Cuisine of China" label="Cuisine of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="19594" end="19610" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Cuisine of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="19612" end="19628" title="Cuisine of Korea" label="Cuisine of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312129" start="19630" end="19638" title="Delicacy" label="Delicacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q700633" start="19640" end="19649" title="Fugu Plan" label="Fugu Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986552" start="19657" end="19696" title="One Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Blue Fish" label="One Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Blue Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q882209" start="19704" end="19727" title="Shanghai Fugu Agreement" label="Shanghai Fugu Agreement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476954" wikidata="Q70711" url="?curid=476954" title="Margot Dreschel">
<text>Margot Elisabeth Dreschel, also spelled Drechsel, Drechsler or Drexler (17 May 1908 – 28 May 1945), was an SS-Aufseherin (concentration camp guard) at Nazi concentration camps during World War II. For her role in the Holocaust, she was sentenced to death and hanged.

== Ravensbrück concentration camp ==
Before her enlistment into the SS-Aufseherinnen, she worked at an office in Berlin. On 31 January 1941, Dreschel arrived at Ravensbrück concentration camp to receive guard training. She initially held the position &quot;Aufseherin&quot; at Ravensbrück, the basic role of a female guard, and was in charge of interned women. She trained under &quot;Oberaufseherin&quot; (Senior Overseer) Johanna Langefeld in 1941, and quickly became an &quot;SS-Rapportführerin&quot; (Report Overseer), a more senior guard.

==Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp==
On 27 April 1942, Dreschel was selected for transfer to the newly opened Auschwitz II – Birkenau concentration camp in occupied Poland. Dreschel began her duties at Birkenau in August 1942 as soon as the women&#x27;s camp was established there, with women transferred from Auschwitz to Birkenau during expansion. She served under Maria Mandl and worked as an associate of Josef Mengele.

Dreschel was head of all camp offices in Auschwitz. Her appearance was reportedly repellent, as one female Auschwitz prisoner recounted: &quot;camp leader Dreschel was there, her buck teeth sticking out, even when her mouth is closed.&quot; Inmates described her as vulgar, thin and ugly. After the war, many survivors testified of her notoriously brutal beatings. She carried out indoor selections wearing a white coat and white gloves, disguised as a doctor.

Dreschel regularly moved between the Auschwitz I camp and Birkenau, and involved herself in selections of women and children to be either exploited as slave labor, or murdered in the gas chambers. On 1 November 1944, she went to Flossenbürg concentration camp as an &quot;Oberaufseherin&quot; and as a trainer of enlisted overseers. In January 1945, she was moved back to the Ravensbrück subcamp at Neustadt-Glewe.

== Arrest and execution ==
Dreschel fled from Ravensbrück in April 1945 as Nazi Germany surrendered.

In May 1945, several former Auschwitz prisoners recognized her on a road from Pirna to Bautzen in the Soviet zone, and took her to the Soviet Military Police. The Soviets condemned her to death and executed her in May or June 1945 by hanging in Bautzen.

==See also==

* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps

==Notes==
==References==
*Margot Drexler (1908-1945) biodata .
*Brown, D. P.: &quot;The Camp Women: The Female Auxiliaries Who Assisted the SS in Running the Nazi Concentration Camp System&quot;; Schiffer Publishing 2002; .
* Matthaus, Juergen. &quot;Approaching an Auschwitz Survivor: Holocaust History and its Transformations&quot; Oxford University Press, 2009; .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70711" start="0" end="25" title="Margot Dreschel" label="Margot Elisabeth Dreschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70711" start="40" end="48" title="Margot Dreschel" label="Drechsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70711" start="50" end="59" title="Margot Dreschel" label="Drechsler"/>
<link wikidata="Q70711" start="63" end="70" title="Margot Dreschel" label="Drexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="151" end="175" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="183" end="195" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="213" end="226" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="336" end="338" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="381" end="387" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="429" end="459" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="525" end="535" title="Aufseherin" label="Aufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="653" end="667" title="Oberaufseherin" label="Oberaufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q88131" start="692" end="709" title="Johanna Langefeld" label="Johanna Langefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="928" end="951" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz II – Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="974" end="989" title="occupied Poland" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78645" start="1185" end="1196" title="Maria Mandl" label="Maria Mandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="1227" end="1240" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799468" start="1631" end="1641" title="Selection (Holocaust)" label="selections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="1763" end="1771" title="Auschwitz II" label="Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="1888" end="1899" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q274354" start="1934" end="1964" title="Flossenbürg concentration camp" label="Flossenbürg concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q540120" start="2104" end="2118" title="Neustadt-Glewe" label="Neustadt-Glewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2196" end="2208" title="Nazism" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477" start="2301" end="2306" title="Pirna" label="Pirna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="2310" end="2317" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="2386" end="2393" title="Soviets" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="2468" end="2475" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="2494" end="2535" title="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps" label="Female guards in Nazi concentration camps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476960" wikidata="Q411973" url="?curid=476960" title="Paramylon">
<text>Paramylon is a carbohydrate similar to starch. The chloroplasts found in &quot;Euglena&quot; contain chlorophyll which aids in the synthesis of carbohydrates to be stored as starch granules and paramylon. 

==Overview==
Paramylon is made in the pyrenoids of &quot;Euglena&quot;. The euglenoids have chlorophylls a and b and they store their photosynthate in an unusual form called paramylon starch, a β-1,3 polymer of glucose. The paramylon is stored in rod like bodies throughout the cytoplasm, called paramylon bodies, which are often visible as colorless or white particles in light microscopy. Their shape is often characteristic of the &quot;Euglena&quot; species that produces them. Paramylon is also reportedly made in granuales by Pavlovophyceae haptophytes.

Paramylon was named and first described in detail by Johann Gottlieb in 1850 based on Gottlieb&#x27;s scientific exchange with Ludwig Karl Schmarda.
==See also==
* Phytoglycogen

==References==
==External links==
*Polydextrose Resources</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411973" start="0" end="9" title="Paramylon" label="Paramylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="15" end="27" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="39" end="45" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="51" end="62" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q236001" start="79" end="86" title="Euglena" label="Euglena"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="101" end="112" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q574470" start="245" end="253" title="pyrenoid" label="pyrenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="418" end="425" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155983" start="739" end="753" title="Pavlovophyceae" label="Pavlovophyceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215911" start="821" end="836" title="Johann Gottlieb" label="Johann Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q114564" start="895" end="915" title="Ludwig Karl Schmarda" label="Ludwig Karl Schmarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957028" start="932" end="945" title="Phytoglycogen" label="Phytoglycogen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476963" wikidata="Q455408" url="?curid=476963" title="1811–1812 New Madrid earthquakes">
<text>The 1811–1812 New Madrid earthquakes were a series of intense intraplate earthquakes beginning with an initial earthquake of moment magnitude 7.2–8.2 on December 16, 1811, followed by a moment magnitude 7.4 aftershock on the same day. Two additional earthquakes of similar magnitude followed in January and February 1812. They remain the most powerful earthquakes to hit the contiguous United States east of the Rocky Mountains in recorded history. The earthquakes, as well as the seismic zone of their occurrence, were named for the Mississippi River town of New Madrid, then part of the Louisiana Territory and now within the U.S. state of Missouri.

The epicenters of the earthquakes were located in an area that at the time was at the distant western edge of the American frontier, only sparsely settled by European settlers. Contemporary accounts have led seismologists to estimate that these stable continental region earthquakes were felt strongly throughout much of the central and eastern United States, across an area of roughly , and moderately across nearly 1 million sq mi (3 million km2). The 1906 San Francisco earthquake, by comparison, was felt moderately over roughly . The earthquakes were interpreted by Tecumseh&#x27;s pan-Indian alliance, to mean that Tecumseh and his brother the Prophet must be supported.

==Events==
* December 16, 1811, 08:15 UTC (02:15 am local time): M 7.2–8.2, epicenter in what is now northeast Arkansas. It caused only slight damage to man-made structures, mainly because of the sparse population in the epicentral area. The future location of Memphis, Tennessee, experienced level IX shaking on the Mercalli intensity scale. A seismic seiche propagated upriver, and Little Prairie (a village that was on the site of the former Fort San Fernando, near the site of present-day Caruthersville, Missouri) was heavily damaged by soil liquefaction. Modified Mercalli intensity VII or greater was observed over a area.
* December 16, 1811 (aftershock), 13:15 UTC (07:15 am local time): M 7.4, epicenter in southeast Missouri. This shock followed the first earthquake by six hours and was similar in intensity.
* January 23, 1812, 15:15 UTC (09:15 am local time): M 7.0–8.0, epicenter in the Missouri Bootheel. The meizoseismal area was characterized by general ground warping, ejections, fissuring, severe landslides, and caving of stream banks. Johnston and Schweig attributed this earthquake to a rupture on the New Madrid North Fault. This may have placed strain on the Reelfoot Fault.
* February 7, 1812, 09:45 UTC (03:45 am local time): M 7.4–8.6, epicenter near New Madrid, Missouri. The town of New Madrid was destroyed. In St. Louis, Missouri, many houses were severely damaged and their chimneys were toppled. This shock was definitively attributed to the Reelfoot Fault by Johnston and Schweig. Uplift along a segment of this reverse fault created temporary waterfalls on the Mississippi at Kentucky Bend, created waves that propagated upstream, and caused the formation of Reelfoot Lake by obstructing streams in what is now Lake County, Tennessee. The maximum Modified Mercalli intensity observed was XII.

The many more aftershocks include one magnitude 7 aftershock to the December 16, 1811, earthquake which occurred at 6:00 UTC (12:00 am local time) on December 17, 1811, and one magnitude 7 aftershock to the February 7, 1812, earthquake which occurred on the same day at 4:40 UTC (10:40 pm local time). Susan Hough, a seismologist of the United States Geological Survey, has estimated the earthquakes&#x27; magnitudes as around magnitude 7.

===Eyewitness accounts===
John Bradbury, a fellow of the Linnean Society, was on the Mississippi on the night of December 15, 1811, and describes the tremors in great detail in his &quot;Travels in the Interior of America in the Years 1809, 1810 and 1811&quot;, published in 1817:

Eliza Bryan in New Madrid, Territory of Missouri, wrote the following eyewitness account in March 1812:

John Reynolds, the fourth governor of Illinois, among other political posts, mentions the earthquake in his biography &quot;My Own Times: Embracing Also the History of My Life&quot; (1855):

The Shaker diarist Samuel Swan McClelland described the effects of the earthquake on the Shaker settlement at West Union (Busro), Indiana, where the earthquakes contributed to the temporary abandonment of the westernmost Shaker community.

==Geologic setting==

The underlying cause of the earthquakes is not well understood, but modern faulting seems to be related to an ancient geologic feature buried under the Mississippi River alluvial plain, known as the Reelfoot Rift. The New Madrid seismic zone is made up of reactivated faults that formed when what is now North America began to split or rift apart during the breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia in the Neoproterozoic era (about 750 million years ago). Faults were created along the rift, and igneous rocks formed from magma that was being pushed towards the surface. The resulting rift system failed to split the plate, but has remained as an aulacogen (a scar or weak zone) deep underground.
In recent decades, minor earthquakes have continued. The epicenters of over 4,000 earthquakes can be identified from seismic measurements since 1974, originating from the seismic activity of the Reelfoot Rift. Forecasts for the next 50 years estimate a 7–10% chance of a major earthquake like those of 1811–1812, and a 25–40% chance of a quake of magnitude 6 or greater.

In a report filed in November 2008, the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency warns that a serious earthquake in the New Madrid Seismic Zone could inflict &quot;the highest economic losses due to a natural disaster in the United States&quot;, further predicting &quot;widespread and catastrophic&quot; damage across Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, and particularly Tennessee, where a 7.7 or greater magnitude quake would cause damage to tens of thousands of structures affecting water distribution, transportation systems, and other vital infrastructure.

==Aftermath==
The quakes caused extensive changes to the region&#x27;s topography. Subsidence, uplift, fissures, landslides and riverbank collapses were common. Trees were uprooted by the intense shaking; people drowned when subsided land flooded. Reelfoot Lake was formed in Tennessee by subsidence of 1.5 meters to 6 meters in some places. Lake St. Francis in eastern Arkansas was expanded by subsidence, with sand and coal being ejected from fissures in the adjacent swamps as water levels rose by 8 to 9 meters. Waves on the Mississippi River caused boats to wash ashore; river banks rose, sand bars were destroyed, and some islands completely disappeared. Sand blows occurred in Missouri, Tennessee, and Arkansas, covering farmland.

The continuous underlying rock mass, uninterrupted by fractures or faults, conducted the seismic waves from the earthquakes over great distances, with perceptible ground shaking as far away as Canada. Intense effects were widely felt in Illinois, Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky and Missouri.

The number of people who died is unknown; as a frontier area, the region was sparsely populated, and communications and records were poor. The predominantly wooden buildings resisted collapse, though the intense shaking caused many chimneys to fall, wood structures to crack, and trees to fall on buildings, particularly in the epicentral area during the first earthquake on December 16, 1811. A Methodist chaplain traveling with Andrew Jackson on his Natchez Expedition of 1813 recorded in his journal: &quot;The fishers [fissures] produced in the earth about Madrid look awful on both sides of the River and the earth continues to shake at times, fears are ascertained that the worst is to come, it is said that there where about one thousand inhabitants in the Town of New Madrid previous to the Earth Quake - but many alarmed went off that at this time there only about 300.&quot;

Rated at VII on the Mercalli Intensity Scale, the New Madrid earthquakes remain the strongest recorded North American earthquakes east of the Rocky Mountains. The earthquakes strengthened the Shawnee prophet Tenskwatawa after the defeat at the Battle of Tippecanoe and the destruction of Prophetstown, with local Native Americans seeing it as a vindication of his teachings and of the warnings of his brother Tecumseh.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* List of earthquakes in the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
* Jay Feldman. &quot;When the Mississippi Ran Backwards : Empire, Intrigue, Murder, and the New Madrid Earthquakes&quot; Free Press, 2005. 
* Conevery Bolton Valencius, &quot;The Lost History of the New Madrid Earthquakes&quot; The University of Chicago Press, 2013. 
* Conevery Bolton Valencius, &quot;Accounts of the New Madrid earthquakes: personal narratives and seismology over the last two centuries,&quot; in Deborah R. Coen, ed., &quot;Witness to Disaster: Earthquakes and Expertise in Comparative Perspective,&quot; *Science in Context*, 25, no. 1 (February 2012): 17–48.

==External links==
* The Enigma of the New Madrid Earthquakes of 1811–1812. Johnson, A.C. and Schweig, E.S. (1996) &quot;Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences&quot;, Volume 24, pp. 339–384. SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System (ADS)
* The Introduction to &quot;The Lost History of the New Madrid Earthquakes&quot; by Conevery Bolton Valencius.
* The New Madrid Fault Zone (NMFZ) (links to maps, history, predictions, etc. from the Arkansas Center for Earthquake Education)
* Steamboat Adventure: The New Madrid Earthquakes (dozens of contemporary accounts of the earthquake, provided by Hanover College)
*USGS, Summary of 1811-1812 New Madrid Earthquake Sequence, at https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/earthquake-hazards/science/summary-1811-1812-new-madrid-earthquakes-sequence?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects
* The &quot;Hard Shock:&quot; The New Madrid Earthquakes. The History Guy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q455408" start="4" end="36" title="1811–1812 New Madrid earthquakes" label="1811–1812 New Madrid earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737176" start="62" end="83" title="intraplate earthquake" label="intraplate earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="125" end="141" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="moment magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q308442" start="207" end="217" title="aftershock" label="aftershock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="412" end="427" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249040" start="481" end="493" title="seismic zone" label="seismic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="534" end="551" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q963427" start="560" end="570" title="New Madrid, Missouri" label="New Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="589" end="608" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="642" end="650" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q106032" start="657" end="666" title="epicenter" label="epicenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="767" end="784" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="1107" end="1136" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="1224" end="1232" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="1442" end="1450" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="1592" end="1610" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="1648" end="1672" title="Modified Mercalli intensity scale" label="Mercalli intensity scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q221076" start="1684" end="1690" title="seiche" label="seiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075644" start="1776" end="1793" title="Fort San Fernando De Las Barrancas" label="Fort San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q952886" start="1824" end="1848" title="Caruthersville, Missouri" label="Caruthersville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q827291" start="1873" end="1890" title="soil liquefaction" label="soil liquefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943926" start="2233" end="2250" title="Missouri Bootheel" label="Missouri Bootheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810455" start="2256" end="2273" title="meizoseismal area" label="meizoseismal area"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="2348" end="2357" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575947" start="2515" end="2529" title="Reelfoot Rift" label="Reelfoot Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q963427" start="2610" end="2630" title="New Madrid, Missouri" label="New Madrid, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2673" end="2692" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="2878" end="2891" title="reverse fault" label="reverse fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="2910" end="2919" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140886" start="2943" end="2956" title="Kentucky Bend" label="Kentucky Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q727901" start="3026" end="3039" title="Reelfoot Lake" label="Reelfoot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q494771" start="3078" end="3100" title="Lake County, Tennessee" label="Lake County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460956" start="3463" end="3474" title="Susan Hough" label="Susan Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="3498" end="3529" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068728" start="3628" end="3641" title="John Bradbury (naturalist)" label="John Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="3659" end="3674" title="Linnean Society" label="Linnean Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="3911" end="3932" title="Missouri Territory" label="Territory of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q734771" start="3989" end="4002" title="John Reynolds (Illinois politician)" label="John Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112719" start="4015" end="4035" title="governor of Illinois" label="governor of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="4184" end="4190" title="Shakers" label="Shaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986729" start="4290" end="4317" title="West Union (Busro), Indiana" label="West Union (Busro), Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="4612" end="4626" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575947" start="4660" end="4683" title="New Madrid seismic zone" label="New Madrid seismic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="4710" end="4716" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="4778" end="4782" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q185161" start="4830" end="4837" title="Rodinia" label="Rodinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="4845" end="4859" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="4935" end="4942" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="4961" end="4966" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q771592" start="5086" end="5095" title="aulacogen" label="aulacogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="5553" end="5588" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="6029" end="6047" title="Water purification" label="water distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="6049" end="6071" title="transportation" label="transportation systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="6189" end="6199" title="Subsidence" label="Subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q727901" start="6354" end="6367" title="Reelfoot Lake" label="Reelfoot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q842928" start="6767" end="6777" title="Sand boil" label="Sand blows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="7567" end="7581" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7607" title="Natchez Expedition" label="Natchez Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="8215" end="8222" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q254682" start="8231" end="8242" title="Tenskwatawa" label="Tenskwatawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379346" start="8267" end="8287" title="Battle of Tippecanoe" label="Battle of Tippecanoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="8432" end="8440" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617623" start="8471" end="8511" title="List of earthquakes in the United States" label="List of earthquakes in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476964" wikidata="Q1512393" url="?curid=476964" title="Postal Index Number">
<text>A Postal Index Number (PIN; sometimes redundantly a PIN code) refers to a six-digit code in the Indian postal code system used by India Post. On 15 August 2022, the PIN system celebrated its 50th anniversary.

== History ==
The PIN system was introduced on 15 August 1972 by Shriram Bhikaji Velankar, an additional secretary in the Government of India&#x27;s Ministry of Communications. The system was introduced to simplify the manual sorting and delivery of mail by eliminating confusion over incorrect addresses, similar place names, and different languages used by the public.

== PIN structure ==
The first digit of a PIN indicates the zone, the second indicates the sub-zone, and the third, combined with the first two, indicates the sorting district within that zone. The final three digits are assigned to individual post offices within the sorting district.

=== Postal zones ===
There are nine postal zones in India, including eight regional zones and one functional zone (for the Indian Army). The first digit of a PIN indicates the zone and is allocated over the 9 zones as follows:

=== Sorting district ===
The third digit of a PIN, combined with the first two digits, represents a specific geographical region (except in the case of the functional zone for the Army) called a sorting district that is headquartered at the main post office of the largest city in the region and is known as the sorting office. A state may have one or more sorting districts depending on the volume of mail handled.

=== Service route ===
The fourth digit represents the route on which a delivery office is located in the sorting district. This is &quot;0&quot; for offices in the core area of the sorting district.

=== Delivery office ===

The last two digits represent the delivery office within the sorting district starting from &quot;01&quot; which would be the General Post Office (GPO) or head office (HO). The numbering of the delivery office is done chronologically with higher numbers assigned to newer delivery offices. If the volume of mail handled at a delivery office is too large, a new delivery office is created and the next available PIN is assigned. Thus, two delivery offices situated next to each other will only have the first four digits in common.

=== Overseas mail === 
Special cases where mail needs to be sent to locations overseas is handled in an ad hoc manner. For example, the PIN of Dakshin Gangotri and Maitri, research stations located in Antarctica, is 403001, which is of the PIN of Panaji, Goa.

== Delivery system ==
Each PIN is mapped to exactly one delivery post office which receives all the mail to be delivered to one or lower offices within its jurisdiction, all of which share the same code. The delivery office can either be a General Post Office (GPO), a head office (HO), or a sub-office (SO) which are usually located in urban areas. The post from the delivery office is sorted and routed to other delivery offices for a different PIN or to one of the relevant sub-offices or branch offices for the same PIN. Branch offices (BOs) are located in rural areas and have limited postal services.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Find Pincode – India Post</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1512393" start="2" end="21" title="Postal Index Number" label="Postal Index Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512393" start="23" end="26" title="Postal Index Number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512393" start="52" end="60" title="Postal Index Number" label="PIN code"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="96" end="101" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q37447" start="103" end="114" title="postal code" label="postal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519720" start="130" end="140" title="India Post" label="India Post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="299" title="Shriram Bhikaji Velankar" label="Shriram Bhikaji Velankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="332" end="358" title="Government of India" label="Government of India&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12454897" start="359" end="385" title="Ministry of Communications (India)" label="Ministry of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q915063" start="1408" end="1422" title="sorting office" label="sorting office"/>
<link wikidata="Q626538" start="2413" end="2429" title="Dakshin Gangotri" label="Dakshin Gangotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q626852" start="2434" end="2440" title="Maitri (research station)" label="Maitri"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2471" end="2481" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="2517" end="2523" title="Panaji" label="Panaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="2525" end="2528" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476966" wikidata="Q107333802" url="?curid=476966" title="Charles Fairbanks (disambiguation)">
<text>Charles Fairbanks may refer to:

*Charles W. Fairbanks (1852–1918), American politician and vice-president
*Charles H. Fairbanks (1913–1984), American archaeologist/anthropologist
*Charles B. Fairbanks (1827–1859), American writer
*Charles Rufus Fairbanks (1790–1841), Canadian lawyer, judge, entrepreneur and political figure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270539" start="34" end="54" title="Charles W. Fairbanks" label="Charles W. Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078560" start="108" end="128" title="Charles H. Fairbanks" label="Charles H. Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q107312266" start="181" end="201" title="Charles B. Fairbanks" label="Charles B. Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082214" start="232" end="255" title="Charles Rufus Fairbanks" label="Charles Rufus Fairbanks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476967" wikidata="Q3326076" url="?curid=476967" title="Mounth">
<text>The Mounth ( ) is the broad upland in northeast Scotland between the Highland Boundary and the River Dee, at the eastern end of the Grampians. 

== Name and etymology ==
The name &quot;Mounth&quot; is ultimately of Pictish origin. The name is derived from &quot;*monɪð&quot;, meaning &quot;mountain&quot; (c.f. Welsh &quot;mynydd&quot;).

It is invariably referred to as &quot;the Mounth&quot; and pronounced &quot;munth&quot;.

== Details ==
The ranges to the north-west are known as the Monadh Liath and the Monadh Ruadh (called the Cairngorms in English), meaning the &quot;Grey Mounth&quot; and the &quot;Red Mounth&quot;.

Some sources regard the Mounth as extending as far west as Drumochter Pass (A9), but it is now generally agreed to start at the Cairnwell Pass (A93 - highest main road pass in Britain, Glen Shee ski centre). Here, a high undulating plateau invaded by deep glacial troughs (Glen Isla, Glen Callater, Glen Muick, Glen Clova) culminates in Glas Maol (1068m /3504&#x27;) on the main watershed, with the outlying granite Lochnagar (1155m/3789&#x27;) and its surrounding &quot;White Mounth&quot; (Monadh Geal). To the east the plateau broadens into a lower moorland incised by river valleys, notably Glen Esk and Glen Tanar, descending gently east to North Sea coastal cliffs between Stonehaven and Aberdeen. This is the best-preserved expanse of the ancient Highland pre-glacial upland surface.

The Mounth is thus bounded by Blairgowrie, Braemar, Ballater, Banchory, Stonehaven, and Kirriemuir, and comprises eastern Highland Perthshire, the Angus Glens, and southern Aberdeenshire. The higher parts are within the Cairngorms National Park.

Historically The Mounth was a formidable barrier which, to some extent, isolated the northeast of Scotland from the Scottish Lowlands, physically and culturally. In the Middle Ages an ancient roadway known as the Causey Mounth was built to connect Stonehaven to Aberdeen using an elevated rock causeway design to penetrate this boggy area of the eastern Mounth. This route was by way of Cowie Castle, Muchalls Castle, Portlethen Moss and the Bridge of Dee. The route was that taken by Earl Marischal and the Marquess of Montrose when they led a Covenanter army of 9000 men in the first battle of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms in 1639.

==Crossings of the Mounth==
There are numerous historic crossings of the Mounth, including:
*Causey Mounth or Cowie Mounth, between Bridge of Cowie near Stonehaven and the Bridge of Dee.
*Elsick Mounth or Netherley Road, from Stonehaven to Drum, followed by the modern B979 road
*The Slug Road, from Stonehaven to Durris, followed by the modern A957 road
*Cryn&#x27;s Cross Mounth, from Laurencekirk to Mills of Drum
*The Stock Mounth, from Glenbervie to Strachan
*Builg Mounth, from Glenfarquhar to Deeside
*Cairnamounth or Cairn O&#x27; Mounth, from Fettercairn to Kincardine o&#x27; Neill, followed by the modern B974 road
*Fungle Road or Forest of Birse Mounth, from Glen Esk to Aboyne via the Forest of Birse
*Firmounth, from Glen Esk to Glen Tanar
*Keenmounth, from Innermarkie to Deeside over the shoulder of Mount Keen
*Capel Mounth, from Glen Clova to Glen Muick
*Tolmounth or Jock&#x27;s Road, from Glen Doll to Glen Callater
*Monega Pass, from Glen Isla to Glen Clunie
*Carnvalage or Cairnwell Road, from Gleann Beag to Glen Clunie, over the Devil&#x27;s Elbow, and followed by the modern A93 road

== References==
==See also==
* Cairn O&#x27; Mounth
* Dubhtolargg
* Saddle Hill (Aberdeenshire)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3326076" start="4" end="10" title="Mounth" label="Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="48" end="56" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="69" end="77" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q964949" start="95" end="104" title="River Dee, Aberdeenshire" label="River Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="132" end="141" title="Grampians" label="Grampians"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="215" end="222" title="Pictish" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="311" end="316" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897866" start="489" end="501" title="Monadh Liath" label="Monadh Liath"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="535" end="545" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142417" start="687" end="702" title="Pass of Drumochter" label="Drumochter Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q280508" start="704" end="706" title="A9 road (Scotland)" label="A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017730" start="756" end="770" title="Cairnwell Pass" label="Cairnwell Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q280494" start="772" end="775" title="A93 road" label="A93"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568035" start="813" end="822" title="Glen Shee" label="Glen Shee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="884" end="891" title="Glacier" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397722" start="965" end="974" title="Glas Maol" label="Glas Maol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="1007" end="1016" title="Drainage divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867453" start="1044" end="1053" title="Lochnagar" label="Lochnagar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1222" end="1230" title="River North Esk, Angus#Glen Esk" label="Glen Esk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24638720" start="1235" end="1245" title="Glen Tanar" label="Glen Tanar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1273" end="1282" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002177" start="1306" end="1316" title="Stonehaven" label="Stonehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="1321" end="1329" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q881185" start="1449" end="1460" title="Blairgowrie and Rattray" label="Blairgowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q897175" start="1462" end="1469" title="Braemar" label="Braemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q805175" start="1471" end="1479" title="Ballater" label="Ballater"/>
<link wikidata="Q806177" start="1481" end="1489" title="Banchory" label="Banchory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011603" start="1507" end="1517" title="Kirriemuir" label="Kirriemuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="1550" end="1560" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455944" start="1566" end="1577" title="Five Glens of Angus" label="Angus Glens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025953" start="1639" end="1663" title="Cairngorms National Park" label="Cairngorms National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="1782" end="1799" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1835" end="1846" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054660" start="1879" end="1892" title="Causey Mounth" label="Causey Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="1960" end="1968" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138213" start="2053" end="2065" title="Cowie Castle" label="Cowie Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10332979" start="2067" end="2082" title="Muchalls Castle" label="Muchalls Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232104" start="2084" end="2099" title="Portlethen Moss" label="Portlethen Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644573" start="2108" end="2121" title="Bridge of Dee" label="Bridge of Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616659" start="2151" end="2165" title="William Keith, 7th Earl Marischal" label="Earl Marischal"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="2174" end="2194" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="2211" end="2221" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="2266" end="2292" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054660" start="2396" end="2409" title="Causey Mounth" label="Causey Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179719" start="2435" end="2450" title="Cowie Bridge" label="Bridge of Cowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644573" start="2475" end="2488" title="Bridge of Dee" label="Bridge of Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367561" start="2491" end="2504" title="Elsick Mounth" label="Elsick Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649683" start="2583" end="2596" title="Slug Road" label="The Slug Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649683" start="2648" end="2657" title="A957 road" label="A957 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q107062337" start="2659" end="2683" title="Cryne Corse Mounth" label="Cryn&amp;#x27;s Cross Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q987775" start="2690" end="2702" title="Laurencekirk" label="Laurencekirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568168" start="2744" end="2754" title="Glenbervie" label="Glenbervie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620846" start="2758" end="2766" title="Strachan, Aberdeenshire" label="Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405926" start="2803" end="2810" title="Deeside" label="Deeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017670" start="2812" end="2824" title="Cairnamounth" label="Cairnamounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070901" start="2855" end="2866" title="Fettercairn" label="Fettercairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q323196" start="2986" end="2992" title="Aboyne" label="Aboyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469157" start="3001" end="3016" title="Forest of Birse" label="Forest of Birse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638167" start="3119" end="3129" title="Mount Keen" label="Mount Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567693" start="3189" end="3205" title="Glen Doll" label="Jock&amp;#x27;s Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017730" start="3298" end="3312" title="Cairnwell Pass" label="Cairnwell Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017670" start="3444" end="3464" title="Cairn O&amp;#x27; Mounth" label="Cairn O&amp;#x27; Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310726" start="3467" end="3478" title="Dubhtolargg" label="Dubhtolargg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397691" start="3481" end="3508" title="Saddle Hill (Aberdeenshire)" label="Saddle Hill (Aberdeenshire)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476972" wikidata="Q1681096" url="?curid=476972" title="James Sherman">
<text>James Sherman may refer to:

*James S. Sherman (1855–1912), vice president of the United States under president William Howard Taft, 1909–1912
*James Sherman (comics), comic book artist
*James Sherman (minister) (1796–1862), British Congregationalist and abolitionist
*James Sherman (cricketer) (1791–1831), English cricketer
*James Morgan Sherman, American professor of bacteriology
*Jim Sherman (baseball) (born 1960), American college baseball coach and player
==See also==
*James Shearman (born 1970), English composer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1681096" start="0" end="13" title="James Sherman" label="James Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q310831" start="30" end="46" title="James S. Sherman" label="James S. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143102" start="144" end="166" title="James Sherman (comics)" label="James Sherman (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143105" start="187" end="211" title="James Sherman (minister)" label="James Sherman (minister)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143104" start="269" end="294" title="James Sherman (cricketer)" label="James Sherman (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115760228" start="327" end="347" title="James Morgan Sherman" label="James Morgan Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60733930" start="385" end="407" title="Jim Sherman (baseball)" label="Jim Sherman (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143062" start="478" end="492" title="James Shearman" label="James Shearman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476982" wikidata="Q4973584" url="?curid=476982" title="Bromberg-Ost">
<text>Bromberg-Ost () was the female subcamp of the German Nazi concentration camp KL Stutthof between 1944-1945, set up in the city of Bydgoszcz during the later stages of World War II. The mostly Jewish women prisoners dispatched from the main camp in Sztutowo worked as slave-labour for the German railways; loading cargo, clearing and repairing tracks, and digging ditches. The commandant of the camp was &quot;SS-Scharführer&quot; Anton Kniffke. 
==History==
The direct order to set up the Bromberg-Ost subcamp was issued on 12 September 1944, by the superintendent of Stutthof concentration camp, Paul Werner Hoppe. The camp was situated between Kamienna and Fabryczna Streets. The following day the first 300 women prisoners were sent there under the control of seven female overseers belonging to Schutzstaffel (SS). No warm clothing was provided before mid-December. Women who managed to survive were taken on a death march to Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg. From June 1944 until March 1945 the position of Oberaufseherin in Bromberg-Ost was held by Johanna Wisotzki, while among guards reassigned to Bromberg-Ost from Stutthof were the notoriously cruel aufseherinnen Herta Bothe (died March 2000), Ewa Paradies (hanged 1946) and Gerda Steinhoff (hanged 1946) who took part in selections of prisoners to be sent to the gas chambers. A group of thirteen ex-officials and overseers of the Bromberg-Ost and Stutthof concentration camps were tried and convicted of crimes against humanity at the Stutthof trials, the war crime tribunals held at Gdańsk, Poland, from April 25, 1946, to May 31, 1946. Eleven convicts were sentenced to death, while the remainder were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.

==Notes==
==References==
* Benjamin B. Ferencz, Less Than Slaves: Jewish Forced Labor and the Quest for Compensation
* Female guards in Nazi concentration camps. Gerda Steinhoff</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4973584" start="0" end="12" title="Bromberg-Ost" label="Bromberg-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="46" end="52" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="53" end="76" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="77" end="88" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="KL Stutthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="130" end="139" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="167" end="179" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790121" start="248" end="256" title="Sztutowo" label="Sztutowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="264" end="279" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="as slave-labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q638249" start="409" end="423" title="SS-Scharführer" label="SS-Scharführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="568" end="595" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q87308" start="597" end="614" title="Werner Hoppe (SS-Officer)" label="Paul Werner Hoppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="799" end="812" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q326259" start="915" end="926" title="death march" label="death march"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="930" end="955" title="Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg" label="Sachsenhausen-Oranienburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="1005" end="1019" title="Oberaufseherin" label="Oberaufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259802" start="1153" end="1163" title="aufseherin" label="aufseherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62485" start="1167" end="1178" title="Herta Bothe" label="Herta Bothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q70748" start="1198" end="1210" title="Ewa Paradies" label="Ewa Paradies"/>
<link wikidata="Q66759" start="1229" end="1244" title="Gerda Steinhoff" label="Gerda Steinhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="1318" end="1329" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="1403" end="1430" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="1460" end="1483" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q474424" start="1491" end="1506" title="Stutthof trials" label="Stutthof trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="1512" end="1521" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1540" end="1546" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1548" end="1554" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476983" wikidata="Q6502031" url="?curid=476983" title="Lautenburg">
<text>Lautenburg may refer to:

* Female and male subcamps of the Stutthof concentration camp
* The German name of Lidzbark Welski, a city in northern Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="60" end="87" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005464" start="109" end="124" title="Lidzbark Welski" label="Lidzbark Welski"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476985" wikidata="Q1904640" url="?curid=476985" title="Thomas Marshall">
<text>Thomas Marshall may refer to:
==Politicians==
*Thomas Marshall (fl. 1376), MP for Somerset
*Thomas Marshall (fl. 1421), MP for Kingston upon Hull
*Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1730) (1730–1802), American politician and soldier, father of U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall
*Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1784) (1784–1835), grandson of above and Virginia delegate
*Thomas Marshall (Canadian politician) (1864–1951), also known as Thomas A. Marshall, MLA in Ontario, Canada
*Thomas A. Marshall (1794–1871), U.S. Representative from Kentucky
*Thomas F. Marshall (North Dakota politician) (1854–1921), U.S. Representative from North Dakota, 1901–1909
*Thomas Francis Marshall (1801–1864), U.S. Representative from Kentucky, 1841–1843
*Thomas R. Marshall (1854–1925), vice president under Woodrow Wilson, 1913–1921
*Thomas C. Marshall (1851–1911), pioneer, lawyer, judge, and mayor of Missoula, Montana
*Thomas Marshall (Illinois politician) (1817–1873), Lieutenant Governor of Illinois
*Thomas Marshall (Maine politician) (1826–1861), American politician and military commander from Maine

==Religious figures==
*Thomas Marshall (Abbot of Colchester) (died 1539), Roman Catholic priest
*Thomas Marshall (Dean of Gloucester) (1621–1685), English scholar and Anglican priest

==Military==
*Thomas Marshall (general) (1793–1853), brigadier general of volunteers during the Mexican–American War
*Thomas W. Marshall Jr. (1906–1942), officer in the United States Navy 1930–1942

==Sportsmen==
*Thomas Roger Marshall (1849–1913), Scottish rugby player
*Thomas Marshall (footballer, born 1858) (1858–1917), England international footballer from the 1880s
*Thomas Marshall (footballer, fl. 1898–1906), played for Bolton Wanderers and Burnley in the 1900s

==Others==
*Thomas Marshall (songwriter) (c. 1806 – 1866), Newcastle-born songwriter
*T. H. Marshall (Thomas Humphrey Marshall, 1893–1981), British sociologist
*Thomas William Marshall (controversialist) (1818–1877), Catholic controversialist
*Thomas William Marshall (painter) (1875–1914), English painter
*Thomas Ansell Marshall (1827–1903), English reverend and entomologist
*Thomas Falcon Marshall (1818–1878), English artist
*Thomas Marshall (died 1900), Flannan Isles lighthouse keeper who famously disappeared without trace
*Thomas H. Marshall, author of &quot;The Irish Necromancer&quot; published in 1821
*One of Whitey Bulger&#x27;s aliases

==See also==
*Tom Marshall (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1904640" start="0" end="15" title="Thomas Marshall" label="Thomas Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47" end="73" title="Thomas Marshall (fl. 1376)" label="Thomas Marshall (fl. 1376)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559806" start="82" end="90" title="Somerset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92" end="118" title="Thomas Marshall (fl. 1421)" label="Thomas Marshall (fl. 1421)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413650" start="127" end="145" title="Kingston upon Hull (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792187" start="147" end="195" title="Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1730)" label="Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1730)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741393" start="300" end="348" title="Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1784)" label="Thomas Marshall (Virginia politician, born 1784)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792184" start="403" end="440" title="Thomas Marshall (Canadian politician)" label="Thomas Marshall (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629877" start="512" end="530" title="Thomas A. Marshall" label="Thomas A. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423983" start="579" end="623" title="Thomas F. Marshall (North Dakota politician)" label="Thomas F. Marshall (North Dakota politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423775" start="687" end="710" title="Thomas Francis Marshall" label="Thomas Francis Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q299001" start="770" end="788" title="Thomas R. Marshall" label="Thomas R. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788151" start="850" end="868" title="Thomas C. Marshall" label="Thomas C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850785" start="938" end="975" title="Thomas Marshall (Illinois politician)" label="Thomas Marshall (Illinois politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303216" start="1022" end="1056" title="Thomas Marshall (Maine politician)" label="Thomas Marshall (Maine politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792185" start="1148" end="1185" title="Thomas Marshall (Abbot of Colchester)" label="Thomas Marshall (Abbot of Colchester)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792186" start="1222" end="1258" title="Thomas Marshall (Dean of Gloucester)" label="Thomas Marshall (Dean of Gloucester)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792191" start="1323" end="1348" title="Thomas Marshall (general)" label="Thomas Marshall (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871567" start="1427" end="1449" title="Thomas W. Marshall Jr." label="Thomas W. Marshall Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7793617" start="1523" end="1544" title="Thomas Roger Marshall" label="Thomas Roger Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792188" start="1581" end="1620" title="Thomas Marshall (footballer, born 1858)" label="Thomas Marshall (footballer, born 1858)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792189" start="1683" end="1726" title="Thomas Marshall (footballer, fl. 1898–1906)" label="Thomas Marshall (footballer, fl. 1898–1906)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792190" start="1794" end="1822" title="Thomas Marshall (songwriter)" label="Thomas Marshall (songwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q920633" start="1868" end="1882" title="T. H. Marshall" label="T. H. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795162" start="1943" end="1985" title="Thomas William Marshall (controversialist)" label="Thomas William Marshall (controversialist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21289884" start="2026" end="2059" title="Thomas William Marshall (painter)" label="Thomas William Marshall (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787085" start="2090" end="2112" title="Thomas Ansell Marshall" label="Thomas Ansell Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18735046" start="2161" end="2183" title="Thomas Falcon Marshall" label="Thomas Falcon Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427154" start="2242" end="2255" title="Flannan Isles" label="Flannan Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377018" start="2391" end="2395" title="1821 in literature" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q557801" start="2404" end="2417" title="Whitey Bulger" label="Whitey Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q283701" start="2448" end="2477" title="Tom Marshall (disambiguation)" label="Tom Marshall (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476986" wikidata="Q7430546" url="?curid=476986" title="Scartho">
<text>Scartho () is a suburban village in the southern part of Grimsby, in the unitary authority area of North East Lincolnshire, in the ceremonial county of Lincolnshire, England. Scartho&#x27;s population is approximately 11,000. Up until the end of the Second World War it was a village; subsequent post-war expansion on the greenfield areas between Scartho and Grimsby has resulted in the village becoming an outer suburb. Its population has increased through recent urban developments such as Scartho Top.

== History ==
===Etymology===
Like &#x27;Grimsby&#x27; the etymology of the word Scartho can be traced back to having Old Norse origin, more than likely due to the ancestry of the surrounding area. In &quot;A Dictionary of British Place Names&quot;, A. D. Mills identifies the elements &quot;skarth&quot; or &quot;skafr&quot; and the ending &quot;haugr&quot; to give the meaning as &#x27;Mound near a gap&#x27; or a mound &#x27;frequented by cormorants&#x27;.

===11th century===
The earliest surviving written reference to Scartho is in the &quot;Domesday Book&quot; of 1086 where it shares an entry with the adjoining parishes of Laceby and Bradley. The three parishes were under the lordship of Swein, Erik brother of Tosti, and Tosti brother of Erik, in 1066, and after the Norman invasion by Odo of Bayeux, a half-brother of William the Conqueror.

The church, dedicated to Saint Giles, retains a tower that dates to the Anglo Saxon period, although there have been more recent changes, including the removal of the north wall for an extension as recently as the 1950s. Walter Johnson in &quot;Byways in British Archaeology&quot; considers the tower to date from the period of church building in the 1042 to 1066 reign of Edward the Confessor and disagrees with 19th century suggestions that the stonework shows signs of scorch mark from having been torched during earlier Viking raids. Rather, Johnson argues, the tower, and others from the same era in Lincolnshire, were built after the period of Viking raids but in a style that reflects a memory of Church towers being used as a place of refuge during those raids.

===19th century===
In the first census of the United Kingdom in 1801 Scartho had 135 inhabitants, in 1831 the population was 147.

In 1894, a workhouse and were built at a site on the west-side of Scartho Road to the south of Grimsby. These new buildings were opened on 9 October 1894 by the Right Honourable J Shaw-Le-Fevre. Following the Local Government Act 1929, the workhouse came under the control of Grimsby Town Council&#x27;s public assistance committee and was renamed Scartho Road Institution. After the introduction of the National Health Act in 1948 it became a general hospital. For many years it was known as Grimsby District General Hospital. Following the erection of the new Princess of Wales&#x27; hospital to the south of the site, a number of the former workhouse buildings have been demolished or stand empty. Others are still used for administrative or ancillary services.

===20th century===
Scartho Road is home to the Flower Cottages. Built in 1903, they are named after the order that flowers come into bloom after Winter, starting at number 100 with Snowdrop Cottage, 98 Crocus Cottage, and finishing at number 76. The architect was Herbert Scaping.

In 1916, 13 bombs were dropped on Scartho by a German Zeppelin, but no-one was killed or injured. The site where one bomb fell is now home to a branch of Barclays Bank, an optician, a few shops and a dance school. At the side of the building is a plaque commemorating this event. A monument giving thanks that no-one was hurt can be found at a spot where another bomb fell, in the churchyard of the nearby parish church of St. Giles, itself believed to be nearly a thousand years old. The church itself was badly damaged in the attack.

Scartho was a separate civil parish until 1928. Its northern boundary included part of the area that now forms the Nunsthorpe housing estate. In that year the greater part of the village was absorbed by Grimsby, with a small part being attached to the parish of Waltham.

Before the Second World War building work commenced on what had been Green Belt land. These constructions include properties along Scartho Road and the roads off it, including Cragston Avenue, Limetree Avenue and Sycamore Avenue.

The village saw post-war growth following the then government-policy of local councils building houses to replace those damaged in the war. This led to the development of three estates on green-belt land around the village: Springfield, Fairfield and (on a smaller-scale) the area around Edge Avenue. As part of this growth three schools were created – Springfield First and Middle schools, Fairfield First and Middle schools and Scartho First and Middle schools (in Edge Avenue).

In 1958 the village opened its first public house, the Rose and Crown on Louth Road. The Seven Seas opened in 1962 in Springfield.

In 1960 the local council built a swimming pool at the northernmost tip of the village boundary, next to the Barratts Playing Field. This is known locally as &#x27;Scatha Baths&#x27;. It was closed in December 2015 and has now been demolished.

In 1965 a new shopping arcade on Waltham Road was constructed in the area, followed a few years later by a similar development on the junction of Louth Road and Pinfold Lane which housed two banks and several retail premises.

Between 1974 and 1982 the village saw the construction of the town&#x27;s new hospital, the Grimsby District General Hospital, next to an existing smaller site. It was opened in 1982 by Her Royal Highness, the Princess of Wales. After her death in 1997 it was renamed the Diana, Princess of Wales Hospital. The nearby Scartho Top development began in the mid-1990s.

==Governance==
North East Lincolnshire Council has one council ward within the area of Scartho. All of the councillors for the ward currently are Conservatives. Only in the inaugural council election of 1995, when Labour won all three seats, and in 2012 and 2014, when UKIP won one seat at either election, has it returned a councillor for another party.

Scartho Ward
* Cllr Charlotte Croft 
* Cllr Ian Lindley
* Cllr Ronald Sheppard

In 1921 the civil parish had a population of 744. On 1 April 1928 the parish was abolished to form Grimsby, part also went to Waltham.

From 1974 to 1996 it was in the county of Humberside. Until 1996 it was in Great Grimsby district.

== Community ==
Scartho&#x27;s retail availability includes a Spar mini-supermarket on Waltham Road, surrounded by a number of other businesses including take-aways and a pharmacy. The supermarket houses the village Post Office after the long-established facility in Pinfold Lane closed in 2000. At this time one of the villages&#x27; two banks (Lloyds TSB – previously a Lloyds Bank) closed after 33 years of service. On Louth Road is a number of other businesses including a veterinary clinic, a newsagent, a building society and a pet store.

==Notable people==
*Richard A Collins (1966) – scientist and author, lived with his parents in Holton-le-Clay and Scartho for most of his youth.
*Brenda Fisher (b.1927) - long-distance and world record swimmer 
*Hanserd Knollys (1599–1691) - an English particular Baptist minister was appointed rector of the church in the 1640s.

== References ==
==External links==
*Scartho Village Website
*Scartho Village Portal
*Historic Scartho
*Photograph of the former Grimsby Workhouse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7430546" start="0" end="7" title="Scartho" label="Scartho"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="57" end="64" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342914" start="99" end="122" title="North East Lincolnshire" label="North East Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="152" end="164" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430547" start="492" end="503" title="Scartho Top" label="Scartho Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="547" end="554" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="624" end="633" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1054" end="1067" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869642" start="1138" end="1144" title="Laceby" label="Laceby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178651" start="1149" end="1156" title="Bradley, Lincolnshire" label="Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49961" start="1303" end="1316" title="Odo of Bayeux" label="Odo of Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1336" end="1357" title="William I of England" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q149727" start="1385" end="1396" title="Saint Giles" label="Saint Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1432" end="1443" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="1733" end="1753" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="2273" end="2282" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="2357" end="2364" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257470" start="2440" end="2455" title="John Shaw-Lefevre" label="J Shaw-Le-Fevre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664061" start="2471" end="2496" title="Local Government Act 1929" label="Local Government Act 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="2502" end="2511" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="2538" end="2545" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257317" start="2566" end="2593" title="public assistance committee" label="public assistance committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031228" start="2666" end="2681" title="National Health" label="National Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000835" start="2824" end="2841" title="Princess of Wales" label="Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="2906" end="2915" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28940927" start="3292" end="3307" title="Herbert Scaping" label="Herbert Scaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="3364" end="3372" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="3464" end="3477" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069916" start="3962" end="3972" title="Nunsthorpe" label="Nunsthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992690" start="4109" end="4116" title="Waltham, Lincolnshire" label="Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="4188" end="4198" title="Green Belt" label="Green Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="4869" end="4881" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="5622" end="5663" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Her Royal Highness, the Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430547" start="5754" end="5765" title="Scartho Top" label="Scartho Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="6251" end="6263" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992690" start="6365" end="6372" title="Waltham, Lincolnshire" label="Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636805" start="6417" end="6427" title="Humberside" label="Humberside"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="6450" end="6463" title="Great Grimsby (borough)" label="Great Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q610492" start="6537" end="6541" title="Spar (retailer)" label="Spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154383" start="6629" end="6639" title="Take-out" label="take-aways"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="6646" end="6654" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="6821" end="6831" title="Lloyds TSB" label="Lloyds TSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q449067" start="6986" end="7002" title="building society" label="building society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323549" start="7041" end="7058" title="Richard A Collins" label="Richard A Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884715" start="7116" end="7130" title="Holton-le-Clay" label="Holton-le-Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960676" start="7167" end="7180" title="Brenda Fisher" label="Brenda Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442886" start="7233" end="7248" title="Hanserd Knollys" label="Hanserd Knollys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122370" start="7274" end="7292" title="particular Baptist" label="particular Baptist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476990" wikidata="Q4603527" url="?curid=476990" title="2004 in LGBTQ rights">
<text>This is a list of notable events in the history of LGBTQ rights that took place in the year 2004.

==Events==

===January===
* 1 – Tasmanian laws come into effect recognising civil unions between same-sex couples. Tasmania becomes the first Australian state to enact such laws.
* 8 – The New Jersey legislature passes a bill creating a domestic partnership status for same-sex couples, with many of the same legal rights as marriage. Governor James McGreevy signs the bill into law four days later, making New Jersey the fifth US state to offer such a status to same-sex couples. The law officially takes effect 180 days later. 

===February===
* 4 – The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court answers the state&#x27;s senate that the proposed civil unions will still violate the constitution by maintaining an inferior status of same-sex couples.
* 6 – Bob Taft, governor of the U.S. state of Ohio, signs the state&#x27;s Defense of Marriage Act which denies recognition of same-sex marriages, civil unions or domestic partner agreements performed in other states. It also outlaws same-sex marriage within the state and forbids state benefits from being extended to gay and lesbian couples.
* 10 – In the United Kingdom, the Gender Recognition Bill passes in the House of Lords.
* 12
** National Freedom to Marry Day in the United States
** City officials in San Francisco start issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples in violation of state law, staging what they view as an act of civil disobedience, by marrying Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon in the first known civil marriage of a same-sex couple in the country. Over 80 couples are whisked through quick ceremonies.
** In the U.S. state of Virginia, the House of Delegates gives preliminary approval to legislation that would ban the recognition of same-sex civil unions and partnerships.
* 15 – Officials at the city and county of San Francisco turn away hundreds of would-be same-sex newlyweds after thousands of couples show up to marry over the weekend. The city claims it can only handle between 400 and 600 marriages a day, or about one a minute.
* 16 – Officials at the city and county of San Francisco estimate by the end of the day that they will have issued 2,000 marriage licenses for same-sex couples in the four days since they started granting licenses to same-sex couples.
* 17 – San Francisco Superior court Judge James L. Warner postpones any decision to block San Francisco from issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples and to void the 2,464 same-sex marriages that were performed in the city since February 12. This was on the grounds that the Proposition 22 Legal Defense and Education Fund&#x27;s order for San Francisco to &quot;cease and desist issuing marriage licenses to and/or solemnizing marriages of same-sex couples; to show cause before this court...&quot; had an improper semicolon. To do both, rather than one or the other, would have exceeded the judge&#x27;s jurisdiction.
* 18 – The California state agency that records marriages states that forms which have been altered, as San Francisco slightly did on its same-sex marriage licenses, will not be registered.
* 19
** In Washington, D.C., The Bush administration reserves judgement on the proposed Federal Marriage Amendment to the U.S. Constitution until the Massachusetts legislature and San Francisco courts take further action.
** San Francisco sues the state of California to force the state to accept marriage licenses it altered to remove reference to bride and groom.
** The American Civil Liberties Union says it will appeal to U.S. federal court to overturn Florida&#x27;s laws banning adoption by lesbians and gays.
* 20
** Victoria Dunlap, county clerk of rural Sandoval County, New Mexico, starts issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples, citing lack of legal grounds for denial.
** Democratic party leaders in California try to withdraw from the divisive political issue of same-sex marriage. A Public Policy Institute of California poll indicates that half of Californians oppose same-sex marriage.
** Arnold Schwarzenegger, governor of California, writes to state Attorney General Bill Lockyer telling him to take legal action to stop the San Francisco from granting marriage licenses to same-sex couples, saying the practice presents &quot;an imminent risk to civil order&quot;.
** In the U.S. state of Oklahoma, a proposed amendment to the state&#x27;s constitution to outlaw same-sex marriage dies in the Senate Human Resources Committee.
* 22 – Saying he will defend California&#x27;s laws limiting marriage to opposite-sex couples, state attorney general Bill Lockyer dismisses governor Arnold Schwarzenegger&#x27;s &quot;order&quot; in the San Francisco marriage licenses debate, saying the office of Attorney General is independent of gubernatorial power.
* 24
** United States President George W. Bush announces his support for a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage. Bush did not explicitly endorse the Federal Marriage Amendment (FMA), which has been criticised for potentially also denying states the ability to recognise same-sex civil unions and partnerships. However, he did say that the FMA &quot;&quot;meets his principles&quot; in protecting the &quot;sanctity of marriage&quot;&quot; between men and women.
* 26 – The mayor of New Paltz, a village in the U.S. state of New York, announces that the town will start performing civil marriages for same-sex couples. It will not attempt to issue marriage certificates, but married couples in New York state will have six months from the date of their wedding to seek a certificate.
* 27
** The Supreme Court of California refuses a petition by state Attorney General Bill Lockyer asking for an immediate ruling on the constitutionality of same-sex marriage and a cease and desist order to prevent San Francisco from granting marriage licenses to more same-sex couples.
** Republican lawmakers in the Indiana House of Representatives fail to introduce legislation for a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage, due to legal maneuvering by Democratic lawmakers in the House&#x27;s leadership causing the Republicans to miss the 2004 deadline for introducing new legislation.

===March===
* 2 – Jason West, mayor of New Paltz is charged with 19 criminal counts of &quot;solemnizing&quot; marriages without a license after officiating same-sex marriage unions. He faces up to a $500 fine and a year in jail on each count.
* 3 – Multnomah County, Oregon, which includes the city of Portland, becomes the second county in the United States where same-sex marriages are legally performed after four county commissioners decide the current state law banning marriage from same-sex couples is against the Oregon constitution. Couples lined up, and clergy performed ceremonies for 3,022 gay couples, mostly from Oregon, over the next month and a half. Couples from throughout the country flocked to Portland to obtain a license and marry legally. See April 20 for a continuation of the story.
* 5
** The Wisconsin State Assembly approves a state constitutional amendment (voted 68–27) to ban same-sex marriage or civil unions.
** The Kansas House passes, by 88 votes to 36, a proposed constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage.
* 10 – Indianapolis, Indiana mayor Bart Peterson issues an executive order that prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation in city and county employment as well as city contractors and vendors.
* 11 – The California Supreme Court orders San Francisco officials to stop performing same-sex marriages. San Francisco officials comply with this order and, for the first time since February 12, refuse to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples. At the same time, the City Attorney of San Francisco sues the State of California on the grounds that prohibiting same-sex marriages is unconstitutional (on a state level).
* 12
** Oregon&#x27;s attorney general issues his opinion on same-sex marriage within Oregon. He concludes that current state law prohibits issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples, but that the Oregon Supreme Court is likely to conclude those statutes violate the state&#x27;s constitution.
** The Wisconsin State Senate approves a state constitutional amendment by a vote of 20–13 to ban same-sex marriage or civil unions.
* 15
** Commissioners of Multnomah County, Oregon, dismiss state attorney general Hardy Myers&#x27; non-binding opinion that same-sex marriages are illegal and vow to continue issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples.
** In South Africa, the Alteration of Sex Description and Sex Status Act comes into force, allowing transsexual and intersex people to change their legally recognized sex.
* 16 – Rhea County, Tennessee commissioners vote 8–0 to ask that state law be changed to allow county officials to effectively ban homosexuals from the county by being able to charge them with &quot;crimes against nature&quot;. After a community uproar, the resolution is withdrawn two days later.
* 19 – Quebec joins Ontario and British Columbia in legalizing same-sex marriage after the Quebec Court of Appeals upholds &quot;Hendricks and Leboeuf v. Quebec&quot;. More than two-thirds of the Canadian population now live in provinces that recognize same-sex marriage.
* 31 – The British government announces the details of the new Civil Partnerships Bill. This would give legal recognition to same sex couples.

===April===
* 1 – The first legal same-sex marriage in the Canadian province of Quebec is celebrated; Michael Hendricks and René Leboeuf wed in Montreal.
* 20 – Oregon Circuit Court Judge Frank Bearden ruled that the state must &quot;accept and register&quot; marriages of same-sex couples. He then ordered a temporary stop to issuing new licenses, but gave the Oregon Legislative Assembly 90 days from the start of its next session to write a law that ensures identical rights for same-sex couples, which could happen through civil marriage or civil union. If the legislature fails to act on the issue within the 90 days, licenses to same-sex couples will resume. The order has been appealed by both proponents and opponents of same-sex marriage, in hopes of the issue making a fast track to the Oregon Supreme Court, which may rule the ban on same-sex marriage unconstitutional. A ruling upheld by the state supreme court in 1999 says government officials must meet an extraordinary burden to treat gays and straights differently – the same high burden required to justify disparate treatment of blacks and whites, or men and women. Opponents hope to change the Oregon constitution to define marriage as restricted to one man and one woman through a vote on the November 2004 ballot.

===May===
* 17 – Massachusetts becomes the first state to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couple and perform same-sex marriages.
* 29 – U.S. District Judge Nancy Gertner (in Massachusetts) rules that stating that someone is homosexual does not libel or slander them, saying that &quot;a finding that such a statement is defamatory requires this court to legitimize the prejudice and bigotry that for too long have plagued the homosexual community&quot;. The ruling came in a lawsuit of James Albright against the singer Madonna: Albright&#x27;s name had appeared in a photo caption in a book by Andrew Morton about Madonna. Gertner said previous rulings that stating someone is homosexual is defamatory had relied on laws criminalizing same-sex sexual acts, and had to be reevaluated in light of more recent rulings that such laws are Constitutionally suspect.

===June===
* 3 – The first civil union is realized in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
* 21 – Maine Governor John Baldacci issues an executive order requiring businesses contracting with the state not to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.
* 24 – the United Kingdom government suffers a defeat in the House of Lords as they approve a wrecking amendment to the Civil Partnership Bill.
* 30 – The Spanish minister of justice, Juan Fernando López Aguilar, announces a number of social bills to be introduced, including one that will legalize same-sex marriage in Spain, one that will introduce rights for common-law couples, and one that will allow transsexual and transgender people to legally change their name and sex designation without the requirement of surgery.

===July===
* 1 – In the United Kingdom, the Gender Recognition Act 2004 receives Royal Assent
* 14
** The Yukon becomes the first territory to legalise same-sex marriage after a ruling by the Yukon Supreme Court.
** The United States Senate votes 48–50 against a procedural motion that would have ended debate on the Federal Marriage Amendment, effectively denying Senate approval this session.
* 22 – The United States House of Representatives passes legislation preventing federal courts from ordering courts in other states recognize same-sex marriage granted elsewhere.
* 30 – Having been passed by the Legislature in April, Maine&#x27;s Domestic Partnership law comes into effect.

===August===
* 9
** Appointed by Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm, Rudy Serra is sworn in as a judge in the state&#x27;s District 36, serving Detroit, becoming the first openly gay judge in the state.
** Authorities in Nepal raid bars and clubs to arrest 39 members of the Blue Diamond Society, a gay rights and AIDS education organization and charge them with &quot;spreading perversion&quot;.
* 12
** In a 5–2 vote, the Supreme Court of California voids the almost 4,000 same-sex marriages performed in San Francisco between February 12 and March 11 after another, unanimous decision that the city&#x27;s officials overstepped their legal rights in ignoring state laws in issuing marriages licences to same-sex couples.
** New Jersey governor James McGreevey becomes the first openly gay chief executive of a US state when he discloses an extramarital affair with another man and announces his resignation effective November 12.
* 13 – The Australian Senate passes legislation by a 38–7 vote that defines marriage as a union of one man and one woman, granting prime minister John Howard a victory in his campaign to outlaw same-sex marriage in the country.
* 16
** Federal justice minister Irwin Cotler announces that the federal government will no longer resist court proceedings aiming to require provincial governments to issue same-sex marriage licences.
** Ohio election officials approve the wording to be placed on the state ballot for the proposed state constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage and extension of marriage rights to the non-married.
* 17
** UNAIDS and Human Rights Watch call on the government of Nepal to release the 39 members of the Blue Diamond Society imprisoned August 9.
** Indiana Governor Joseph Kernan issues an executive order banning gender identity discrimination in the public sector.

===September===
* 16 – Manitoba becomes the fifth of Canada&#x27;s provinces or territories to have legal same-sex marriage. Neither the federal nor provincial governments opposed the lawsuit filed by three couples, one of whom had previously filed suit for same-sex marriage in 1974. See Same-sex marriage in Manitoba.
* 23 – California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signs SB 1234, a bill that defines the legal term &quot;hate crime&quot; (which includes LGBT-motivated violence) for all state and local agencies, encourages the creation of local law enforcement hate-crime protocols and increased hate crime awareness training for law enforcement officers.
* 24 – Nova Scotia becomes the sixth of Canada&#x27;s provinces or territories to have legal same-sex marriage. Neither the federal nor provincial governments opposed the lawsuit filed by three couples, one of whom had already been married in Ontario and sought recognition for their marriage in their home province. See Same-sex marriage in Nova Scotia.
* 25 – California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signs AB 2900, a bill to unify all state anti-discrimination codes to match the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. In essence it adds &quot;sexual orientation&quot; and &quot;gender identity&quot; anti-discrimination protections to the California government, labor, military and veterans, public utilities, unemployment and insurance, and welfare and institutions codes.
* 27 – California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signs SB 1193, a bill to provide a $10,000 death benefit to the surviving spouse or designated beneficiary of a member of one of the state military reserves (California National Guard, State Military Reserve, or Naval militia). The bill, retroactive to March 1, 2003, allows LGBT partners of military personnel be listed as &quot;designated beneficiary&quot;.
* 30 – The proposed Federal Marriage Amendment fails to pass the United States House of Representatives, with a vote of 227–186 on House Joint Resolution 106.

===October===
* 1 – The cabinet of Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero approves a bill to legalize same-sex marriage; the government believes that it will pass the full parliament.
* 29 – Germany expands the rights of same-sex couples, allowing registered domestic partners to adopt each other&#x27;s children.

===November===
* 2
** Voters in 11 states pass amendments to their state constitutions banning same-sex marriage, and in most of those states, civil unions and domestic partnership as well.
** Voters in San Mateo County, California approve a measure to prohibit public-sector employment discrimination based on sexual orientation, with 70.5 per cent of votes in favor.
* 5 – A judge in Saskatchewan rules that same-sex couples have the right to marry in that province.
* 18 – In the United Kingdom, the Civil Partnership Act receives royal assent.
* 29 – Without comment, the Supreme Court of the United States refuses to hear arguments appealing the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruling that same-sex marriage must be allowed in that state, in essence letting the ruling stand.
* 30 – In the case of &quot;Fourie v Minister of Home Affairs&quot;, the Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa rules that the common law definition of marriage must be extended to include same-sex couples. Same-sex marriages would not become immediately possible because of limitations in the Marriage Act; in any event, the government took the decision on appeal to the Constitutional Court.

===December===
* 6 – Louisiana Governor Kathleen Blanco issues an executive order banning sexual orientation discrimination in the public sector.
* 9
** Parliament of New Zealand passes the Civil Union Bill, establishing the new institution of civil union, available to same-sex and de facto couples. The Civil Union Bill has been described as a copy of the Marriage Act with &quot;marriage&quot; replaced by &quot;civil union&quot;. Its companion bill, the Relationships (Statutory References) Bill, was to remove discriminatory provisions from a large number of pieces of legislation, but has run into stumbling blocks in Parliament and has been shelved until 2005.
** The Supreme Court of Canada rules in its reference on same-sex marriage that altering the legal definition of marriage to include same-sex couples is within the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Canada. Prime Minister Paul Martin indicates that his government will introduce such a bill early in the new year.
* 21 – Newfoundland and Labrador becomes the eighth province to legalize same-sex marriage after a Supreme Court judge approves the licences for two lesbian couples.

==Deaths==
* November 28 – Leroy F. Aarons, 70, founder of the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association

==See also==

* Timeline of LGBTQ history – timeline of events from 12,000 BCE to present
* LGBTQ rights by country or territory – current legal status around the world
* LGBTQ social movements

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="131" end="139" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="175" end="186" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="288" end="298" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="336" end="356" title="domestic partnership" label="domestic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242821" start="368" end="383" title="same-sex couple" label="same-sex couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q248668" start="443" end="457" title="James McGreevy" label="James McGreevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="655" end="691" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="742" end="753" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q888281" start="852" end="860" title="Bob Taft" label="Bob Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="892" end="896" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="921" end="944" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="973" end="990" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="993" end="1004" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="1009" end="1025" title="domestic partner" label="domestic partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530946" start="1224" end="1247" title="Gender Recognition Bill" label="Gender Recognition Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1262" end="1276" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972797" start="1286" end="1315" title="National Freedom to Marry Day" label="National Freedom to Marry Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="1487" end="1505" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056017" start="1519" end="1546" title="Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon" label="Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1696" end="1704" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="1710" end="1728" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="2365" end="2379" title="Superior court" label="Superior court"/>
<link wikidata="Q104394" start="2865" end="2874" title="semicolon" label="semicolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466536" start="3039" end="3044" title="form (document)" label="forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="3192" end="3211" title="George W. Bush administration" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="3247" end="3273" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="3281" end="3298" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3309" end="3322" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q353673" start="3508" end="3513" title="bride" label="bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q854830" start="3518" end="3523" title="groom" label="groom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="3532" end="3562" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="3586" end="3604" title="U.S. federal court" label="U.S. federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="3645" end="3653" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q883211" start="3701" end="3713" title="county clerk" label="county clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q493255" start="3723" end="3750" title="Sandoval County, New Mexico" label="Sandoval County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3850" end="3860" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257496" start="3963" end="4000" title="Public Policy Institute of California" label="Public Policy Institute of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="4071" end="4092" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="4134" end="4150" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903273" start="4151" end="4163" title="Bill Lockyer" label="Bill Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="4374" end="4382" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164221" start="4412" end="4437" title="constitution of Oklahoma" label="state&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4865" end="4879" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="4995" end="5021" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="5125" end="5136" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="5142" end="5154" title="domestic partnership" label="partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138833" start="5328" end="5337" title="New Paltz (village), New York" label="New Paltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="5641" end="5668" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="5810" end="5832" title="cease and desist order" label="cease and desist order"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5919" end="5929" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392642" start="5947" end="5979" title="Indiana House of Representatives" label="Indiana House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6096" end="6106" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525059" start="6250" end="6260" title="Jason West" label="Jason West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138833" start="6271" end="6280" title="New Paltz (village), New York" label="New Paltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q450374" start="6482" end="6506" title="Multnomah County, Oregon" label="Multnomah County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="6535" end="6543" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236853" start="7052" end="7076" title="Wisconsin State Assembly" label="Wisconsin State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="7140" end="7157" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="7161" end="7172" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="7182" end="7188" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="7291" end="7303" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q809207" start="7319" end="7332" title="Bart Peterson" label="Bart Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506230" start="7431" end="7437" title="Marion County, Indiana" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="7501" end="7525" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="7576" end="7593" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="7922" end="7928" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7936" end="7952" title="attorney general#United States" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7975" end="8006" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States#Oregon" label="same-sex marriage within Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064922" start="8114" end="8134" title="Oregon Supreme Court" label="Oregon Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164225" start="8184" end="8209" title="Oregon Constitution" label="state&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412814" start="8218" end="8240" title="Wisconsin State Senate" label="Wisconsin State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="8309" end="8326" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="8330" end="8341" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q450374" start="8369" end="8393" title="Multnomah County, Oregon" label="Multnomah County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369101" start="8426" end="8437" title="Hardy Myers" label="Hardy Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="8469" end="8486" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736295" start="8591" end="8639" title="Alteration of Sex Description and Sex Status Act" label="Alteration of Sex Description and Sex Status Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="8667" end="8678" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="8683" end="8691" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q502377" start="8746" end="8768" title="Rhea County, Tennessee" label="Rhea County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9044" end="9050" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="9057" end="9064" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="9069" end="9085" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824826" start="9372" end="9395" title="Civil Partnerships Bill" label="Civil Partnerships Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="9487" end="9504" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9533" end="9539" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831080" start="9555" end="9589" title="Michael Hendricks and René Leboeuf" label="Michael Hendricks and René Leboeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="9597" end="9605" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101433" start="9614" end="9634" title="Oregon Circuit Court" label="Oregon Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101257" start="9815" end="9842" title="Oregon Legislative Assembly" label="Oregon Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064922" start="10250" end="10270" title="Oregon Supreme Court" label="Oregon Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="10757" end="10770" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="11264" end="11271" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="11633" end="11644" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="11660" end="11677" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="11694" end="11699" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q502949" start="11709" end="11722" title="John Baldacci" label="John Baldacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="11914" end="11928" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037702" start="11947" end="11965" title="wrecking amendment" label="wrecking amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824826" start="11973" end="11995" title="Civil Partnership Bill" label="Civil Partnership Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423" start="12152" end="12178" title="same-sex marriage in Spain" label="same-sex marriage in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="12215" end="12233" title="common-law marriage" label="common-law couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="12259" end="12270" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="12275" end="12286" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="12318" end="12322" title="name change" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="12370" end="12377" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530946" start="12424" end="12451" title="Gender Recognition Act 2004" label="Gender Recognition Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="12461" end="12473" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="12600" end="12620" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135595" start="12643" end="12660" title="cloture" label="procedural motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="12697" end="12723" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="12786" end="12824" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290189" start="13009" end="13042" title="Domestic partnership in Maine" label="Maine&amp;#x27;s Domestic Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="13100" end="13108" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234994" start="13114" end="13131" title="Jennifer Granholm" label="Jennifer Granholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="13285" end="13290" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929057" start="13339" end="13359" title="Blue Diamond Society" label="Blue Diamond Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="13488" end="13515" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="13791" end="13801" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q248668" start="13811" end="13826" title="James McGreevey" label="James McGreevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="14008" end="14025" title="Australian Senate" label="Australian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="14143" end="14154" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q983119" start="14258" end="14270" title="Irwin Cotler" label="Irwin Cotler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="14430" end="14434" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="14641" end="14647" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="14652" end="14670" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="14781" end="14788" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431576" start="14798" end="14811" title="Joe Kernan (politician)" label="Joseph Kernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="14923" end="14931" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409153" start="15189" end="15218" title="Same-sex marriage in Manitoba" label="Same-sex marriage in Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="15247" end="15268" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="15568" end="15579" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5810069" start="15882" end="15914" title="Same-sex marriage in Nova Scotia" label="Same-sex marriage in Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="15943" end="15964" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="16372" end="16393" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16437" end="16450" title="death benefit" label="death benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="16563" end="16577" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088231" start="16585" end="16601" title="Military Reserve" label="Military Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q125867348" start="16606" end="16619" title="Naval militia" label="Naval militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="16774" end="16800" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="16819" end="16857" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="16972" end="17000" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="17029" end="17046" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="17207" end="17212" title="adoption" label="adopt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="17445" end="17461" title="San Mateo County, California" label="San Mateo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="17628" end="17640" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409169" start="17687" end="17709" title="same-sex marriage in Saskatchewan" label="marry in that province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824826" start="17745" end="17766" title="Civil Partnership Act" label="Civil Partnership Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="17776" end="17788" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="17818" end="17852" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="17893" end="17929" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866184" start="18056" end="18089" title="Fourie v Minister of Home Affairs" label="Fourie v Minister of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368304" start="18101" end="18140" title="Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa" label="Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="18156" end="18166" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772826" start="18323" end="18335" title="Marriage Act (South Africa)" label="Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133886" start="18401" end="18421" title="Constitutional Court of South Africa" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="18445" end="18454" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q237786" start="18464" end="18479" title="Kathleen Blanco" label="Kathleen Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="18577" end="18602" title="Parliament of New Zealand" label="Parliament of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147546" start="18614" end="18630" title="Civil unions in New Zealand" label="Civil Union Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="18668" end="18679" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="19099" end="19122" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307130" start="19136" end="19145" title="reference question" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="19276" end="19296" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="19313" end="19324" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="19412" end="19437" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="19504" end="19517" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121617" start="19599" end="19614" title="Leroy F. Aarons" label="Leroy F. Aarons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974089" start="19635" end="19683" title="National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association" label="National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q202256" start="19701" end="19726" title="Timeline of LGBTQ history" label="Timeline of LGBTQ history"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="19777" end="19813" title="LGBTQ rights by country or territory" label="LGBTQ rights by country or territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="19856" end="19878" title="LGBTQ social movements" label="LGBTQ social movements"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476992" wikidata="Q216450" url="?curid=476992" title="Mercedes Sosa">
<text>Haydée Mercedes &quot;La Negra&quot; Sosa (; 9 July 1935 – 4 October 2009) was an Argentine singer who was popular throughout Latin America and many countries outside the region. With her roots in Argentine folk music, Sosa became one of the preeminent exponents of &quot;El nuevo cancionero&quot;. She gave voice to songs written by many Latin American songwriters. Her music made people hail her as the &quot;voice of the voiceless ones&quot;. She was often called &quot;the conscience of Latin America&quot;.

Sosa performed in venues such as the Lincoln Center in New York City, the Théâtre Mogador in Paris, the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City, as well as sold-out shows in New York&#x27;s Carnegie Hall and the Roman Colosseum during her final decade of life. Her career spanned four decades and she was the recipient of six Latin Grammy awards (2000, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2011), including a Latin Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2004 and two posthumous Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album in 2009 and 2011. She won the Premio Gardel in 2000, the main musical award in Argentina. She served as an ambassador for UNICEF.

==Life==
Sosa was born on 9 July 1935, in San Miguel de Tucumán, in the northwestern Argentine province of Tucumán, of mestizo ancestry. She was of French, Spanish and Diaguita descent. Her parents, a day laborer and a washerwoman, were Peronists, although they never registered in the party, and she started her career as a singer for the Peronist Party in Tucuman under the name Gladys Osorio. In 1950, at age fifteen, she won a singing competition organized by a local radio station and was given a contract to perform for two months. She recorded her first album, &quot;La Voz de la Zafra&quot;, in 1959. A performance at the 1965 Cosquín National Folklore Festival—where she was introduced and brought to the stage while sitting in the audience by fellow folk singer Jorge Cafrune— brought her to the attention of the Argentine public. Sosa and her first husband, Manuel Oscar Matus, with whom she had one son, were key players in the mid-60s &quot;nueva canción&quot; movement (which was called &quot;nuevo cancionero&quot; in Argentina). Her second record was &quot;Canciones con Fundamento&quot;, a collection of Argentine folk songs.
Sosa &quot;spent the late 1960s building her audience in Europe and among the cosmopolitan middle class in Buenos Aires, becoming in the process a much bigger star&quot; than her contemporaries.In 1967, Sosa toured the United States and Europe with great success. In later years, she performed and recorded extensively, broadening her repertoire to include material from throughout Latin America.

In the early 1970s, Sosa released two concept albums in collaboration with composer Ariel Ramírez and lyricist Félix Luna: &quot;Cantata Sudamericana&quot; and &quot;Mujeres Argentinas&quot; (Argentine Women). She also recorded a tribute to Chilean musician Violeta Parra in 1971, including what was to become one of Sosa&#x27;s signature songs, &quot;Gracias a la vida&quot;. She further popularized of songs written by Milton Nascimento of Brazil and Pablo Milanés and Silvio Rodríguez both from Cuba.
After the military junta of Jorge Videla came to power in 1976, the atmosphere in Argentina grew increasingly oppressive. Sosa faced death threats against both her and her family, but refused for many years to leave the country. At a concert in La Plata in 1979, Sosa was searched and arrested on stage, along with all those attending the concert. Their release came about through international intervention. Banned in her own country, she moved to Paris and then to Madrid.

Sosa returned to Argentina from her exile in Europe in 1982, several months before the military regime collapsed as a result of the Falklands War, and gave a series of concerts at the &quot;Teatro Ópera&quot; in Buenos Aires, where she invited many of her younger colleagues to share the stage. A double album of recordings from these performances became an instant best seller. In subsequent years, Sosa continued to tour both in Argentina and abroad, performing in such venues as the Lincoln Center in New York City and the &quot;Théâtre Mogador&quot; in Paris. In poor health for much of the 1990s, she performed a comeback show in Argentina in 1998. In 1994, she played in the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City. In 2002, she sold out both Carnegie Hall in New York and the Colosseum in Rome in the same year.
A supporter of Perón, she favored leftist causes throughout her life. She opposed President Carlos Menem, who was in office from 1989 to 1999, and supported the election of Néstor Kirchner, who became president in 2003.
Sosa was a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Latin America and the Caribbean. 

Sosa disliked being identified as a protest singer. While she was outright in her political stances, Sosa said the following on the position of the artist: 

In a career spanning four decades, she worked with performers across several genres and generations, folk, opera, pop, rock, including Martha Argerich, Andrea Bocelli, David Broza, Franco Battiato, Jaime Roos, Joan Baez, Francis Cabrel, Gal Costa, Luz Casal, Lila Downs, Lucio Dalla, Maria Farantouri, Lucecita Benitez, Nilda Fernández, Charly Garcia, León Gieco, Gian Marco, Nana Mouskouri, Pablo Milanés, Holly Near, Milton Nascimento, Pata Negra, Fito Páez, Franco De Vita, Lourdes Pérez, Luciano Pavarotti, Silvio Rodríguez, Ismael Serrano, Shakira, Sting, Caetano Veloso, Julieta Venegas, Gustavo Cerati and Konstantin Wecker

Sosa participated in a 1999 production of Ariel Ramírez&#x27;s &quot;Misa Criolla&quot;. Her song &quot;Balderrama&quot; is featured in the 2008 movie &quot;Che&quot;, starring Benicio del Toro as the Argentine Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara.

Sosa was the co-chair of the Earth Charter International Commission.

==Awards==
Sosa won the Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album in 2000 (&quot;Misa Criolla&quot;), 2003 (&quot;Acústico&quot;), 2006 (&quot;Corazón Libre&quot;), 2009 (&quot;Cantora 1&quot;, which also won Best Recording Package and was nominated for Album of the Year), and 2011 (&quot;Deja La Vida Volar&quot;), as well as several international awards.

In 1995, Konex Foundation from Argentina granted her the Diamond Konex Award, one of the most prestigious awards in Argentina, as the most important personality in the popular music of her country in the last decade.

==Death==

Suffering from recurrent endocrine and respiratory problems in later years, the 74-year-old Sosa was hospitalized in Buenos Aires on 18 September 2009. She died from multiple organ failure on 4 October 2009, at 5:15 am. She is survived by one son, Fabián Matus, born of her first marriage. He said: &quot;She lived her 74 years to the fullest. She had done practically everything she wanted, she didn&#x27;t have any type of barrier or any type of fear that limited her&quot;. The hospital expressed its sympathies to her relatives. Her website featured the following: &quot;Her undisputed talent, her honesty and her profound convictions leave a great legacy to future generations&quot;.

Her body was placed on display at the National Congress building in Buenos Aires for the public to pay their respects, and President Fernández de Kirchner ordered three days of national mourning. Thousands had queued by the end of the day.

Sosa&#x27;s obituary in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; said she was &quot;an unrivalled interpreter of works by her compatriot, the Argentine Atahualpa Yupanqui, and Chile&#x27;s Violeta Parra&quot;. Helen Popper of Reuters reported her death by saying she &quot;fought South America&#x27;s dictators with her voice and became a giant of contemporary Latin American music&quot;. Sosa received three Latin Grammy nominations for her album, in 2009 . She went on to win Best Folk Album about a month after her death.

==Tributes==
In 2019, Sosa was celebrated by a Google Doodle. The doodle was showcased in Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Cuba, Iceland, Sweden, Serbia, Greece, Israel and Vietnam.

In 2023, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Sosa at number 160 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.

==Discography==
Sosa recorded forty albums.

=== Studio albums ===
=== EPs ===
=== Live albums ===
=== Compilation albums ===
==Filmography==
*&quot;Güemes, la tierra en armas&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Argentinísima&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Esta es mi Argentina&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Mercedes Sosa, como un pájaro libre&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Será possible el sur: Mercedes Sosa&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Historias de Argentina en vivo&quot; (2001)

== Further reading ==
* (Abridged version of Mercedes Sosa - The Voice of Hope)
* 
==References==
==External links==
* Tribute to Mercedes Sosa (in Portuguese BR)
* Mercedes Sosa&#x27;s website (in Spanish)
* Mercedes Sosa&#x27;s News (in Spanish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216450" start="0" end="15" title="Mercedes Sosa" label="Haydée Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216450" start="22" end="30" title="Mercedes Sosa" label="La Negra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216450" start="37" end="41" title="Mercedes Sosa" label="Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="82" end="91" title="Argentines" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="126" end="139" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q645992" start="197" end="217" title="Folk music of Argentina" label="Argentine folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="550" end="564" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527525" start="587" end="602" title="Théâtre Mogador" label="Théâtre Mogador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="617" end="631" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="694" end="707" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="722" end="731" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q921469" start="830" end="842" title="Latin Grammy" label="Latin Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345366" start="900" end="939" title="Latin Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Latin Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496351" start="967" end="1005" title="Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album" label="Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494051" start="1036" end="1049" title="Premios Gardel" label="Premio Gardel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="1128" end="1134" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q44255" start="1179" end="1200" title="San Miguel de Tucumán" label="San Miguel de Tucumán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437320" start="1209" end="1231" title="Argentine Northwest" label="northwestern Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44829" start="1244" end="1251" title="Tucumán Province" label="Tucumán"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="1256" end="1263" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q278944" start="1305" end="1313" title="Diaguita" label="Diaguita"/>
<link wikidata="Q464555" start="1374" end="1383" title="Peronism" label="Peronists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053668" start="1477" end="1491" title="Peronist Party" label="Peronist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q44829" start="1495" end="1502" title="Tucumán Province" label="Tucuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830392" start="1711" end="1729" title="La voz de la zafra" label="La Voz de la Zafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174678" start="1772" end="1806" title="Cosquín Festival" label="Cosquín National Folklore Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q981505" start="1909" end="1922" title="Jorge Cafrune" label="Jorge Cafrune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2006" end="2024" title="Manuel Oscar Matus" label="Manuel Oscar Matus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151259" start="2091" end="2104" title="nueva canción" label="nueva canción"/>
<link wikidata="Q356552" start="2762" end="2775" title="Ariel Ramírez" label="Ariel Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q226053" start="2789" end="2799" title="Félix Luna" label="Félix Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q230499" start="2936" end="2949" title="Violeta Parra" label="Violeta Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737250" start="3030" end="3047" title="Gracias a la vida" label="Gracias a la vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q542847" start="3099" end="3116" title="Milton Nascimento" label="Milton Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q560953" start="3131" end="3144" title="Pablo Milanés" label="Pablo Milanés"/>
<link wikidata="Q377956" start="3149" end="3165" title="Silvio Rodríguez" label="Silvio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3176" end="3180" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q645986" start="3192" end="3206" title="National Reorganization Process" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q75853" start="3210" end="3222" title="Jorge Videla" label="Jorge Videla"/>
<link wikidata="Q44059" start="3427" end="3435" title="La Plata" label="La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="3649" end="3655" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="3790" end="3803" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q937079" start="3848" end="3860" title="Teatro Opera" label="Teatro Ópera"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="4144" end="4158" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527525" start="4190" end="4205" title="Théâtre Mogador" label="Théâtre Mogador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="4339" end="4353" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="4398" end="4411" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="4432" end="4441" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="4483" end="4488" title="Juan Perón" label="Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q185107" start="4560" end="4572" title="Carlos Menem" label="Carlos Menem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170899" start="4641" end="4656" title="Néstor Kirchner" label="Néstor Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q378422" start="4699" end="4725" title="UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador" label="UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q156810" start="5058" end="5073" title="Martha Argerich" label="Martha Argerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402" start="5075" end="5089" title="Andrea Bocelli" label="Andrea Bocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q731076" start="5091" end="5102" title="David Broza" label="David Broza"/>
<link wikidata="Q25147" start="5104" end="5119" title="Franco Battiato" label="Franco Battiato"/>
<link wikidata="Q382570" start="5121" end="5131" title="Jaime Roos" label="Jaime Roos"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="5133" end="5142" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q324981" start="5144" end="5158" title="Francis Cabrel" label="Francis Cabrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q236361" start="5160" end="5169" title="Gal Costa" label="Gal Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q265053" start="5171" end="5180" title="Luz Casal" label="Luz Casal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23880" start="5182" end="5192" title="Lila Downs" label="Lila Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167546" start="5194" end="5205" title="Lucio Dalla" label="Lucio Dalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q234918" start="5207" end="5223" title="Maria Farantouri" label="Maria Farantouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696446" start="5225" end="5241" title="Lucecita Benitez" label="Lucecita Benitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341867" start="5243" end="5258" title="Nilda Fernández" label="Nilda Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q467940" start="5260" end="5273" title="Charly Garcia" label="Charly Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742007" start="5275" end="5285" title="León Gieco" label="León Gieco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558037" start="5287" end="5297" title="Gian Marco" label="Gian Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q154662" start="5299" end="5313" title="Nana Mouskouri" label="Nana Mouskouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q560953" start="5315" end="5328" title="Pablo Milanés" label="Pablo Milanés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624891" start="5330" end="5340" title="Holly Near" label="Holly Near"/>
<link wikidata="Q542847" start="5342" end="5359" title="Milton Nascimento" label="Milton Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240661" start="5361" end="5371" title="Pata Negra" label="Pata Negra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393935" start="5373" end="5382" title="Fito Páez" label="Fito Páez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442690" start="5384" end="5398" title="Franco De Vita" label="Franco De Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689780" start="5400" end="5413" title="Lourdes Pérez" label="Lourdes Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="5415" end="5432" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q377956" start="5434" end="5450" title="Silvio Rodríguez" label="Silvio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q22624" start="5452" end="5466" title="Ismael Serrano" label="Ismael Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="5468" end="5475" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="5477" end="5482" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q309983" start="5484" end="5498" title="Caetano Veloso" label="Caetano Veloso"/>
<link wikidata="Q232214" start="5500" end="5515" title="Julieta Venegas" label="Julieta Venegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q533284" start="5517" end="5531" title="Gustavo Cerati" label="Gustavo Cerati"/>
<link wikidata="Q45373" start="5536" end="5553" title="Konstantin Wecker" label="Konstantin Wecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q356552" start="5597" end="5610" title="Ariel Ramírez" label="Ariel Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039175" start="5712" end="5715" title="Che (2008 film)" label="Che"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="5732" end="5748" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="5766" end="5773" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="5788" end="5799" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q871256" start="5831" end="5844" title="Earth Charter" label="Earth Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496351" start="5896" end="5934" title="Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album" label="Latin Grammy Award for Best Folk Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283291" start="6046" end="6055" title="Cantora, un Viaje Íntimo" label="Cantora 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496373" start="6078" end="6100" title="Latin Grammy Award for Best Recording Package" label="Best Recording Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496321" start="6123" end="6140" title="Latin Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966540" start="6237" end="6253" title="Konex Foundation" label="Konex Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404922" start="6293" end="6304" title="Konex Award" label="Konex Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="6482" end="6491" title="Endocrine system" label="endocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="6496" end="6507" title="Respiratory system" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193870" start="6623" end="6645" title="multiple organ failure" label="multiple organ failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q646190" start="7185" end="7202" title="Argentine National Congress" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="7418" end="7437" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q284017" start="7531" end="7549" title="Atahualpa Yupanqui" label="Atahualpa Yupanqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q230499" start="7568" end="7581" title="Violeta Parra" label="Violeta Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="7605" end="7612" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q921469" start="7788" end="7800" title="Latin Grammy" label="Latin Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="7952" end="7965" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="7995" end="8004" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="8006" end="8011" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="8013" end="8020" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="8022" end="8030" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="8032" end="8039" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="8041" end="8045" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="8047" end="8054" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="8056" end="8060" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="8062" end="8069" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="8079" end="8085" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="8087" end="8093" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="8095" end="8101" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="8106" end="8113" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="8131" end="8144" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8380" end="8406" title="Güemes: la tierra en armas" label="Güemes, la tierra en armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789506" start="8427" end="8440" title="Argentinísima" label="Argentinísima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8461" end="8481" title="Esta es mi Argentina" label="Esta es mi Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8502" end="8537" title="Mercedes Sosa: como un pajaro libre" label="Mercedes Sosa, como un pájaro libre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8558" end="8593" title="Será possible el sur: Mercedes Sosa" label="Será possible el sur: Mercedes Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8614" end="8644" title="Historias de Argentina en vivo" label="Historias de Argentina en vivo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476993" wikidata="Q15020929" url="?curid=476993" title="Thermoelectric materials">
<text>Thermoelectric materials show the thermoelectric effect in a strong or convenient form.

The &quot;thermoelectric effect&quot; refers to phenomena by which either a temperature difference creates an electric potential or an electric current creates a temperature difference. These phenomena are known more specifically as the Seebeck effect (creating a voltage from temperature difference), Peltier effect (driving heat flow with an electric current), and Thomson effect (reversible heating or cooling within a conductor when there is both an electric current and a temperature gradient). While all materials have a nonzero thermoelectric effect, in most materials it is too small to be useful. However, low-cost materials that have a sufficiently strong thermoelectric effect (and other required properties) are also considered for applications including power generation and refrigeration. The most commonly used thermoelectric material is based on bismuth telluride ().

Thermoelectric materials are used in thermoelectric systems for cooling or heating in niche applications, and are being studied as a way to regenerate electricity from waste heat. Research in the field is still driven by materials development, primarily in optimizing transport and thermoelectric properties.

==Thermoelectric figure of merit==

The usefulness of a material in thermoelectric systems is determined by the device efficiency. This is determined by the material&#x27;s electrical conductivity (&quot;σ&quot;), thermal conductivity (&quot;κ&quot;), and Seebeck coefficient (S), which change with temperature (&quot;T&quot;). The maximum efficiency of the energy conversion process (for both power generation and cooling) at a given temperature point in the material is determined by the thermoelectric materials figure of merit formula_1, given byformula_2

===Device efficiency===
The efficiency of a thermoelectric device for electricity generation is given by formula_3, defined as formula_4

The maximum efficiency of a thermoelectric device is typically described in terms of its device figure of merit formula_5 where the maximum device efficiency is approximately given by formula_6 where formula_7 is the fixed temperature at the hot junction, formula_8 is the fixed temperature at the surface being cooled, and formula_9 is the mean of formula_7 and formula_8. This maximum efficiency equation is exact when thermoelectric properties are temperature-independent.

For a single thermoelectric leg the device efficiency can be calculated from the temperature dependent properties &quot;S&quot;, &quot;κ&quot; and &quot;σ&quot; and the heat and electric current flow through the material.
In an actual thermoelectric device, two materials are used (typically one n-type and one p-type) with metal interconnects. The maximum efficiency formula_12 is then calculated from the efficiency of both legs and the electrical and thermal losses from the interconnects and surroundings.

Ignoring these losses and temperature dependencies in &quot;S&quot;, &quot;κ&quot; and &quot;σ&quot;, an inexact estimate for formula_5 is given byformula_14 where formula_15 is the electrical resistivity, and the properties are averaged over the temperature range; the subscripts n and p denote properties related to the n- and p-type semiconducting thermoelectric materials, respectively. Only when n and p elements have the same and temperature independent properties (formula_16) does formula_17.

Since thermoelectric devices are heat engines, their efficiency is limited by the Carnot efficiency formula_18, the first factor in formula_12, while formula_5 and formula_1 determines the maximum reversibility of the thermodynamic process globally and locally, respectively. Regardless, the coefficient of performance of current commercial thermoelectric refrigerators ranges from 0.3 to 0.6, one-sixth the value of traditional vapor-compression refrigerators.

===Power factor===

Often the thermoelectric power factor is reported for a thermoelectric material, given by formula_22 where &quot;S&quot; is the Seebeck coefficient, and &quot;σ&quot; is the electrical conductivity.

Although it is often claimed that TE devices with materials with a higher power factor are able to &#x27;generate&#x27; more energy (move more heat or extract more energy from that temperature difference) this is only true for a thermoelectric device with fixed geometry and unlimited heat source and cooling. If the geometry of the device is optimally designed for the specific application, the thermoelectric materials will operate at their peak efficiency which is determined by their formula_23 not formula_24.

===Aspects of materials choice===
For good efficiency, materials with high electrical conductivity, low thermal conductivity and high Seebeck coefficient are needed.

====Electron state density: metals vs semiconductors ====
The band structure of semiconductors offers better thermoelectric effects than the band structure of metals.

The Fermi energy is below the conduction band causing the state density to be asymmetric around the Fermi energy. Therefore, the average electron energy of the conduction band is higher than the Fermi energy, making the system conducive for charge motion into a lower energy state. By contrast, the Fermi energy lies in the conduction band in metals. This makes the state density symmetric about the Fermi energy so that the average conduction electron energy is close to the Fermi energy, reducing the forces pushing for charge transport. Therefore, semiconductors are ideal thermoelectric materials.

====Conductivity ====
In the efficiency equations above, thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity compete.

The thermal conductivity &quot;κ&quot; in crystalline solids has mainly two components: 
:&quot;κ&quot; = &quot;κ&quot; electron + &quot;κ&quot; phonon

According to the Wiedemann–Franz law, the higher the electrical conductivity, the higher &quot;κ&quot; electron becomes. Thus in metals the ratio of thermal to electrical conductivity is about fixed, as the electron part dominates.
In semiconductors, the phonon part is important and cannot be neglected. It reduces the efficiency. For good efficiency a low ratio of &quot;κ&quot; phonon / &quot;κ&quot; electron is desired.

Therefore, it is necessary to minimize &quot;κ&quot; phonon and keep the electrical conductivity high. Thus semiconductors should be highly doped.

G. A. Slack proposed that in order to optimize the figure of merit, phonons, which are responsible for thermal conductivity must experience the material as a glass (experiencing a high degree of phonon scattering—lowering thermal conductivity) while electrons must experience it as a crystal (experiencing very little scattering—maintaining electrical conductivity): this concept is called phonon glass electron crystal. The figure of merit can be improved through the independent adjustment of these properties.

==== Quality factor ====

The maximum formula_25 of a material is given by the material&#x27;s quality factor

:formula_26

where formula_27 is the Boltzmann constant, formula_28 is the reduced Planck constant, formula_29 is the number of degenerated valleys for the band, formula_30 is the average longitudinal elastic moduli, formula_31 is the inertial effective mass, formula_32 is the deformation potential coefficient, formula_33 is the lattice thermal conduction, and formula_34 is temperature. The figure of merit, formula_25, depends on doping concentration and temperature of the material of interest.

The material quality factor formula_36 is useful because it allows for an intrinsic comparison of possible efficiency between different materials. This relation shows that improving the electronic component formula_37, which primarily affects the Seebeck coefficient, will increase the quality factor of a material. A large density of states can be created due to a large number of conducting bands (formula_29) or by flat bands giving a high band effective mass (formula_39). For isotropic materials formula_40. Therefore, it is desirable for thermoelectric materials to have high valley degeneracy in a very sharp band structure. Other complex features of the electronic structure are important. These can be partially quantified using an electronic fitness function.

==Materials of interest==
Strategies to improve thermoelectric performances include both advanced bulk materials and the use of low-dimensional systems. Such approaches to reduce lattice thermal conductivity fall under three general material types: (1) Alloys: create point defects, vacancies, or rattling structures (heavy-ion species with large vibrational amplitudes contained within partially filled structural sites) to scatter phonons within the unit cell crystal; (2) Complex crystals: separate the phonon glass from the electron crystal using approaches similar to those for superconductors (the region responsible for electron transport should be an electron crystal of a high-mobility semiconductor, while the phonon glass should ideally house disordered structures and dopants without disrupting the electron crystal, analogous to the charge reservoir in high-Tc superconductors); (3) Multiphase nanocomposites: scatter phonons at the interfaces of nanostructured materials, be they mixed composites or thin film superlattices.

Materials under consideration for thermoelectric device applications include:

===Bismuth chalcogenides and their nanostructures===
Materials such as  and  comprise some of the best performing room temperature thermoelectrics with a temperature-independent figure-of-merit, ZT, between 0.8 and 1.0. Nanostructuring these materials to produce a layered superlattice structure of alternating and layers produces a device within which there is good electrical conductivity but perpendicular to which thermal conductivity is poor. The result is an enhanced ZT (approximately 2.4 at room temperature for p-type). Note that this high value of ZT has not been independently confirmed due to the complicated demands on the growth of such superlattices and device fabrication; however the material ZT values are consistent with the performance of hot-spot coolers made out of these materials and validated at Intel Labs.

Bismuth telluride and its solid solutions are good thermoelectric materials at room temperature and therefore suitable for refrigeration applications around 300 K. The Czochralski method has been used to grow single crystalline bismuth telluride compounds. These compounds are usually obtained with directional solidification from melt or powder metallurgy processes. Materials produced with these methods have lower efficiency than single crystalline ones due to the random orientation of crystal grains, but their mechanical properties are superior and the sensitivity to structural defects and impurities is lower due to high optimal carrier concentration.

The required carrier concentration is obtained by choosing a nonstoichiometric composition, which is achieved by introducing excess bismuth or tellurium atoms to primary melt or by dopant impurities. Some possible dopants are halogens and group IV and V atoms. Due to the small bandgap (0.16 eV) Bi2Te3 is partially degenerate and the corresponding Fermi-level should be close to the conduction band minimum at room temperature. The size of the band-gap means that Bi2Te3 has high intrinsic carrier concentration. Therefore, minority carrier conduction cannot be neglected for small stoichiometric deviations. Use of telluride compounds is limited by the toxicity and rarity of tellurium.

===Lead tellurides===

Heremans &quot;et al.&quot; (2008) demonstrated that thallium-doped lead telluride alloy (PbTe) achieves a ZT of 1.5 at 773 K. Later, Snyder &quot;et al.&quot; (2011) reported ZT~1.4 at 750 K in sodium-doped PbTe, and ZT~1.8 at 850 K in sodium-doped PbTe1−xSex alloy. Snyder&#x27;s group determined that both thallium and sodium alter the electronic structure of the crystal increasing electronic conductivity. They also claim that selenium increases electric conductivity and reduces thermal conductivity.

In 2012 another team used lead telluride to convert waste heat to electricity, reaching a ZT of 2.2, which they claimed was the highest yet reported.

===Inorganic clathrates===

Inorganic clathrates have the general formula AxByC46-y (type I) and AxByC136-y (type II), where B and C are group III and IV elements, respectively, which form the framework where “guest” A atoms (alkali or alkaline earth metal) are encapsulated in two different polyhedra facing each other. The differences between types I and II come from the number and size of voids present in their unit cells. Transport properties depend on the framework&#x27;s properties, but tuning is possible by changing the “guest” atoms.

The most direct approach to synthesize and optimize the thermoelectric properties of semiconducting type I clathrates is substitutional doping, where some framework atoms are replaced with dopant atoms. In addition, powder metallurgical and crystal growth techniques have been used in clathrate synthesis. The structural and chemical properties of clathrates enable the optimization of their transport properties as a function of stoichiometry. The structure of type II materials allows a partial filling of the polyhedra, enabling better tuning of the electrical properties and therefore better control of the doping level. Partially filled variants can be synthesized as semiconducting or even insulating.

Blake &quot;et al.&quot; have predicted ZT~0.5 at room temperature and ZT~1.7 at 800 K for optimized compositions. Kuznetsov &quot;et al.&quot; measured electrical resistance and Seebeck coefficient for three different type I clathrates above room temperature and by estimating high temperature thermal conductivity from the published low temperature data they obtained ZT~0.7 at 700 K for Ba8Ga16Ge30 and ZT~0.87 at 870 K for Ba8Ga16Si30.

===Compounds of Mg and group-14 element===

Mg2BIV (B14=Si, Ge, Sn) compounds and their solid solutions are good thermoelectric materials and their ZT values are comparable with those of established materials. The appropriate production methods are based on direct co-melting, but mechanical alloying has also been used. During synthesis, magnesium losses due to evaporation and segregation of components (especially for Mg2Sn) need to be taken into account. Directed crystallization methods can produce single crystals of Mg2Si, but they intrinsically have n-type conductivity, and doping, e.g. with Sn, Ga, Ag or Li, is required to produce p-type material which is required for an efficient thermoelectric device. Solid solutions and doped compounds have to be annealed in order to produce homogeneous samples – with the same properties throughout. At 800 K, Mg2Si0.55−xSn0.4Ge0.05Bix has been reported to have a figure of merit about 1.4, the highest ever reported for these compounds.

===Skutterudite thermoelectrics===
Skutterudites have a chemical composition of LM4X12, where L is a rare-earth metal (optional component), M is a transition metal, and X is a metalloid, a group V element or a pnictogen such as phosphorus, antimony, or arsenic. These materials exhibit ZT&gt;1.0 and can potentially be used in multistage thermoelectric devices.

Unfilled, these materials contain voids, which can be filled with low-coordination ions (usually rare-earth elements) to reduce thermal conductivity by producing sources for lattice phonon scattering, without reducing electrical conductivity. It is also possible to reduce the thermal conductivity in skutterudite without filling these voids using a special architecture containing nano- and micro-pores.

NASA is developing a Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator in which the thermocouples would be made of skutterudite, which can function with a smaller temperature difference than the current tellurium designs. This would mean that an otherwise similar RTG would generate 25% more power at the beginning of a mission and at least 50% more after seventeen years. NASA hopes to use the design on the next New Frontiers mission.

===Oxide thermoelectrics===
Homologous oxide compounds (such as those of the form ()n—the Ruddlesden-Popper phase) have layered superlattice structures that make them promising candidates for use in high-temperature thermoelectric devices. These materials exhibit low thermal conductivity perpendicular to the layers while maintaining good electronic conductivity within the layers. Their ZT values can reach 2.4 for epitaxial films, and the enhanced thermal stability of such oxides, as compared to conventional high-ZT bismuth compounds, makes them superior high-temperature thermoelectrics.

Interest in oxides as thermoelectric materials was reawakened in 1997 when a relatively high thermoelectric power was reported for NaCo2O4. In addition to their thermal stability, other advantages of oxides are their low toxicity and high oxidation resistance. Simultaneously controlling both the electric and phonon systems may require nanostructured materials. Layered Ca3Co4O9 exhibited ZT values of 1.4–2.7 at 900 K. If the layers in a given material have the same stoichiometry, they will be stacked so that the same atoms will not be positioned on top of each other, impeding phonon conductivity perpendicular to the layers. Recently, oxide thermoelectrics have gained a lot of attention so that the range of promising phases increased drastically. Novel members of this family include ZnO, MnO2, and NbO2.

===Cation-substituted copper sulfide thermoelectrics===

All variables mentioned are included in the equation for the dimensionless figure of merit, &quot;zT&quot;, which can be seen at the top of this page. The goal of any thermoelectric experiment is to make the power factor, &quot;S2 σ&quot;, larger while maintaining a small thermal conductivity. This is because electricity is produced through a temperature gradient, so materials that can equilibrate heat very quickly are not useful. The two compounds detailed below were found to exhibit high-performing thermoelectric properties, which can be evidenced by the reported figure of merit in either respective manuscript.

Cuprokalininite (CuCr2S4) is a copper-dominant analogue of the mineral joegoldsteinite. It was recently found within metamorphic rocks in Slyudyanka, part of the South Baikal region of Russia, and researchers have determined that Sb-doped cuprokalininite (Cu1-xSbxCr2S4) shows promise in renewable technology. Doping is the act of intentionally adding an impurity, usually to modify the electrochemical characteristics of the seed material. The introduction of antimony enhances the power factor by bringing in extra electrons, which increases the Seebeck coefficient, &quot;S&quot;, and reduces the magnetic moment (how likely the particles are to align with a magnetic field); it also distorts the crystal structure, which lowers the thermal conductivity, &quot;κ&quot;. Khan &quot;et al.&quot; (2017) were able to discover the optimal amount of Sb content (x=0.3) in cuprokalininte in order to develop a device with a ZT value of 0.43.

Bornite (Cu5FeS4) is a sulfide mineral named after an Austrian mineralogist, though it is much more common than the aforementioned cuprokalininite. This metal ore was found to demonstrate an improved thermoelectric performance after undergoing cation exchange with iron. Cation exchange is the process of surrounding a parent crystal with an electrolyte complex, so that the cations (positively charged ions) within the structure can be swapped out for those in solution without affecting the anion sublattice (negatively charged crystal network). What one is left with are crystals that possess a different composition, yet an identical framework. In this way, scientists are granted extreme morphological control and uniformity when generating complicated heterostructures. As to why it was thought to improve the ZT value, the mechanics of cation exchange often bring about crystallographic defects, which cause phonons (simply put, heat particles) to scatter. According to the Debye-Callaway formalism, a model used to determine the lattice thermal conductivity, &quot;κL&quot;, the highly anharmonic behavior due to phonon scattering results in a large thermal resistance. Therefore, a greater defect density decreases the lattice thermal conductivity, thereby making a larger figure of merit. In conclusion, Long &quot;et al.&quot; reported that greater Cu-deficiencies resulted in increases of up to 88% in the ZT value, with a maximum of 0.79.

The composition of thermoelectric devices can dramatically vary depending on the temperature of the heat they must harvest; considering the fact that more than eighty percent of industry waste falls within a range of 373-575 K, chalcogenides and antimonides are better suited for thermoelectric conversion because they can utilize heat at lower temperatures. Not only is sulfur the cheapest and lightest chalcogenide, current surpluses may be causing threat to the environment since it is a byproduct of oil capture, so sulfur consumption could help mitigate future damage. As for the metal, copper is an ideal seed particle for any kind of substitution method because of its high mobility and variable oxidation state, for it can balance or complement the charge of more inflexible cations. Therefore, either the cuprokalininite or bornite minerals could prove ideal thermoelectric components.

===Half-Heusler alloys===

Half-Heusler (HH) alloys have a great potential for high-temperature power generation applications. Examples of these alloys include NbFeSb, NbCoSn and VFeSb. They have a cubic MgAgAs-type structure formed by three interpenetrating face-centered-cubic (fcc) lattices. The ability to substitute any of these three sublattices opens the door for wide variety of compounds to be synthesized. Various atomic substitutions are employed to reduce the thermal conductivity and enhance the electrical conductivity. 
Previously, ZT could not peak more than 0.5 for p-type and 0.8 for n-type HH compound. However, in the past few years, researchers were able to achieve ZT≈1 for both n-type and p-type. Nano-sized grains is one of the approaches used to lower the thermal conductivity via grain boundaries- assisted phonon scattering. Other approach was to utilize the principles of nanocomposites, by which certain combination of metals were favored on others due to the atomic size difference. For instance, Hf and Ti is more effective than Hf and Zr, when reduction of thermal conductivity is of concern, since the atomic size difference between the former is larger than that of the latter.

===Flexible Thermoelectric Materials===

====Electrically conducting organic materials====
Conducting polymers are of significant interest for flexible thermoelectric development. They are flexible, lightweight, geometrically versatile, and can be processed at scale, an important component for commercialization. However, the structural disorder of these materials often inhibits the electrical conductivity much more than the thermal conductivity, limiting their use so far. Some of the most common conducting polymers investigated for flexible thermoelectrics include poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), polyanilines (PANIs), polythiophenes, polyacetylenes, polypyrrole, and polycarbazole. P-type PEDOT:PSS (polystyrene sulfonate) and PEDOT-Tos (Tosylate) have been some of the most encouraging materials investigated. Organic, air-stable n-type thermoelectrics are often harder to synthesize because of their low electron affinity and likelihood of reacting with oxygen and water in the air. These materials often have a figure of merit that is still too low for commercial applications (~0.42 in ) due to the poor electrical conductivity.

====Hybrid Composites====
Hybrid composite thermoelectrics involve blending the previously discussed electrically conducting organic materials or other composite materials with other conductive materials in an effort to improve transport properties. The conductive materials that are most commonly added include carbon nanotubes and graphene due to their conductivities and mechanical properties. It has been shown that carbon nanotubes can increase the tensile strength of the polymer composite they are blended with. However, they can also reduce the flexibility. Furthermore, future study into the orientation and alignment of these added materials will allow for improved performance. The percolation threshold of CNT’s is often especially low, well below 10%, due to their high aspect ratio. A low percolation threshold is desirable for both cost and flexibility purposes. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as graphene-related material was also used to enhance figure of merit of thermoelectric materials. The addition of rather low amount of graphene or rGO around 1 wt% mainly strengthens the phonon scattering at grain boundaries of all these materials as well as increases the charge carrier concentration and mobility in chalcogenide-, skutterudite- and, particularly, metal oxide-based composites. However, significant growth of ZT after addition of graphene or rGO was observed mainly for composites based on thermoelectric materials with low initial ZT. When thermoelectric material is already nanostructured and possesses high electrical conductivity, such an addition does not enhance ZT significantly. Thus, graphene or rGO-additive works mainly as an optimizer of the intrinsic performance of thermoelectric materials.

Hybrid thermoelectric composites also refer to polymer-inorganic thermoelectric composites. This is generally achieved through an inert polymer matrix that is host to thermoelectric filler material. The matrix is generally nonconductive so as to not short current as well as to let the thermoelectric material dominate electrical transport properties. One major benefit of this method is that the polymer matrix will generally be highly disordered and random on many different length scales, meaning that the composite material will can have a much lower thermal conductivity. The general procedure to synthesize these materials involves a solvent to dissolve the polymer and dispersion of the thermoelectric material throughout the mixture.

===Silicon-germanium alloys===

Bulk Si exhibits a low ZT of ~0.01 because of its high thermal conductivity. However, ZT can be as high as 0.6 in silicon nanowires, which retain the high electrical conductivity of doped Si, but reduce the thermal conductivity due to elevated scattering of phonons on their extensive surfaces and low cross-section.

Combining Si and Ge also allows to retain a high electrical conductivity of both components and reduce the thermal conductivity. The reduction originates from additional scattering due to very different lattice (phonon) properties of Si and Ge. As a result, Silicon-germanium alloys are currently the best thermoelectric materials around 1000 °C and are therefore used in some radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTG) (notably the MHW-RTG and GPHS-RTG) and some other high^temperature applications, such as waste heat recovery. Usability of silicon-germanium alloys is limited by their high price and moderate ZT values (p-SiGe ~0.7 and n-SiGe ~1.0); however, ZT can be increased to 1–2 in SiGe nanostructures owing to the reduction in thermal conductivity.

===Sodium cobaltate===
Experiments on crystals of sodium cobaltate, using X-ray and neutron scattering experiments carried out at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) and the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) in Grenoble were able to suppress thermal conductivity by a factor of six compared to vacancy-free sodium cobaltate. The experiments agreed with corresponding density functional calculations. The technique involved large anharmonic displacements of contained within the crystals.

===Amorphous materials===
In 2002, Nolas and Goldsmid have come up with a suggestion that systems with the phonon mean free path larger than the charge carrier mean free path can exhibit an enhanced thermoelectric efficiency. This can be realized in amorphous thermoelectrics and soon they became a focus of many studies. This ground-breaking idea was accomplished in Cu-Ge-Te, NbO2, In-Ga-Zn-O, Zr-Ni-Sn, Si-Au, and Ti-Pb-V-O amorphous systems. It should be mentioned that modelling of transport properties is challenging enough without breaking the long-range order so that design of amorphous thermoelectrics is at its infancy. Naturally, amorphous thermoelectrics give rise to extensive phonon scattering, which is still a challenge for crystalline thermoelectrics. A bright future is expected for these materials.

===Functionally graded materials===
Functionally graded materials make it possible to improve the conversion efficiency of existing thermoelectrics. These materials have a non-uniform carrier concentration distribution and in some cases also solid solution composition. In power generation applications the temperature difference can be several hundred degrees and therefore devices made from homogeneous materials have some part that operates at the temperature where ZT is substantially lower than its maximum value. This problem can be solved by using materials whose transport properties vary along their length thus enabling substantial improvements to the operating efficiency over large temperature differences. This is possible with functionally graded materials as they have a variable carrier concentration along the length of the material, which is optimized for operations over specific temperature range.

===Nanomaterials and superlattices===
In addition to nanostructured / superlattice thin films, other nanostructured materials, including silicon nanowires, nanotubes and quantum dots show potential in improving thermoelectric properties.

==== PbTe/PbSeTe quantum dot superlattice ====
Another example of a superlattice involves a PbTe/PbSeTe quantum dot superlattices provides an enhanced ZT (approximately 1.5 at room temperature) that was higher than the bulk ZT value for either PbTe or PbSeTe (approximately 0.5).

==== Nanocrystal stability and thermal conductivity ====

Not all nanocrystalline materials are stable, because the crystal size can grow at high temperatures, ruining the materials&#x27; desired characteristics.

Nanocrystalline materials have many interfaces between crystals, which Physics of SASER scatter phonons so the thermal conductivity is reduced. Phonons are confined to the grain, if their mean free path is larger than the material grain size.

==== Nanocrystalline transition metal silicides ====
Nanocrystalline transition metal silicides are a promising material group for thermoelectric applications, because they fulfill several criteria that are demanded from the commercial applications point of view. In some nanocrystalline transition metal silicides the power factor is higher than in the corresponding polycrystalline material but the lack of reliable data on thermal conductivity prevents the evaluation of their thermoelectric efficiency.

==== Nanostructured skutterudites ====
Skutterudites, a cobalt arsenide mineral with variable amounts of nickel and iron, can be produced artificially, and are candidates for better thermoelectric materials.
One advantage of nanostructured skutterudites over normal skutterudites is their reduced thermal conductivity, caused by grain boundary scattering. ZT values of ~0.65 and &gt; 0.4 have been achieved with CoSb3 based samples; the former values were 2.0 for Ni and 0.75 for Te-doped material at 680 K and latter for Au-composite at .

Even greater performance improvements can be achieved by using composites and by controlling the grain size, the compaction conditions of polycrystalline samples and the carrier concentration.

==== Graphene ====

Graphene is known for its high electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient at room temperature. However, from thermoelectric perspective, its thermal conductivity is notably high, which in turn limits its ZT. Several approaches were suggested to reduce the thermal conductivity of graphene without altering much its electrical conductivity. These include, but not limited to, the following:

*Doping with carbon isotopes to form isotopic heterojunction such as that of 12C and 13C. Those isotopes possess different phonon frequency mismatch, which leads to the scattering of the heat carriers (phonons). This approach has been shown to affect neither the power factor nor the electrical conductivity.
*Wrinkles and cracks in the graphene structure were shown to contribute to the reduction in the thermal conductivity. Reported values of thermal conductivity of suspended graphene of size 3.8 μm show a wide spread from 1500 to 5000 W/(m·K). A recent study attributed that to the microstructural defects present in graphene, such as wrinkles and cracks, which can drop the thermal conductivity by 27%. These defects help scatter phonons.
*Introduction of defects with techniques such as oxygen plasma treatment. A more systemic way of introducing defects in graphene structure is done through O2 plasma treatment. Ultimately, the graphene sample will contain prescribed-holes spaced and numbered according to the plasma intensity. People were able to improve ZT of graphene from 1 to a value of 2.6 when the defect density is raised from 0.04 to 2.5 (this number is an index of defect density and usually understood when compared to the corresponding value of the un-treated graphene, 0.04 in our case). Nevertheless, this technique would lower the electrical conductivity as well, which can be kept unchanged if the plasma processing parameters are optimized.
*Functionalization of graphene by oxygen. The thermal behavior of graphene oxide has not been investigated extensively as compared to its counterpart; graphene. However, it was shown theoretically by Density Functional Theory (DFT) model that adding oxygen into the lattice of graphene reduces a lot its thermal conductivity due to phonon scattering effect. Scattering of phonons result from both acoustic mismatch and reduced symmetry in graphene structure after doping with oxygen. The reduction of thermal conductivity can easily exceed 50% with this approach.

==== Superlattices and roughness ====
Superlattices – nano structured thermocouples, are considered a good candidate for better thermoelectric device manufacturing, with materials that can be used in manufacturing this structure.

Their production is expensive for general-use due to fabrication processes based on expensive thin-film growth methods. However, since the amount of thin-film materials required for device fabrication with superlattices, is so much less than thin-film materials in bulk thermoelectric materials (almost by a factor of 1/10,000) the long-term cost advantage is indeed favorable.

This is particularly true given the limited availability of tellurium causing competing solar applications for thermoelectric coupling systems to rise.

Superlattice structures also allow the independent manipulation of transport parameters by adjusting the structure itself, enabling research for better understanding of the thermoelectric phenomena in nanoscale, and studying the phonon-blocking electron-transmitting structures – explaining the changes in electric field and conductivity due to the material&#x27;s nano-structure.

Many strategies exist to decrease the superlattice thermal conductivity that are based on engineering of phonon transport. The thermal conductivity along the film plane and wire axis can be reduced by creating diffuse interface scattering and by reducing the interface separation distance, both which are caused by interface roughness.

Interface roughness can naturally occur or may be artificially induced. In nature, roughness is caused by the mixing of atoms of foreign elements. Artificial roughness can be created using various structure types, such as quantum dot interfaces and thin-films on step-covered substrates.

===== Problems in superlattices =====
Reduced electrical conductivity: 
Reduced phonon-scattering interface structures often also exhibit a decrease in electrical conductivity.

The thermal conductivity in the cross-plane direction of the lattice is usually very low, but depending on the type of superlattice, the thermoelectric coefficient may increase because of changes to the band structure.

Low thermal conductivity in superlattices is usually due to strong interface scattering of phonons. Minibands are caused by the lack of quantum confinement within a well. The mini-band structure depends on the superlattice period so that with a very short period (~1 nm) the band structure approaches the alloy limit and with a long period (≥ ~60 nm) minibands become so close to each other that they can be approximated with a continuum.

Superlattice structure countermeasures: 
Counter measures can be taken which practically eliminate the problem of decreased electrical conductivity in a reduced phonon-scattering interface. These measures include the proper choice of superlattice structure, taking advantage of mini-band conduction across superlattices, and avoiding quantum-confinement. It has been shown that because electrons and phonons have different wavelengths, it is possible to engineer the structure in such a way that phonons are scattered more diffusely at the interface than electrons.

Phonon confinement countermeasures: 
Another approach to overcome the decrease in electrical conductivity in reduced phonon-scattering structures is to increase phonon reflectivity and therefore decrease the thermal conductivity perpendicular to the interfaces.

This can be achieved by increasing the mismatch between the materials in adjacent layers, including density, group velocity, specific heat, and the phonon-spectrum.

Interface roughness causes diffuse phonon scattering, which either increases or decreases the phonon reflectivity at the interfaces. A mismatch between bulk dispersion relations confines phonons, and the confinement becomes more favorable as the difference in dispersion increases.

The amount of confinement is currently unknown as only some models and experimental data exist. As with a previous method, the effects on the electrical conductivity have to be considered.

Attempts to localize long-wavelength phonons by aperiodic superlattices or composite superlattices with different periodicities have been made. In addition, defects, especially dislocations, can be used to reduce thermal conductivity in low dimensional systems.

Parasitic heat: 
Parasitic heat conduction in the barrier layers could cause significant performance loss. It has been proposed but not tested that this can be overcome by choosing a certain correct distance between the quantum wells.
The Seebeck coefficient can change its sign in superlattice nanowires due to the existence of minigaps as Fermi energy varies. This indicates that superlattices can be tailored to exhibit n or p-type behavior by using the same dopants as those that are used for corresponding bulk materials by carefully controlling Fermi energy or the dopant concentration. With nanowire arrays, it is possible to exploit semimetal-semiconductor transition due to the quantum confinement and use materials that normally would not be good thermoelectric materials in bulk form. Such elements are for example bismuth. The Seebeck effect could also be used to determine the carrier concentration and Fermi energy in nanowires.

In quantum dot thermoelectrics, unconventional or nonband transport behavior (e.g. tunneling or hopping) is necessary to utilize their special electronic band structure in the transport direction. It is possible to achieve ZT&gt;2 at elevated temperatures with quantum dot superlattices, but they are almost always unsuitable for mass production.

However, in superlattices, where quantum-effects are not involved, with film thickness of only a few micrometers (μm) to about 15 μm, Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattice material has been made into high-performance microcoolers and other devices. The performance of hot-spot coolers are consistent with the reported ZT~2.4 of superlattice materials at 300 K.

Nanocomposites are promising material class for bulk thermoelectric devices, but several challenges have to be overcome to make them suitable for practical applications. It is not well understood why the improved thermoelectric properties appear only in certain materials with specific fabrication processes.

SrTe nanocrystals can be embedded in a bulk PbTe matrix so that rocksalt lattices of both materials are completely aligned (endotaxy) with optimal molar concentration for SrTe only 2%. This can cause strong phonon scattering but would not affect charge transport. In such case, ZT~1.7 can be achieved at 815 K for p-type material.

===Tin selenide===
In 2014, researchers at Northwestern University discovered that tin selenide (SnSe) has a ZT of 2.6 along the b axis of the unit cell. This was the highest value reported to date. This was attributed to an extremely low thermal conductivity found in the SnSe lattice. Specifically, SnSe demonstrated a lattice thermal conductivity of 0.23 W·m−1·K−1, much lower than previously reported values of 0.5 W·m−1·K−1 and greater. This material also exhibited a ZT of along the c-axis and along the a-axis. These results were obtained at a temperature of . As shown by the figures below, SnSe performance metrics were found to significantly improve at higher temperatures; this is due to a structural change. Power factor, conductivity, and thermal conductivity all reach their optimal values at or above 750 K, and appear to plateau at higher temperatures. However, other groups have not been able to reproduce the reported bulk thermal conductivity data.


Although it exists at room temperature in an orthorhombic structure with space group Pnma, SnSe undergoes a transition to a structure with higher symmetry, space group Cmcm, at higher temperatures. This structure consists of Sn-Se planes that are stacked upwards in the a-direction, which accounts for the poor performance out-of-plane (along a-axis). Upon transitioning to the Cmcm structure, SnSe maintains its low thermal conductivity but exhibits higher carrier mobilities.

One impediment to further development of SnSe is that it has a relatively low carrier concentration: approximately 1017 cm−3. Compounding this issue is the fact that SnSe has been reported to have low doping efficiency.
However, such single crystalline materials suffer from inability to make useful devices due to their brittleness as well as narrow range of temperatures, where ZT is reported to be high.

In 2021 the researchers announced a polycrystalline form of SnSe that was at once less brittle and featured a ZT of 3.1.

=== Anderson localization ===
Anderson localization is a quantum mechanical phenomenom where charge carriers in a random potential are trapped in place (i.e. they are in localized states as opposed to being in scattering states if they could move freely). This localization prevents the charge carriers from moving, which inhibits their contribution to the thermal conductivity of a material, but because it also lowers the electrical conductivity, it was thought to reduce ZT and be detrimental for thermoelectric materials. In 2019, it was proposed that by localizing only the minority charge carriers in a doped semiconductor (i.e. holes in an n-doped semiconductor or electrons in a p-doped semiconductor), Anderson localization could increase ZT. The heat conductivity associated with movement of the minority charge carriers would be reduced while electrical conductivity of the majority charge carrier would be unaffected.

In 2020, researchers at Kyung Hee University demonstrated the use of Anderson localization in an n-type semiconductor to improve the thermoelectric properties of a material. They embedded nanoparticles of silver telluride (Ag2Te) in a lead telluride (PbTe) matrix. Ag2Te undergoes a phase transition around 407 K. Below this temperature, both holes and electrons are localized at the Ag2Te nanoparticles, while after the transition, holes are still localized, but electrons can move freely in the material. The researchers were able to increase ZT from 1.5 to above 2.0 using this method.

==Production methods==

Production methods for these materials can be divided into powder and crystal growth based techniques. Powder based techniques offer excellent ability to control and maintain desired carrier distribution, particle size, and composition. In crystal growth techniques dopants are often mixed with melt, but diffusion from gaseous phase can also be used. In the zone melting techniques disks of different materials are stacked on top of others and then materials are mixed with each other when a traveling heater causes melting. In powder techniques, either different powders are mixed with a varying ratio before melting or they are in different layers as a stack before pressing and melting.

There are applications, such as cooling of electronic circuits, where thin films are required. Therefore, thermoelectric materials can also be synthesized using physical vapor deposition techniques. Another reason to utilize these methods is to design these phases and provide guidance for bulk applications.

=== 3D Printing ===
Significant improvement on 3D printing skills has made it possible for thermoelectric components to be prepared via 3D printing. Thermoelectric products are made from special materials that absorb heat and create electricity. The requirement of fitting complex geometries in tightly constrained spaces makes 3D printing the ideal manufacturing technique. There are several benefits to the use of additive manufacturing in thermoelectric material production. Additive manufacturing allows for innovation in the design of these materials, facilitating intricate geometries that would not otherwise be possible by conventional manufacturing processes. It reduces the amount of wasted material during production and allows for faster production turnaround times by eliminating the need for tooling and prototype fabrication, which can be time-consuming and expensive.

There are several major additive manufacturing technologies that have emerged as feasible methods for the production of thermoelectric materials, including continuous inkjet printing, dispenser printing, screen printing, stereolithography, and selective laser sintering. Each method has its own challenges and limitations, especially related to the material class and form that can be used. For example, selective laser sintering (SLS) can be used with metal and ceramic powders, stereolithography (SLA) must be used with curable resins containing solid particle dispersions of the thermoelectric material of choice, and inkjet printing must use inks which are usually synthesized by dispersing inorganic powders to organic solvent or making a suspension.

The motivation for producing thermoelectrics by means of additive manufacturing is due to a desire to improve the properties of these materials, namely increasing their thermoelectric figure of merit ZT, and thereby improving their energy conversion efficiency. Research has been done proving the efficacy and investigating the material properties of thermoelectric materials produced via additive manufacturing. An extrusion-based additive manufacturing method was used to successfully print bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) with various geometries. This method utilized an all-inorganic viscoelastic ink synthesized using Sb2Te2 chalcogenidometallate ions as binders for Bi2Te3-based particles. The results of this method showed homogenous thermoelectric properties throughout the material and a thermoelectric figure of merit ZT of 0.9 for p-type samples and 0.6 for n-type samples. The Seebeck coefficient of this material was also found to increase with increasing temperature up to around 200 °C.

Groundbreaking research has also been done towards the use of selective laser sintering (SLS) for the production of thermoelectric materials. Loose Bi2Te3 powders have been printed via SLS without the use of pre- or post-processing of the material, pre-forming of a substrate, or use of binder materials. The printed samples achieved 88% relative density (compared to a relative density of 92% in conventionally manufactured Bi2Te3). Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging results showed adequate fusion between layers of deposited materials. Though pores existed within the melted region, this is a general existing issue with parts made by SLS, occurring as a result of gas bubbles that get trapped in the melted material during its rapid solidification. X-ray diffraction results showed that the crystal structure of the material was intact after laser melting.

The Seebeck coefficient, figure of merit ZT, electrical and thermal conductivity, specific heat, and thermal diffusivity of the samples were also investigated, at high temperatures up to 500 °C. Of particular interest is the ZT of these Bi2Te3 samples, which were found to decrease with increasing temperatures up to around 300 °C, increase slightly at temperatures between 300-400 °C, and then increase sharply without further increase in temperature. The highest achieved ZT value (for an n-type sample) was about 0.11.

The bulk thermoelectric material properties of samples produced using SLS had comparable thermoelectric and electrical properties to thermoelectric materials produced using conventional manufacturing methods. This the first time the SLS method of thermoelectric material production has been used successfully.

== Mechanical Properties ==
Thermoelectric materials are commonly used in thermoelectric generators to convert the thermal energy into electricity. Thermoelectric generators have the advantage of no moving parts and do not require any chemical reaction for energy conversion, which make them stand out from other sustainable energy resources such as wind turbine and solar cells; Nevertheless, the mechanical performance of thermoelectric generators may decay over time due to plastic, fatigue and creep deformation as a result of being subjected to complex and time-varying thermomechanical stresses.

=== Thermomechanical Stresses in Thermoelectric Devices ===

==== Geometrical Effects ====
In their research, Al-Merbati et al. found that the stress levels around the leg corners of thermoelectric devices were high and generally increased closer to the hot side. However, switching to a trapezoidal leg geometry reduced thermal stresses. Erturun et al. compared various leg geometries and discovered that rectangular prism and cylindrical legs experienced the highest stresses. Studies have also shown that using thinner and longer legs can significantly relieve stress. Tachibana and Fang estimated the relationship between thermal stress, temperature difference, coefficient of thermal expansion, and module dimensions. They found that the thermal stress was proportional toformula_41, where L, α, ΔT and h are module thickness, Coefficients of Thermal Expansion(CTE), temperature difference and leg height, respectively.

==== Effect of Boundary Conditions ====
Clin et al. conducted finite-element analysis to replicate thermal stresses in a thermoelectric module and concluded that the thermal stresses were dependent on the mechanical boundary conditions on the module and on CTE mismatch between various components. The corners of the legs exhibited maximum stresses. In a separate investigation, Turenne et al. examined the distribution of stress in large freestanding thermoelectric modules and those rigidly fixed between two surfaces for thermal exchange. Although boundary conditions significantly altered the stress distribution, the authors deduced that external compressive loading on the TE module resulted in the creation of global compressive stresses.

==== Effect of Thermal Fatigue ====
Thermoelectric materials commonly contain different types of defects, such as dislocations, vacancies, secondary phases and antisite defects. These defects can affect thermoelectric performance by evolving under service conditions. In 2019, Yun Zheng et al. studied thermal fatigue of &lt;chem&gt;Bi_2Te_3 &lt;/chem&gt;-based materials and they proposed that their fatigue behavior can be reduced via boosting the fracture toughness by introducing pores, microcracks or inclusion with the inextricable trade-off with fracture strength.

==== Effect of Thermal Shocks ====
Thermoelectric materials can undergo thermal shock loading through service temperature spikes, soldering and metallizing processes. The thermoelectric leg can be coated with metals to form the required diffusion barrier (Metallizing) and dipping the metallized leg in a molten alloy bath (Soldering) for connecting the leg to the interconnect. In a study conducted by Pelletier et al. thermoelectric disks were quenched for the purpose of thermal shock experiments. They realized that quenching in a hot medium helped disks&#x27; surface to produce compressive stresses in contrary to the core, which developed tensile stress. Anisotropic materials and thin disks were reported to develop greater maximum stresses. They also observed fracturing of specimens during quenching process in a soldering bath from room temperature.

==== Effect of Tensile Stresses ====
Thermal stresses have been quantified and extensively studied in thermoelectric modules throughout the years but von Mises stresses are commonly reported. The von Mises stress defines a constraint on plastic yielding without having any information of the stress nature.

For instance, in a study by Sakamoto et al. the mechanical stability of a &lt;chem&gt;Mg_2Si&lt;/chem&gt;-based structure was investigated that could utilize thermoelectric legs at an angle with elecftrical interconnects and substrates. Maximum tensile strength stresses were calculated and compared to the ultimate tensile strength of different materials. This approach might be misleading for brittle materials (such as ceramics) as they do not possess a defined tensile strength.

==== Thermal Mismatch Stresses ====
In 2018, Chen et al. investigated the cracking failure of Cu pillar bump that was caused by electromigration under thermoelectric coupling load. They showed that under thermoelectric coupling load, will experience severe joule heat and current density that can be accumulate thermoemechanical stress and miscrostructure evolution. They also pointed out that the difference in CTE between materials in the flip chip package causes thermal mismatch stress which can later develop the cavities to expand along cathode into cracks. Also, it is worth noting that they mentioned thermal-electrical coupling can cause electromigration, microcracks and delamination due to temperature and stress concentration that can fail Cu pillar bumps.

==== Phase-Transformation Stresses ====
Phase transformation can occur in thermoelectric materials as well as many other energy materials. As pointed out by Al Malki et al., phase transformation can lead to a total plastic strain when internal mismatch stresses are biased with shear stress. The alpha phase of &lt;chem&gt;Ag_2S
&lt;/chem&gt; transforms to a body centered cubic phase. Liang et al. showed that a crack was observed when heating through 407 K through this phase transformation.

==== Creep Deformation ====
Creep deformation is a time-dependent mechanism where strain accumulates as amaterial is subjected to external or internal stressesat a high homologous temperature in excess ofT/Tm= 0.5(whereTmis the melting point in K). This phenomenon can emerge in thermoelectric devices after operating for a long time (i.e. months to years). A coarse-grained or monocrystalline structures have been shown to be desirable as creep-resistant materials.

==Applications==

===Refrigeration===

Thermoelectric materials can be used as refrigerators, called &quot;thermoelectric coolers&quot;, or &quot;Peltier coolers&quot; after the Peltier effect that controls their operation. As a refrigeration technology, Peltier cooling is far less common than vapor-compression refrigeration. The main advantages of a Peltier cooler (compared to a vapor-compression refrigerator) are its lack of moving parts or refrigerant, and its small size and flexible shape (form factor).

The main disadvantage of Peltier coolers is low efficiency. It is estimated that materials with ZT&gt;3 (about 20–30% Carnot efficiency) would be required to replace traditional coolers in most applications. Today, Peltier coolers are only used in niche applications, especially small scale, where efficiency is not important.

===Power generation===

Thermoelectric efficiency depends on the &quot;figure of merit&quot;, ZT. There is no theoretical upper limit to ZT, and as ZT approaches infinity, the thermoelectric efficiency approaches the Carnot limit. However, until recently no known thermoelectrics had a ZT&gt;3. 
In 2019, researchers reported a material with &quot;approximated&quot; ZT between 5 and 6.

As of 2010, thermoelectric generators serve application niches where efficiency and cost are less important than reliability, light weight, and small size.
Internal combustion engines capture 20–25% of the energy released during fuel combustion.
 Increasing the conversion rate can increase mileage and provide more electricity for on-board controls and creature comforts (stability controls, telematics, navigation systems, electronic braking, etc.) It may be possible to shift energy draw from the engine (in certain cases) to the electrical load in the car, e.g., electrical power steering or electrical coolant pump operation.

Cogeneration power plants use the heat produced during electricity generation for alternative purposes; being this more profitable in industries with high amounts of waste energy.

Thermoelectrics may find applications in such systems or in solar thermal energy generation.
== See also ==
* Batteryless radio
* Pyroelectric effect
* Thermionic converter

==References==
==Bibliography==

== External links ==
*TE Modules Application Tips and Hints 
*The Seebeck Coefficient
*Materials for Thermoelectric Devices (4th chapter of Martin Wagner dissertation)
*New material breaks world record for turning heat into electricity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15020929" start="0" end="24" title="Thermoelectric materials" label="Thermoelectric materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="34" end="55" title="thermoelectric effect" label="thermoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="165" end="176" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="199" end="217" title="electric potential" label="electric potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="326" end="340" title="Seebeck effect" label="Seebeck effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="391" end="405" title="Peltier effect" label="Peltier effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="456" end="470" title="Thomson effect" label="Thomson effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11569191" start="856" end="872" title="thermogenerator" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="877" end="890" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q415256" start="951" end="968" title="bismuth telluride" label="bismuth telluride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1038" end="1078" title="#Refrigeration" label="cooling or heating in niche applications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1114" end="1152" title="#Power generation" label="regenerate electricity from waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1396" end="1413" title="#Device efficiency" label="device efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="1457" end="1480" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="1498" end="1518" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091448" start="1540" end="1559" title="Seebeck coefficient" label="Seebeck coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="1583" end="1594" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676605" start="1799" end="1814" title="figure of merit" label="figure of merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676605" start="2079" end="2094" title="figure of merit" label="figure of merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188910" start="3555" end="3572" title="Carnot efficiency" label="Carnot efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q902090" start="3765" end="3791" title="coefficient of performance" label="coefficient of performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091448" start="4084" end="4103" title="Seebeck coefficient" label="Seebeck coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="4130" end="4153" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="4901" end="4915" title="band structure" label="band structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="4919" end="4932" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q431335" start="5011" end="5023" title="Fermi energy" label="Fermi energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="5037" end="5052" title="conduction band" label="conduction band"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="5667" end="5687" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="5692" end="5715" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q944030" start="5896" end="5915" title="Wiedemann–Franz law" label="Wiedemann–Franz law"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="6521" end="6528" title="phonons" label="phonons"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="6648" end="6654" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="6675" end="6695" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="6703" end="6712" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="6737" end="6744" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="6794" end="6817" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359395" start="8448" end="8461" title="bulk material" label="bulk material"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="8529" end="8536" title="Crystal structure" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="8537" end="8557" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="8603" end="8608" title="Alloy" label="Alloy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8668" end="8677" title="heavy-ion" label="heavy-ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="8709" end="8718" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="8802" end="8811" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="8833" end="8840" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="8933" end="8947" title="superconductor" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="9130" end="9136" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639556" start="9257" end="9270" title="nanocomposite" label="nanocomposite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137203" start="9364" end="9373" title="thin film" label="thin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q332431" start="9374" end="9386" title="superlattice" label="superlattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q415256" start="9540" end="9540" title="Bismuth telluride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q410462" start="9545" end="9545" title="Bismuth selenide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="11190" end="11197" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="11730" end="11738" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="11745" end="11749" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="11999" end="12005" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="12109" end="12117" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q781204" start="12374" end="12383" title="clathrate" label="clathrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="12562" end="12568" title="alkali metal" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="12572" end="12592" title="alkaline earth metal" label="alkaline earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="12628" end="12637" title="polyhedra" label="polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="12752" end="12761" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="13313" end="13326" title="stoichiometry" label="stoichiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q421028" start="14556" end="14561" title="Magnesium silicide" label="Mg2Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q417274" start="15058" end="15070" title="Skutterudite" label="Skutterudite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="15124" end="15140" title="rare-earth metal" label="rare-earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="15170" end="15186" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596" start="15199" end="15208" title="metalloid" label="metalloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675" start="15233" end="15242" title="pnictogen" label="pnictogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="15251" end="15261" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="15263" end="15271" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="15276" end="15283" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="15483" end="15502" title="rare-earth elements" label="rare-earth elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15560" end="15585" title="Electron mobility#Lattice (phonon) scattering" label="lattice phonon scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="15604" end="15627" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="15792" end="15796" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396570" start="15813" end="15864" title="Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator" label="Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q417274" start="15909" end="15921" title="skutterudite" label="skutterudite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="15997" end="16006" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45356" start="16208" end="16221" title="New Frontiers program" label="New Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="16271" end="16276" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105592" start="16322" end="16345" title="Ruddlesden-Popper phase" label="Ruddlesden-Popper phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="16753" end="16760" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="17409" end="17415" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676605" start="17773" end="17788" title="figure of merit" label="figure of merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="17971" end="17991" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21666238" start="18391" end="18406" title="joegoldsteinite" label="joegoldsteinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="18553" end="18558" title="dopant" label="doped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="18781" end="18789" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091448" start="18868" end="18887" title="Seebeck coefficient" label="Seebeck coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="18920" end="18935" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="19056" end="19076" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108694" start="19260" end="19267" title="Bornite" label="Bornite"/>
<link wikidata="Q389137" start="19504" end="19519" title="cation exchange" label="cation exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="19602" end="19613" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="19635" end="19642" title="cations" label="cations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="19753" end="19758" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19953" end="19974" title="morphological control" label="morphological control"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="20137" end="20161" title="crystallographic defects" label="crystallographic defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="20175" end="20182" title="phonons" label="phonons"/>
<link wikidata="Q545228" start="20354" end="20364" title="anharmonic" label="anharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187311" start="20381" end="20398" title="phonon scattering" label="phonon scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q898920" start="20941" end="20954" title="chalcogenides" label="chalcogenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243177" start="20959" end="20970" title="antimonides" label="antimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="21416" end="21431" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324872" start="26594" end="26611" title="silicon nanowires" label="silicon nanowires"/>
<link wikidata="Q367849" start="27056" end="27073" title="Silicon-germanium" label="Silicon-germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q305208" start="27175" end="27212" title="radioisotope thermoelectric generator" label="radioisotope thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715870" start="27233" end="27240" title="MHW-RTG" label="MHW-RTG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093335" start="27245" end="27253" title="GPHS-RTG" label="GPHS-RTG"/>
<link wikidata="Q15081379" start="27309" end="27328" title="waste heat recovery unit" label="waste heat recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="27635" end="27640" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="27645" end="27663" title="neutron scattering" label="neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q901751" start="27695" end="27734" title="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility" label="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="27938" end="27969" title="density functional theory" label="density functional calculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984320" start="28916" end="28944" title="Functionally graded material" label="Functionally graded material"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324872" start="29936" end="29952" title="silicon nanowire" label="silicon nanowire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="29955" end="29964" title="nanotubes" label="nanotubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="29969" end="29981" title="quantum dots" label="quantum dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="30142" end="30153" title="quantum dot" label="quantum dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972615" start="30604" end="30620" title="Sound amplification by stimulated emission of radiation" label="Physics of SASER"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30621" end="30636" title="scatter phonons" label="scatter phonons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30677" end="30697" title="Polaritonics#Guidance and control" label="Phonons are confined"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="31357" end="31364" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q417274" start="31525" end="31537" title="skutterudite" label="skutterudite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="32513" end="32516" title="Carbon-12" label="12C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="32521" end="32524" title="Carbon-13" label="13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q410707" start="33971" end="33985" title="graphene oxide" label="graphene oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q332431" start="34508" end="34520" title="Superlattice" label="Superlattice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35462" end="35499" title="Carrier scattering#Phonon scattering" label="phonon-blocking electron-transmitting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35825" end="35853" title="Carrier scattering#Phonon scattering" label="diffuse interface scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="36174" end="36185" title="quantum dot" label="quantum dot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37357" end="37377" title="Superlattice#Miniband structure" label="mini-band conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268964" start="37413" end="37432" title="Quantum-confined Stark effect" label="quantum-confinement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37807" end="37826" title="Polaritonics#Guidance and control" label="phonon reflectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="38009" end="38016" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q217361" start="38018" end="38032" title="group velocity" label="group velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="38034" end="38047" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38828" end="38842" title="Parasitic heat" label="Parasitic heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033925" start="39452" end="39461" title="semimetal" label="semimetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="40204" end="40215" title="micrometre" label="micrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589976" start="41179" end="41191" title="tin selenide" label="tin selenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q491409" start="43105" end="43126" title="Anderson localization" label="Anderson localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q906709" start="44211" end="44227" title="silver telluride" label="silver telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q900134" start="45473" end="45498" title="physical vapor deposition" label="physical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022471" start="46728" end="46745" title="stereolithography" label="stereolithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q428412" start="46751" end="46776" title="selective laser sintering" label="selective laser sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q192704" start="47496" end="47524" title="energy conversion efficiency" label="energy conversion efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50040" end="50065" title="thermoelectric generators" label="thermoelectric generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319519" start="53827" end="53845" title="Von Mises yield criterion" label="von Mises stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319519" start="53873" end="53889" title="Von Mises yield criterion" label="von Mises stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319010" start="54597" end="54613" title="electromigration" label="electromigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014200" start="54726" end="54736" title="Joule heating" label="joule heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319010" start="55116" end="55132" title="electromigration" label="electromigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="55134" end="55145" title="microcracks" label="microcracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183858" start="55150" end="55162" title="delamination" label="delamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="55517" end="55529" title="shear stress" label="shear stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q462188" start="55762" end="55779" title="Creep (deformation)" label="Creep deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="56380" end="56394" title="Peltier effect" label="Peltier effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q615475" start="56497" end="56528" title="vapor-compression refrigeration" label="vapor-compression refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="56649" end="56660" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347139" start="57261" end="57273" title="Carnot&amp;#x27;s theorem (thermodynamics)" label="Carnot limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="58064" end="58076" title="Cogeneration" label="Cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q303288" start="58305" end="58325" title="solar thermal energy" label="solar thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869898" start="58355" end="58372" title="Batteryless radio" label="Batteryless radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q858318" start="58375" end="58394" title="Pyroelectric effect" label="Pyroelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017624" start="58397" end="58417" title="Thermionic converter" label="Thermionic converter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="476998" wikidata="Q1883116" url="?curid=476998" title="John Garner">
<text>John Garner may refer to:

*John Nance Garner (1868–1967), Vice President of the United States (1933–1941)
*John Garner (golfer) (born 1947), English golfer
*John Donald Garner (born 1931), British diplomat
*John T. Garner (1809–1888), soldier in the Texas Army during the Texas Revolution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298991" start="28" end="45" title="John Nance Garner" label="John Nance Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234898" start="108" end="128" title="John Garner (golfer)" label="John Garner (golfer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229711" start="158" end="176" title="John Donald Garner" label="John Donald Garner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="208" end="222" title="John T. Garner" label="John T. Garner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477002" wikidata="Q969429" url="?curid=477002" title="Laurance Safford">
<text>Captain, U.S.N. Laurance Frye Safford (October 22, 1893 – May 15, 1973) was a U.S. Navy cryptologist. He established the Naval cryptologic organization after World War I, and headed the effort more or less constantly until shortly after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. His identification with the Naval effort was so close that he was the Friedman of the Navy.

==Biography==
Safford was born in 1893 in Somerville, Massachusetts. He secured an appointment to Annapolis, and graduated fifteenth in the class of 1916. In January 1924 he was called from command of a minesweeper off the China coast to head the &quot;research desk&quot; of the Code and Signal Section within the Office of Naval Communications. In the beginning his sole task was to exploit a Japanese naval codebook that had been filched from the Japanese consulate in New York City. To do this he had four civilian clerical employees.

Safford promoted the effort throughout the Navy, attracting Agnes Meyer Driscoll, Joseph Rochefort, Joseph Wenger, and others who were to lead the business through World War II and into the postwar period. He was the first to begin organizing the worldwide Naval collection and direction finding effort, so that when the United States entered World War II it already had a system of intercept stations. Safford himself was wrenched out of the job in 1926, returning in 1929. He remained with the effort except for another sea tour from 1932 to 1936. Meanwhile, the effort that he headed broke Japanese naval codes, and began mechanizing its operations with the addition of IBM equipment. Safford himself was directly involved with building cryptographic machines, and collaborated with the Army&#x27;s Frank Rowlett in the invention of the Sigaba, a cipher machine not known to be broken by any country during World War II.

Safford promoted collaboration with the Army on several fronts and was mostly responsible for the Navy entry into a joint effort with the Army on the Japanese diplomatic systems. He recognized the signs of war that appeared in the diplomatic traffic, and he tried to get a warning message to Pearl Harbor several days before the attack but Director of Naval Communications Admiral Noyes rebuffed him. Organizationally, he promoted a decentralized system with Naval COMINT sections in Washington, Hawaii, and Manila.

He gave the chief Japanese naval code problem to the organization in Hawaii, and named Joseph Rochefort to head the effort. He also gave Rochefort a blank check to obtain the very best Navy cryptanalysts. That paid off in the spring of 1942, when Rochefort&#x27;s team, though unable to break JN-25, the main Japanese naval operational code, was able to deduce important information from it, largely through traffic analysis, in time to help win the Battle of Midway. Rochefort&#x27;s team was also able to trick the Japanese Navy into sending a message that revealed that it was Midway that was the focus of the attack, not the Aleutians, as Washington cryptanalysts maintained.

While many historians have insisted that Rochefort&#x27;s team failed to crack the JN-25B, Naval code the declassified intercepts refute the notion. In August 1970, Safford reaffirmed his views: &quot;By Dec.1/41, we had the code solved to a readable extent.&quot;(Wilford, Decoding Pearl Harbor:
USN Cryptanalysis and the Challenge of JN-25B in 1941). But this is sharply disputed in &quot;Tower of Skulls&quot; by Richard B. Frank, citing a report written during the war that says that no messages in JN-25 were read in 1941.

He was promoted to captain shortly after the United States entered the war, on January 1, 1942. Power struggles with the Navy soon led to Safford&#x27;s ouster in February 1942, with John R. Redman and Joseph Wenger heading sections of OP-20-G. Safford was sidelined for the remainder of the war, as ultimately was Rochefort.

He retired from active duty in 1953 and died in May 1973.

==Amelia Earhart==
About 1970 he began a lengthy analysis of the 1937 flight across the Pacific on which Amelia Earhart disappeared, and after establishing the intricate radio transmission documentation he concluded &quot;poor planning, worse execution&quot;. A book was subsequently published: &quot;Earhart&#x27;s Flight into Yesterday: The Facts Without the Fiction&quot; by Laurance F. Safford with Cameron A. Warren &amp; Robert R. Payne (c2003, Paladwr Press, McLean VA USA) 
==Works==
* &quot;Earhart&#x27;s Flight into Yesterday: The Facts Without the Fiction&quot; (Paladwr Press, 2002) 

==References==
==External links==
* Laurance Safford in NSA Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="0" end="15" title="Captain (US Navy)" label="Captain, U.S.N."/>
<link wikidata="Q969429" start="16" end="37" title="Laurance Safford" label="Laurance Frye Safford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="78" end="87" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="88" end="100" title="Cryptology" label="cryptologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="158" end="169" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="260" end="272" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q969082" start="344" end="352" title="William F. Friedman" label="Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="409" end="434" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="465" end="474" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="839" end="852" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q258206" start="967" end="987" title="Agnes Meyer Driscoll" label="Agnes Meyer Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q187113" start="989" end="1005" title="Joseph Rochefort" label="Joseph Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q422911" start="1007" end="1020" title="Joseph Wenger" label="Joseph Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1071" end="1083" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1580" end="1583" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444058" start="1709" end="1722" title="Frank Rowlett" label="Frank Rowlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121818" start="1747" end="1753" title="Sigaba" label="Sigaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280550" start="2172" end="2204" title="Director of Naval Communications" label="Director of Naval Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="2418" end="2424" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q187113" start="2436" end="2452" title="Joseph Rochefort" label="Joseph Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q734176" start="2642" end="2647" title="JN-25" label="JN-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="2757" end="2773" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="2799" end="2815" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253984" start="3742" end="3756" title="John R. Redman" label="John R. Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q422911" start="3761" end="3774" title="Joseph Wenger" label="Joseph Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q224375" start="3795" end="3802" title="OP-20-G" label="OP-20-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355" start="4050" end="4064" title="Amelia Earhart" label="Amelia Earhart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477003" wikidata="Q63995" url="?curid=477003" title="Elisabeth Volkenrath">
<text>Elisabeth Volkenrath (née Mühlau; 5 September 1919 – 13 December 1945) was a German supervisor at several Nazi concentration camps during World War II.

Volkenrath, née Mühlau, was an &quot;ungelernte Hilfskraft&quot; (unskilled worker) when she volunteered for service in a concentration camp. In October 1941 she began working at Ravensbrück concentration camp as a guard. In March 1942, she was sent to Auschwitz concentration camp where she worked in the same function as at Ravensbrück. At Auschwitz, she met &quot;SS-Rottenführer&quot; Heinz Volkenrath, who had worked there since 1941 as &quot;SS&quot;-&quot;Blockführer&quot;. The couple married in 1943. Elisabeth Volkenrath participated in the selection of prisoners for the gas chambers and, in November 1944, was promoted to &quot;Oberaufseherin&quot; for all camp sections for female prisoners at Auschwitz.

Elisabeth Volkenrath was transferred to Bergen-Belsen when Auschwitz was closed. From February 1945, she was &quot;Oberaufseherin&quot; (supervising wardress) at Bergen-Belsen.

==Belsen trial==
In April 1945, Volkenrath was arrested by the British Army, and was tried in the Belsen trials, at which she was convicted of war crimes. She claimed during her testimony that &quot;it was really awful in the camps, but it was awful for us too. We were punished just like the prisoners.&quot; Sentenced to death, she was the first woman to be executed by hanging at Hamelin Prison by British official executioner Albert Pierrepoint on 13 December 1945 at 09:34.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63995" start="0" end="20" title="Elisabeth Volkenrath" label="Elisabeth Volkenrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="106" end="130" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="138" end="150" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="332" end="362" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="406" end="434" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="601" end="603" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927267" start="616" end="627" title="Blockführer" label="Blockführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="912" end="925" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Bergen-Belsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1113" end="1125" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q662437" start="1148" end="1161" title="Belsen trials" label="Belsen trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1360" end="1378" title="Capital punishment" label="Sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498152" start="1433" end="1447" title="Hamelin Prison" label="Hamelin Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q945914" start="1480" end="1498" title="Albert Pierrepoint" label="Albert Pierrepoint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477011" wikidata="Q130882" url="?curid=477011" title="Allium ursinum">
<text>Allium ursinum, known as wild garlic, ramsons, cowleekes, cows&#x27;s leek, cowleek, buckrams, broad-leaved garlic, wood garlic, bear leek, Eurasian wild garlic or bear&#x27;s garlic, is a bulbous perennial flowering plant in the amaryllis family, Amaryllidaceae. It is native to Eurasia, where it grows in moist woodland. It is a wild relative of onion and garlic, all belonging to the same genus, &quot;Allium&quot;. There are two recognized subspecies: &quot;A. ursinum&quot; subsp. &quot;ursinum&quot; and &quot;A. ursinum&quot; subsp. &quot;ucrainicum&quot;.

== Etymology ==
The Latin specific name &quot;ursinum&quot; translates to &#x27;bear&#x27; and refers to the supposed fondness of the brown bear for the bulbs; folk tales describe the bears consuming them after awakening from hibernation. Another theory is that the &quot;ursinum&quot; may refer to Ursa Major, as &quot;A. ursinum&quot; was perhaps one of the most northerly distributed &quot;Allium&quot; species known to the ancient Greeks, though this hypothesis is disputed. Common names for the plant in many languages also make reference to bears.

Cows love to eat them, hence the modern vernacular name of cows&#x27;s leek. In Devon, dairy farmers have occasionally had the milk of their herds rejected because of the garlic flavour imparted to it by the cows having grazed upon the plant.

Ramsons is from the Old English word &quot;hramsa&quot;, meaning &quot;garlic&quot;. There is evidence it has been used in British cuisine since the Celtic Britons over 1,500 years ago.

Early healers among the Celts, Gaels, and Teutonic tribes and ancient Romans were familiar with the wild herb who called it &quot;herba salutaris&quot;, meaning &#x27;healing herb&#x27;.

==Description==

&quot;Allium ursinum&quot; is a bulbous, perennial herbaceous monocot, that reproduces primarily by seed. The narrow bulbs are formed from a single leaf base and produce bright green entire, elliptical leaves up to long x wide with a petiole up to long. The inflorescence is an umbel of six to 20 white flowers, lacking the bulbils produced by some other &quot;Allium&quot; species such as &quot;Allium vineale&quot; (crow garlic) and &quot;Allium oleraceum&quot; (field garlic). The flowers are star-like with six white tepals, about in diameter, with stamens shorter than the perianth.

It flowers in the British Isles from April to June, starting before deciduous trees leaf in the spring. The flower stem is triangular in cross-section and the leaves are broadly lanceolate, similar to those of the toxic lily of the valley (&quot;Convallaria majalis&quot;).

=== Similarity to poisonous plants ===

Plants that may be mistaken for &quot;A. ursinum&quot; include lily of the valley, &quot;Colchicum autumnale&quot;, &quot;Arum maculatum&quot;, and &quot;Veratrum viride&quot; or &quot;Veratrum album&quot;, all of which are poisonous. In Europe, where ramsons are popularly harvested from the wild, people are regularly poisoned after mistakenly picking lily of the valley or &quot;Colchicum autumnale&quot;.

Grinding the leaves between the fingers and checking for a garlic-like smell can be helpful, but if the smell remains on the hands, one can mistake a subsequent poisonous plant for a safe one. When the leaves of &quot;A. ursinum&quot; and &quot;Arum maculatum&quot; first sprout, they look similar, but unfolded &quot;Arum maculatum&quot; leaves have irregular edges and many deep veins, while ramsons leaves are convex with a single main vein. The leaves of lily of the valley are in pairs, dull green, and come from a single reddish-purple stem, while the leaves of &quot;A. ursinum&quot; each have their own stem, are shiny when new, and are bright green.

==Distribution and habitat==
It is native to Europe and Asia, where it grows in moist woodland. It can be found in temperate Europe from Ireland east to the Caucasus. It is common in much of the lowlands of the British Isles with the exception of the far north of Scotland, Orkney and Shetland. The &quot;ursinum&quot; subspecies is found in western and central Europe, while the &quot;ucrainicum&quot; subspecies is found in the east and southeast.
It grows in deciduous woodlands with moist soils, preferring slightly acidic conditions. In the British Isles, colonies are frequently associated with bluebells (&quot;Hyacinthoides non-scripta&quot;), especially in ancient woodland. It is considered to be an ancient woodland indicator species.

== Ecology ==
As its name suggests, &quot;A. ursinum&quot; is an important food for brown bears. The plant is also a favourite of wild boar.

&quot;A. ursinum&quot; is the primary larval host plant for a specialised hoverfly, &quot;Portevinia maculata&quot; (ramsons hoverfly).

The flowers are pollinated by bees.

== Uses ==
All parts of &quot;A. ursinum&quot; are edible. The leaves can be used as salad, herb, boiled as a vegetable, in soup, or as an ingredient for a sauce that may be a substitute for pesto in lieu of basil. Leaves are also often used to make garlic butter. In Russia the stems are preserved by salting and eaten as a salad. A variety of Cornish Yarg cheese has a rind coated in wild garlic leaves. The leaves can be pickled in the same way as &quot;Allium ochotense&quot; known as mountain garlic in Korea. The bulbs can be used similarly to garlic cloves, and the flowers are also edible. Parts of the plant can be used for preparing Van herbed cheese, a speciality of the Van province in Turkey.

Popular dishes using the plant include pesto, soups, pasta, cheese, scones and Devonnaise.

The leaves are also used as fodder. Cows that have fed on ramsons give milk that tastes slightly of garlic, and butter made from this milk used to be very popular in 19th-century Switzerland.

The first evidence of the human use of &quot;A. ursinum&quot; comes from the Mesolithic settlement of Barkær (Denmark), where an impression of a leaf has been found. In the Swiss Neolithic settlement of Thayngen-Weier (Cortaillod culture), a high concentration of pollen from &quot;A. ursinum&quot; was found in the settlement layer, interpreted by some as evidence for use of the plant as fodder.

=== Herbal remedy ===
&quot;Allium ursinum&quot; has been credited with many medicinal qualities and is a popular homeopathic ingredient. It is often used for treating cardiovascular, respiratory, and digestive problems, as well as for the sterilisation of wounds.

Various minerals are found in much higher amounts in &quot;Allium ursinum&quot; than in clove garlic. It is sometimes called the &quot;magnesium king&quot; of plants because of the high levels of this mineral found in the leaves.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Allioideae
* &quot;Allium tricoccum&quot; - North American wild leek (or &quot;ramps&quot;, a cognate of &quot;ramsons&quot;)
* &quot;Allium ampeloprasum&quot; - Eurasian broadleaf wild leek 
* &quot;Allium ochotense&quot;
* &quot;Allium victorialis&quot;
*List of &quot;Allium&quot; species

==References==
== External links ==

* Tutin, T.G. 1957. Biological flora of the British Isles: &quot;Allium ursinum&quot;. Journal of Ecology 45(3) pp.1003-1010.
* Ramsons at Gernot Katzer&#x27;s Spice Pages
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="25" end="36" title="Allium ursinum" label="wild garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="38" end="45" title="Allium ursinum" label="ramsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="47" end="56" title="Allium ursinum" label="cowleekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="58" end="74" title="Allium ursinum" label="cows&amp;#x27;s leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="76" end="83" title="Allium ursinum" label="cowleek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="85" end="93" title="Allium ursinum" label="buckrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="95" end="114" title="Allium ursinum" label="broad-leaved garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="116" end="127" title="Allium ursinum" label="wood garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="129" end="138" title="Allium ursinum" label="bear leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="140" end="160" title="Allium ursinum" label="Eurasian wild garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="164" end="182" title="Allium ursinum" label="bear&amp;#x27;s garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="189" end="193" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="207" end="222" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="248" end="262" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="348" end="353" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="358" end="364" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="405" end="411" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="699" end="709" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="864" end="874" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="992" end="1006" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1384" end="1395" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="1513" end="1527" title="Celtic Britons" label="Celtic Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="1818" end="1825" title="Monocotyledon" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="2014" end="2027" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q577430" start="2034" end="2039" title="umbel" label="umbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10437539" start="2080" end="2086" title="bulbil" label="bulbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q161230" start="2152" end="2166" title="Allium vineale" label="Allium vineale"/>
<link wikidata="Q161107" start="2197" end="2213" title="Allium oleraceum" label="Allium oleraceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="2277" end="2282" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331384" start="2453" end="2464" title="peduncle (botany)" label="flower stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q101711" start="2591" end="2610" title="Convallaria majalis" label="Convallaria majalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101711" start="2723" end="2741" title="lily of the valley" label="lily of the valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152553" start="2749" end="2768" title="Colchicum autumnale" label="Colchicum autumnale"/>
<link wikidata="Q836366" start="2782" end="2796" title="Arum maculatum" label="Arum maculatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707753" start="2814" end="2829" title="Veratrum viride" label="Veratrum viride"/>
<link wikidata="Q157547" start="2845" end="2859" title="Veratrum album" label="Veratrum album"/>
<link wikidata="Q836366" start="3315" end="3329" title="Arum maculatum" label="Arum maculatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3887" end="3895" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="4004" end="4010" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="4015" end="4023" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="4192" end="4201" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q164013" start="4348" end="4373" title="Hyacinthoides non-scripta" label="Hyacinthoides non-scripta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078732" start="4396" end="4412" title="ancient woodland" label="ancient woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="4607" end="4616" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745226" start="4709" end="4728" title="Portevinia maculata" label="Portevinia maculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="4786" end="4790" title="bees" label="bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q9896" start="4984" end="4989" title="pesto" label="pesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38859" start="5001" end="5006" title="basil" label="basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q377020" start="5138" end="5150" title="Cornish Yarg" label="Cornish Yarg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521402" start="5250" end="5266" title="Allium ochotense" label="Allium ochotense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062076" start="5436" end="5453" title="Van herbed cheese" label="Van herbed cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="5862" end="5872" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5887" end="5893" title="Barkær" label="Barkær"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5964" end="5973" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69152" start="5988" end="5996" title="Thayngen" label="Thayngen"/>
<link wikidata="Q671984" start="6004" end="6022" title="Cortaillod culture" label="Cortaillod culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="6049" end="6055" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49392" start="6710" end="6720" title="Allioideae" label="Allioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714893" start="6729" end="6745" title="Allium tricoccum" label="Allium tricoccum"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="6804" end="6811" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q148995" start="6844" end="6863" title="Allium ampeloprasum" label="Allium ampeloprasum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521402" start="6910" end="6926" title="Allium ochotense" label="Allium ochotense"/>
<link wikidata="Q162924" start="6941" end="6959" title="Allium victorialis" label="Allium victorialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q898713" start="6967" end="7001" title="List of Allium species" label="List of &amp;quot;Allium&amp;quot; species"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477012" wikidata="Q4358242" url="?curid=477012" title="Pain (philosophy)">
<text>Philosophy of pain may be about suffering in general or more specifically about physical pain. The experience of pain is, due to its seeming universality, a very good portal through which to view various aspects of human life. Discussions in philosophy of mind concerning qualia has given rise to a body of knowledge called &quot;philosophy of pain&quot;, which is about pain in the narrow sense of physical pain, and which must be distinguished from philosophical works concerning pain in the broad sense of suffering. This article covers both topics.

==Historical views of pain==

Two near contemporaries in the 18th and 19th centuries, Jeremy Bentham and the Marquis de Sade had very different views on these matters. Bentham saw pain and pleasure as objective phenomena, and defined utilitarianism on that principle. However the Marquis de Sade offered a wholly different view – which is that pain itself has an ethics, and that pursuit of pain, or imposing it, may be as useful and just as pleasurable, and that this indeed is the purpose of the state – to indulge the desire to inflict pain in revenge, for instance, via the law (in his time most punishment was in fact the dealing out of pain). The 19th-century view in Europe was that Bentham&#x27;s view had to be promoted, de Sade&#x27;s (which it found painful) suppressed so intensely that it – as de Sade predicted – became a pleasure in itself to indulge. The Victorian culture is often cited as the best example of this hypocrisy.

Various 20th century philosophers (viz. J.J.C. Smart, David Kellogg Lewis, D.M. Armstrong) have commented upon the meaning of pain and what it can tell us about the nature of human experiences. Pain has also been the subject of various socio-philosophical treatises. Michel Foucault, for example, observed that the biomedical model of pain, and the shift away from pain-inducing punishments, was part of a general Enlightenment invention of Man.

==The individuality of pain==
It is often accepted as &quot;a priori&quot; principle that one has inherent knowledge of one&#x27;s own consciousness simply by virtue of dwelling within an &quot;inner world&quot; of the mind. This drastic distinction between inner world and outer world was most popularized by René Descartes when he solidified his principle of Cartesian dualism. From the centrality of one&#x27;s own consciousness springs a fundamental problem of other minds, the discussion of which has often centered on pain. 
Some scholars refer to psychological pain as an internalized state of suffering. This is opposed to the kind of sensation one gets from hitting one&#x27;s leg against a stone.

==Pain and theories of mind==
The experience of pain has been used by various philosophers to analyze various types of philosophy of mind, such as dualism, identity theory, or functionalism. David Lewis, in his article &#x27;Mad pain and Martian pain&#x27;, gives examples of various types of pain to support his own flavor of functionalism. He defines mad pain to be pain which occurs in a madman who has somehow gotten his &quot;wires crossed&quot; (possibly an early observation distinguishing normal pain from either clinical psychalgia or schizophreniac pain) in such a way that what we usually call &quot;pain&quot; does not cause him to cry or roll in agony, but instead to, for example, become very concentrated and good at mathematics. Martian pain is, to him, pain which occupies the same causal role as our pain, but has a very different physical realization (e.g. the Martian feels pain due to the activation of an elaborate internal hydraulic system rather than, for example, the firing of C-fibers). Both of these phenomena, Lewis claims, are pain, and must be accounted for in any coherent theory of mind.

== See also ==
* Nociception
* Pain
* Pain asymbolia
* Perception
* Suffering

== References ==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Pain (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
*Bibliography—Philosophy of Pain
*Wittgenstein&#x27;s Beetle - Philosophy Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4358242" start="0" end="18" title="Pain (philosophy)" label="Philosophy of pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="32" end="41" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="80" end="93" title="pain" label="physical pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="242" end="260" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="272" end="278" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="408" end="412" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="509" end="518" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="640" end="654" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="663" end="678" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="788" end="802" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="834" end="849" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="917" end="923" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="1052" end="1057" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="1101" end="1108" title="revenge" label="revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="1132" end="1135" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="1154" end="1164" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900116" start="1425" end="1442" title="Victorian morality" label="Victorian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="1486" end="1495" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600759" start="1538" end="1550" title="J.J.C. Smart" label="J.J.C. Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q384522" start="1552" end="1571" title="David Kellogg Lewis" label="David Kellogg Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173590" start="1573" end="1587" title="D.M. Armstrong" label="D.M. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="1734" end="1753" title="Social philosophy" label="socio-philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="1765" end="1780" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1912" end="1925" title="the Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="2005" end="2013" title="A priori and a posteriori" label="a priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="2164" end="2168" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2255" end="2269" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="2306" end="2323" title="Cartesian dualism" label="Cartesian dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q677734" start="2399" end="2421" title="problem of other minds" label="problem of other minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="2772" end="2790" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="2800" end="2807" title="dualism (philosophy of mind)" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546801" start="2809" end="2824" title="identity theory of mind" label="identity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377166" start="2829" end="2842" title="functionalism (philosophy of mind)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q384522" start="2844" end="2855" title="David Kellogg Lewis" label="David Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726099" start="2878" end="2903" title="Mad pain and Martian pain" label="Mad pain and Martian pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377166" start="2980" end="2993" title="Functionalism (philosophy of mind)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q695954" start="3183" end="3193" title="Psychogenic pain" label="psychalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661218" start="3398" end="3405" title="Martian" label="Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="3452" end="3458" title="causal" label="causal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="3599" end="3608" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611131" start="3656" end="3664" title="C fiber" label="C-fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734305" start="3792" end="3803" title="Nociception" label="Nociception"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="3806" end="3810" title="Pain" label="Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868696" start="3813" end="3827" title="Pain asymbolia" label="Pain asymbolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="3830" end="3840" title="Perception" label="Perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="3843" end="3852" title="Suffering" label="Suffering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477018" wikidata="Q1444058" url="?curid=477018" title="Frank Rowlett">
<text>Frank Byron Rowlett (May 2, 1908 – June 29, 1998) was an American cryptologist.

==Life and career==
Rowlett was born in Rose Hill, Lee County, Virginia and attended Emory &amp; Henry College in Emory, Virginia. In 1929 he received a bachelor&#x27;s degree in mathematics and chemistry. He was hired by William Friedman as a &quot;junior cryptanalyst&quot; for the Signals Intelligence Service (SIS) on April Fools&#x27; Day 1930; shortly after, he was followed into SIS by Abraham Sinkov and Solomon Kullback.

During the 1930s, after a lengthy period of training, Rowlett and his colleagues compiled codes and ciphers for use by the U.S. Army and began solving a number of foreign, notably Japanese, systems. In the mid-1930s, they solved the first Japanese machine for encipherment of diplomatic communications, known to the Americans as RED. In 1939–40, Rowlett led the SIS effort that solved a more sophisticated Japanese diplomatic machine cipher, codenamed PURPLE by the U.S. Once, when asked what his greatest contribution to that effort had been, Rowlett said, &quot;I was the one who believed it could be done.&quot; Rowlett supervised cryptanalyst Virginia Dare Aderholdt, who decrypted the Japanese surrender message, August 14, 1945.

Rowlett also played a crucial role in protecting American communications during World War II, making fundamental and innovative contributions to the design of the SIGABA cipher machine. Its security was an important factor in saving American lives in combat. In 1964, Congress awarded Rowlett US$100,000, equivalent to $ in , as partial compensation for his classified cryptologic inventions.

In addition to having highly developed cryptanalytic skills, Rowlett was a good manager, and he rose quickly within the organization. In 1943–45 he was chief of the General Cryptanalytic Branch, and in 1945–1947 chief of the Intelligence Division. From 1949 to 1952, he was technical director in the Office of Operations of the Armed Forces Security Agency, predecessor to the National Security Agency (NSA).

Rowlett differed with General Ralph J. Canine, the first director of NSA, over personnel movements, including his own. Acting on his differences, he transferred to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1952 and worked there until 1958. At that time he returned to NSA as a Special Assistant to the Director. In 1965 Rowlett became commandant of the National Cryptologic School. In 1965, Rowlett was awarded the President&#x27;s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service. He retired from federal service in 1966. In 1965 he was awarded the National Security Medal by President Lyndon B. Johnson for his work on breaking the Japanese Purple cipher.

Rowlett has been inducted into the Military Intelligence Hall of Fame.

Because of his importance in the protection of American communications, the Information Systems Security Organization has named its highest award the Frank Byron Rowlett Award.

Frank Rowlett died June 29, 1998, at age 90.

==See also==
*Operation Gold
*Leo Rosen

==References==
* Frank B. Rowlett, &quot;The Story of Magic: Memoirs of an American Cryptologic Pioneer&quot;, with Foreword and Epilogue by David Kahn, Laguna Hills, CA, Aegean Press, 1999.
*James Gannon, &quot;Stealing Secrets, Telling Lies: How Spies and Codebreakers Helped Shape the Twentieth century&quot;, Washington, D.C., Brassey&#x27;s, 2001, especially chapter 6: Who Broke Purple? (pp. 94–106).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1444058" start="0" end="19" title="Frank Rowlett" label="Frank Byron Rowlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q779391" start="66" end="78" title="cryptologist" label="cryptologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459997" start="121" end="152" title="Rose Hill, Lee County, Virginia" label="Rose Hill, Lee County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373734" start="166" end="191" title="Emory &amp;amp; Henry College" label="Emory &amp;amp; Henry College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373674" start="195" end="210" title="Emory, Virginia" label="Emory, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q969082" start="303" end="319" title="William Friedman" label="William Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667850" start="365" end="393" title="Signals Intelligence Service" label="Signals Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="403" end="424" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q330622" start="474" end="488" title="Abraham Sinkov" label="Abraham Sinkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q896641" start="493" end="509" title="Solomon Kullback" label="Solomon Kullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994879" start="602" end="606" title="Code (cryptography)" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="612" end="618" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="635" end="644" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="692" end="697" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="772" end="780" title="encipher" label="encipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="788" end="798" title="diplomacy" label="diplomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303601" start="841" end="844" title="RED (cipher machine)" label="RED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667850" start="874" end="877" title="Signals Intelligence Service" label="SIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197850" start="964" end="970" title="PURPLE" label="PURPLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q72595943" start="1159" end="1182" title="Virginia Dare Aderholdt" label="Virginia Dare Aderholdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1328" end="1340" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121818" start="1411" end="1417" title="SIGABA" label="SIGABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="1418" end="1432" title="cipher" label="cipher machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="1970" end="1998" title="Armed Forces Security Agency" label="Armed Forces Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="2019" end="2043" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q326109" start="2082" end="2097" title="Ralph J. Canine" label="Ralph J. Canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="2220" end="2247" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="2319" end="2322" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315002" start="2404" end="2431" title="National Cryptologic School" label="National Cryptologic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700391" start="2466" end="2531" title="President&amp;#x27;s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service" label="President&amp;#x27;s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978357" start="2601" end="2624" title="National Security Medal" label="National Security Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="2638" end="2655" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197850" start="2694" end="2700" title="PURPLE" label="Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185112" start="2745" end="2779" title="Military Intelligence Hall of Fame" label="Military Intelligence Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2858" end="2899" title="Information Systems Security Organization" label="Information Systems Security Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485599" start="2932" end="2957" title="Frank Byron Rowlett Award" label="Frank Byron Rowlett Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q427974" start="3020" end="3034" title="Operation Gold" label="Operation Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524190" start="3036" end="3045" title="Leo Rosen" label="Leo Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q451935" start="3101" end="3106" title="Magic (cryptography)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3131" end="3142" title="Cryptography" label="Cryptologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q686493" start="3188" end="3198" title="David Kahn (writer)" label="David Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134475" start="3239" end="3251" title="James Gannon (author)" label="James Gannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="3295" end="3300" title="Espionage" label="Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3305" end="3317" title="Cryptology" label="Codebreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197850" start="3432" end="3438" title="PURPLE" label="Purple"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477026" wikidata="Q225926" url="?curid=477026" title="Kriging">
<text>In statistics, originally in geostatistics, kriging or Kriging (), also known as Gaussian process regression, is a method of interpolation based on Gaussian process governed by prior covariances. Under suitable assumptions of the prior, kriging gives the best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) at unsampled locations. Interpolating methods based on other criteria such as smoothness (e.g., smoothing spline) may not yield the BLUP. The method is widely used in the domain of spatial analysis and computer experiments. The technique is also known as Wiener–Kolmogorov prediction, after Norbert Wiener and Andrey Kolmogorov.

The theoretical basis for the method was developed by the French mathematician Georges Matheron in 1960, based on the master&#x27;s thesis of Danie G. Krige, the pioneering plotter of distance-weighted average gold grades at the Witwatersrand reef complex in South Africa. Krige sought to estimate the most likely distribution of gold based on samples from a few boreholes. The English verb is &quot;to krige&quot;, and the most common noun is &quot;kriging&quot;. The word is sometimes capitalized as &quot;Kriging&quot; in the literature.

Though computationally intensive in its basic formulation, kriging can be scaled to larger problems using various approximation methods.

==Main principles==

===Related terms and techniques===
Kriging predicts the value of a function at a given point by computing a weighted average of the known values of the function in the neighborhood of the point. The method is closely related to regression analysis. Both theories derive a best linear unbiased estimator based on assumptions on covariances, make use of Gauss–Markov theorem to prove independence of the estimate and error, and use very similar formulae. Even so, they are useful in different frameworks: kriging is made for estimation of a single realization of a random field, while regression models are based on multiple observations of a multivariate data set.

The kriging estimation may also be seen as a spline in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, with the reproducing kernel given by the covariance function. The difference with the classical kriging approach is provided by the interpretation: while the spline is motivated by a minimum-norm interpolation based on a Hilbert-space structure, kriging is motivated by an expected squared prediction error based on a stochastic model.

Kriging with &quot;polynomial trend surfaces&quot; is mathematically identical to generalized least squares polynomial curve fitting.

Kriging can also be understood as a form of Bayesian optimization. Kriging starts with a prior distribution over functions. This prior takes the form of a Gaussian process: formula_1 samples from a function will be normally distributed, where the covariance between any two samples is the covariance function (or kernel) of the Gaussian process evaluated at the spatial location of two points. A set of values is then observed, each value associated with a spatial location. Now, a new value can be predicted at any new spatial location by combining the Gaussian prior with a Gaussian likelihood function for each of the observed values. The resulting posterior distribution is also Gaussian, with a mean and covariance that can be simply computed from the observed values, their variance, and the kernel matrix derived from the prior.

===Geostatistical estimator===
In geostatistical models, sampled data are interpreted as the result of a random process. The fact that these models incorporate uncertainty in their conceptualization doesn&#x27;t mean that the phenomenon – the forest, the aquifer, the mineral deposit – has resulted from a random process, but rather it allows one to build a methodological basis for the spatial inference of quantities in unobserved locations and to quantify the uncertainty associated with the estimator.

A stochastic process is, in the context of this model, simply a way to approach the set of data collected from the samples. The first step in geostatistical modulation is to create a random process that best describes the set of observed data.

A value from location formula_2 (generic denomination of a set of geographic coordinates) is interpreted as a realization formula_3 of the random variable formula_4. In the space formula_5, where the set of samples is dispersed, there are formula_1 realizations of the random variables formula_7, correlated between themselves.

The set of random variables constitutes a random function, of which only one realization is known – the set formula_8 of observed data. With only one realization of each random variable, it&#x27;s theoretically impossible to determine any statistical parameter of the individual variables or the function. The proposed solution in the geostatistical formalism consists in &quot;assuming&quot; various degrees of &quot;stationarity&quot; in the random function, in order to make the inference of some statistic values possible.

For instance, if one assumes, based on the homogeneity of samples in area formula_5 where the variable is distributed, the hypothesis that the first moment is stationary (i.e. all random variables have the same mean), then one is assuming that the mean can be estimated by the arithmetic mean of sampled values.

The hypothesis of stationarity related to the second moment is defined in the following way: the correlation between two random variables solely depends on the spatial distance between them and is independent of their location. Thus if formula_10 and formula_11, then:

: formula_12

: formula_13

For simplicity, we define formula_14 and formula_15.

This hypothesis allows one to infer those two measures – the variogram and the covariogram:

: formula_16

: formula_17

where:
: formula_18;
: formula_19 denotes the set of pairs of observations formula_20 such that formula_21, and formula_22 is the number of pairs in the set.
In this set, formula_23 and formula_24 denote the same element. Generally an &quot;approximate distance&quot; formula_25 is used, implemented using a certain tolerance.

===Linear estimation===
Spatial inference, or estimation, of a quantity formula_26, at an unobserved location formula_27, is calculated from a linear combination of the observed values formula_28 and weights formula_29:

: formula_30

The weights formula_31 are intended to summarize two extremely important procedures in a spatial inference process:
* reflect the structural &quot;proximity&quot; of samples to the estimation location formula_27;
* at the same time, they should have a desegregation effect, in order to avoid bias caused by eventual sample &quot;clusters&quot;.

When calculating the weights formula_31, there are two objectives in the geostatistical formalism: &quot;unbias&quot; and &quot;minimal variance of estimation&quot;.

If the cloud of real values formula_34 is plotted against the estimated values formula_35, the criterion for global unbias, &quot;intrinsic stationarity&quot; or wide sense stationarity of the field, implies that the mean of the estimations must be equal to mean of the real values.

The second criterion says that the mean of the squared deviations formula_36 must be minimal, which means that when the cloud of estimated values &quot;versus&quot; the cloud real values is more disperse, the estimator is more imprecise.

==Methods==
Depending on the stochastic properties of the random field and the various degrees of stationarity assumed, different methods for calculating the weights can be deduced, i.e. different types of kriging apply. Classical methods are:
* &quot;Ordinary kriging&quot; assumes constant unknown mean only over the search neighborhood of formula_27.
* &quot;Simple kriging&quot; assumes stationarity of the first moment over the entire domain with a known mean: formula_38, where formula_39 is the known mean.
* &quot;Universal kriging&quot; assumes a general polynomial trend model, such as linear trend model formula_40.
* &quot;IRFk-kriging&quot; assumes formula_41 to be an unknown polynomial in formula_42.
* &quot;Indicator kriging&quot; uses indicator functions instead of the process itself, in order to estimate transition probabilities.
** &quot;Multiple-indicator kriging&quot; is a version of indicator kriging working with a family of indicators. Initially, MIK showed considerable promise as a new method that could more accurately estimate overall global mineral deposit concentrations or grades. However, these benefits have been outweighed by other inherent problems of practicality in modelling due to the inherently large block sizes used and also the lack of mining scale resolution. Conditional simulation is fast, becoming the accepted replacement technique in this case.
* &quot;Disjunctive kriging&quot; is a nonlinear generalisation of kriging.
* &quot;Log-normal kriging&quot; interpolates positive data by means of logarithms.
* &quot;Latent kriging&quot; assumes the various krigings on the latent level (second stage) of the nonlinear mixed-effects model to produce a spatial functional prediction. This technique is useful when analyzing a spatial functional data formula_43, where formula_44 is a time series data over formula_45 period, formula_46 is a vector of formula_47 covariates, and formula_48 is a spatial location (longitude, latitude) of the formula_49-th subject.
*&quot;Co-kriging&quot; denotes the joint kriging of data from multiple sources with a relationship between the different data sources. Co-kriging is also possible in a Bayesian approach.
*&quot;Bayesian kriging&quot; departs from the optimization of unknown coefficients and hyperparameters, which is understood as a maximum likelihood estimate from the Bayesian perspective. Instead, the coefficients and hyperparameters are estimated from their expectation values. An advantage of Bayesian kriging is, that it allows to quantify the evidence for and the uncertainty of the kriging emulator. If the emulator is employed to propagate uncertainties, the quality of the kriging emulator can be assessed by comparing the emulator uncertainty to the total uncertainty (see also Bayesian Polynomial Chaos). Bayesian kriging can also be mixed with co-kriging.

===Ordinary kriging===
The unknown value formula_34 is interpreted as a random variable located in formula_27, as well as the values of neighbors samples formula_52. The estimator formula_35 is also interpreted as a random variable located in formula_27, a result of the linear combination of variables.

Kriging seeks to minimize the mean square value of the following error in estimating formula_34, subject to lack of bias:

: formula_56

The two quality criteria referred to previously can now be expressed in terms of the mean and variance of the new random variable formula_57:

; Lack of bias

Since the random function is stationary, formula_58, the weights must sum to 1 in order to ensure that the model is unbiased. This can be seen as follows:

: formula_59

::::: formula_60

; Minimum variance

Two estimators can have formula_61, but the dispersion around their mean determines the difference between the quality of estimators. To find an estimator with minimum variance, we need to minimize formula_62.

: formula_63

See covariance matrix for a detailed explanation.

: formula_64

where the literals formula_65 stand for

: formula_66

Once defined the covariance model or variogram, formula_67 or formula_68, valid in all field of analysis of formula_69, then we can write an expression for the estimation variance of any estimator in function of the covariance between the samples and the covariances between the samples and the point to estimate:

: formula_70

Some conclusions can be asserted from this expression. The variance of estimation:
* is not quantifiable to any linear estimator, once the stationarity of the mean and of the spatial covariances, or variograms, are assumed;
* grows when the covariance between the samples and the point to estimate decreases. This means that, when the samples are farther away from formula_27, the estimation becomes worse;
* grows with the a priori variance formula_72 of the variable formula_69; when the variable is less disperse, the variance is lower in any point of the area formula_5;
* does not depend on the values of the samples, which means that the same spatial configuration (with the same geometrical relations between samples and the point to estimate) always reproduces the same estimation variance in any part of the area formula_5; this way, the variance does not measure the uncertainty of estimation produced by the local variable.

; System of equations

: formula_76

Solving this optimization problem (see Lagrange multipliers) results in the &quot;kriging system&quot;:

: formula_77

The additional parameter formula_78 is a Lagrange multiplier used in the minimization of the kriging error formula_79 to honor the unbiasedness condition.

===Simple kriging===
Simple kriging is mathematically the simplest, but the least general. It assumes the expectation of the random field is known and relies on a covariance function. However, in most applications neither the expectation nor the covariance are known beforehand.

The practical assumptions for the application of &quot;simple kriging&quot; are:
* Wide-sense stationarity of the field (variance stationary).
* The expectation is zero everywhere: formula_80.
* Known covariance function formula_81.
The covariance function is a crucial design choice, since it stipulates the properties of the Gaussian process and thereby the behaviour of the model. The covariance function encodes information about, for instance, smoothness and periodicity, which is reflected in the estimate produced. A very common covariance function is the squared exponential, which heavily favours smooth function estimates. For this reason, it can produce poor estimates in many real-world applications, especially when the true underlying function contains discontinuities and rapid changes.

; System of equations
The &quot;kriging weights&quot; of &quot;simple kriging&quot; have no unbiasedness condition and are given by the &quot;simple kriging equation system&quot;:
: formula_82

This is analogous to a linear regression of formula_34 on the other formula_84.

; Estimation
The interpolation by simple kriging is given by
: formula_85

The kriging error is given by
: formula_86
which leads to the generalised least-squares version of the Gauss–Markov theorem (Chiles &amp; Delfiner 1999, p. 159):
: formula_87

=== Bayesian kriging ===
&quot;See also Bayesian Polynomial Chaos&quot;

=== Properties ===
* The kriging estimation is unbiased: formula_88.
* The kriging estimation honors the actually observed value: formula_89 (assuming no measurement error is incurred).
* The kriging estimation formula_90 is the best linear unbiased estimator of formula_69 if the assumptions hold. However (e.g. Cressie 1993):
** As with any method, if the assumptions do not hold, kriging might be bad.
** There might be better nonlinear and/or biased methods.
** No properties are guaranteed when the wrong variogram is used. However, typically still a &quot;good&quot; interpolation is achieved.
** Best is not necessarily good: e.g. in case of no spatial dependence the kriging interpolation is only as good as the arithmetic mean.
* Kriging provides formula_92 as a measure of precision. However, this measure relies on the correctness of the variogram.

==Applications==
Although kriging was developed originally for applications in geostatistics, it is a general method of statistical interpolation and can be applied within any discipline to sampled data from random fields that satisfy the appropriate mathematical assumptions. It can be used where spatially related data has been collected (in 2-D or 3-D) and estimates of &quot;fill-in&quot; data are desired in the locations (spatial gaps) between the actual measurements.

To date kriging has been used in a variety of disciplines, including the following:
* Environmental science
* Hydrogeology
* Mining
* Natural resources
* Remote sensing
* Real estate appraisal
* Integrated circuit analysis and optimization
* Modelling of microwave devices
* Astronomy
* Prediction of oil production curve of shale oil wells

===Design and analysis of computer experiments===
Another very important and rapidly growing field of application, in engineering, is the interpolation of data coming out as response variables of deterministic computer simulations, e.g. finite element method (FEM) simulations. In this case, kriging is used as a metamodeling tool, i.e. a black-box model built over a designed set of computer experiments. In many practical engineering problems, such as the design of a metal forming process, a single FEM simulation might be several hours or even a few days long. It is therefore more efficient to design and run a limited number of computer simulations, and then use a kriging interpolator to rapidly predict the response in any other design point. Kriging is therefore used very often as a so-called surrogate model, implemented inside optimization routines. Kriging-based surrogate models may also be used in the case of mixed integer inputs.

==See also==
* Bayes linear statistics
* Gaussian process
* Multivariate interpolation
* Nonparametric regression
* Radial basis function interpolation
* Space mapping
* Spatial dependence
* Variogram
* Gradient-enhanced kriging (GEK)
* Surrogate model
* Information field theory
* Inverse distance weighting

==References==
==Further reading==

===Historical references===
# Agterberg, F. P., &quot;Geomathematics, Mathematical Background and Geo-Science Applications&quot;, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1974.
# Cressie, N. A. C., &quot;The origins of kriging, Mathematical Geology&quot;, v. 22, pp. 239–252, 1990.
# Krige, D. G., &quot;A statistical approach to some mine valuations and allied problems at the Witwatersrand&quot;, Master&#x27;s thesis of the University of Witwatersrand, 1951.
# Link, R. F. and Koch, G. S., &quot;Experimental Designs and Trend-Surface Analsysis, Geostatistics&quot;, A colloquium, Plenum Press, New York, 1970.
# Matheron, G., &quot;Principles of geostatistics&quot;, &quot;Economic Geology&quot;, 58, pp. 1246–1266, 1963.
# Matheron, G., &quot;The intrinsic random functions, and their applications&quot;, &quot;Adv. Appl. Prob.&quot;, 5, pp. 439–468, 1973.
# Merriam, D. F. (editor), &quot;Geostatistics&quot;, a colloquium, Plenum Press, New York, 1970.
# Mockus, J., &quot;On Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum.&quot; Proceedings of the IFIP Technical Conference. 1974.

===Books===
* Abramowitz, M., and Stegun, I. (1972), Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Dover Publications, New York.
* Banerjee, S., Carlin, B. P. and Gelfand, A. E. (2004). Hierarchical Modeling and Analysis for Spatial Data. Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group.
* Chiles, J.-P. and P. Delfiner (1999) &quot;Geostatistics, Modeling Spatial uncertainty&quot;, Wiley Series in Probability and statistics.
* Clark, I., and Harper, W. V., (2000) &quot;Practical Geostatistics 2000&quot;, Ecosse North America, USA.
* Cressie, N. (1993) &quot;Statistics for spatial data&quot;, Wiley, New York.
* David, M. (1988) &quot;Handbook of Applied Advanced Geostatistical Ore Reserve Estimation&quot;, Elsevier Scientific Publishing
* Deutsch, C. V., and Journel, A. G. (1992), GSLIB – Geostatistical Software Library and User&#x27;s Guide, Oxford University Press, New York, 338 pp.
* Goovaerts, P. (1997) &quot;Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation&quot;, Oxford University Press, New York, .
* Isaaks, E. H., and Srivastava, R. M. (1989), An Introduction to Applied Geostatistics, Oxford University Press, New York, 561 pp.
* Journel, A. G. and C. J. Huijbregts (1978) &quot;Mining Geostatistics&quot;, Academic Press London.
* Journel, A. G. (1989), Fundamentals of Geostatistics in Five Lessons, American Geophysical Union, Washington D.C.
* . Also, &quot;Section 15.9. Gaussian Process Regression&quot;.
* Stein, M. L. (1999), &quot;Statistical Interpolation of Spatial Data: Some Theory for Kriging&quot;, Springer, New York.
* Wackernagel, H. (1995) &quot;Multivariate Geostatistics - An Introduction with Applications&quot;, Springer Berlin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440020" start="29" end="42" title="geostatistics" label="geostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="44" end="51" title="Kriging" label="kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="55" end="62" title="Kriging" label="Kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="81" end="108" title="Kriging" label="Gaussian process regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="125" end="138" title="interpolation" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496376" start="148" end="164" title="Gaussian process" label="Gaussian process"/>
<link wikidata="Q201984" start="183" end="193" title="covariance" label="covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q796265" start="255" end="286" title="best linear unbiased prediction" label="best linear unbiased prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="372" end="382" title="smoothness" label="smoothness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546460" start="390" end="406" title="smoothing spline" label="smoothing spline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="475" end="491" title="Spatial analysis#Sampling" label="spatial analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157537" start="496" end="515" title="computer experiment" label="computer experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="549" end="577" title="Kriging" label="Wiener–Kolmogorov prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178577" start="585" end="599" title="Norbert Wiener" label="Norbert Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="604" end="621" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089403" start="703" end="719" title="Georges Matheron" label="Georges Matheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159834" start="766" end="780" title="Danie G. Krige" label="Danie G. Krige"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="853" end="866" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="883" end="895" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845015" start="1280" end="1301" title="Gaussian process approximations" label="approximation methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="1553" end="1572" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428134" start="1597" end="1627" title="best linear unbiased estimator" label="best linear unbiased estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q201984" start="1652" end="1662" title="covariance" label="covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q428134" start="1677" end="1697" title="Gauss–Markov theorem" label="Gauss–Markov theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q735256" start="2035" end="2041" title="spline (mathematics)" label="spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345678" start="2047" end="2079" title="reproducing kernel Hilbert space" label="reproducing kernel Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246261" start="2500" end="2525" title="generalized least squares" label="generalized least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q603159" start="2537" end="2550" title="curve fitting" label="curve fitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002908" start="2597" end="2618" title="Bayesian optimization" label="Bayesian optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="2642" end="2647" title="prior probability distribution" label="prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="2648" end="2660" title="probability distribution" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="2666" end="2675" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="2768" end="2788" title="normal distribution" label="normally distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q201984" start="2800" end="2810" title="covariance" label="covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345662" start="2866" end="2872" title="kernel (statistics)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="2949" end="2952" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q45284" start="3138" end="3157" title="likelihood function" label="likelihood function"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="3205" end="3214" title="Posterior probability" label="posterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="3899" end="3917" title="stochastic process" label="stochastic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="4208" end="4230" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="4281" end="4296" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="4710" end="4731" title="statistical parameter" label="statistical parameter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5142" end="5154" title="Moment (mathematics)#Mean" label="first moment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5358" end="5371" title="Moment (mathematics)#Variance" label="second moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269270" start="5725" end="5734" title="variogram" label="variogram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5743" end="5754" title="covariogram" label="covariogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192209" start="7023" end="7046" title="stationary process" label="wide sense stationarity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7795" end="7807" title="Moment (mathematics)#Mean" label="first moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309532" start="7906" end="7923" title="Universal kriging" label="Universal kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="8074" end="8084" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="8137" end="8155" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q826116" start="8866" end="8876" title="Log-normal distribution" label="Log-normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="8930" end="8939" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079401" start="9042" end="9071" title="nonlinear mixed-effects model" label="nonlinear mixed-effects model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643312" start="9564" end="9572" title="List of things named after Thomas Bayes" label="Bayesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="9713" end="9740" title="Maximum likelihood estimation" label="maximum likelihood estimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="9843" end="9860" title="expectation value" label="expectation value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646884" start="9979" end="9987" title="Surrogate model" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10170" end="10195" title="Polynomial chaos#Bayesian polynomial chaos" label="Bayesian Polynomial Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11289" end="11306" title="Covariance matrix#As a linear operator" label="covariance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269270" start="11442" end="11451" title="variogram" label="variogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="12746" end="12766" title="Lagrange multipliers" label="Lagrange multipliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="12867" end="12886" title="Lagrange multiplier" label="Lagrange multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="13088" end="13099" title="expected value" label="expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361768" start="13107" end="13119" title="random field" label="random field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178897" start="13145" end="13164" title="covariance function" label="covariance function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192209" start="13345" end="13368" title="Stationary process" label="Wide-sense stationarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178897" start="13463" end="13482" title="covariance function" label="covariance function"/>
<link wikidata="Q428134" start="14518" end="14538" title="Gauss–Markov theorem" label="Gauss–Markov theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14631" end="14656" title="Polynomial chaos#Bayesian polynomial chaos" label="Bayesian Polynomial Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q428134" start="14893" end="14923" title="best linear unbiased estimator" label="best linear unbiased estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="16087" end="16108" title="Environmental science" label="Environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q179509" start="16111" end="16123" title="Hydrogeology" label="Hydrogeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="16126" end="16132" title="Mining" label="Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="16135" end="16151" title="Natural resource" label="Natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="16155" end="16169" title="Remote sensing" label="Remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="16172" end="16193" title="Real estate appraisal" label="Real estate appraisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="16276" end="16285" title="Astronomy" label="Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="16461" end="16472" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="16580" end="16601" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925081" start="16656" end="16668" title="metamodeling" label="metamodeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157537" start="16727" end="16746" title="computer experiment" label="computer experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470205" start="16813" end="16826" title="metal forming" label="metal forming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646884" start="17146" end="17161" title="surrogate model" label="surrogate model"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="17182" end="17194" title="optimization" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874459" start="17306" end="17329" title="Bayes linear statistics" label="Bayes linear statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496376" start="17332" end="17348" title="Gaussian process" label="Gaussian process"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334079" start="17351" end="17377" title="Multivariate interpolation" label="Multivariate interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455886" start="17380" end="17404" title="Nonparametric regression" label="Nonparametric regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063433" start="17407" end="17442" title="Radial basis function interpolation" label="Radial basis function interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572595" start="17445" end="17458" title="Space mapping" label="Space mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938983" start="17461" end="17479" title="Spatial dependence" label="Spatial dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269270" start="17482" end="17491" title="Variogram" label="Variogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457717" start="17494" end="17519" title="Gradient-enhanced kriging" label="Gradient-enhanced kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646884" start="17528" end="17543" title="Surrogate model" label="Surrogate model"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597589" start="17546" end="17570" title="Information field theory" label="Information field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430701" start="17573" end="17599" title="Inverse distance weighting" label="Inverse distance weighting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477027" wikidata="Q15525075" url="?curid=477027" title="Luis Maravilla">
<text>Luis Maravilla &quot;(Luis López Tejera)&quot; (1 June 1914 – 10 July 2000) was a Flamenco composer. He was born in Seville, Spain.

Maravilla studied guitar under Marcelo Molina and Pepe de Badajoz, and debuted professionally at the age of 12 in the Pavon Theatre of Seville. In the 1930s he toured much of North and South America. The Spanish Civil War brought him to France. Returning to Spain in 1940, he performed with such troupes as Gracia de Triana and Estrellita Castro. Maravilla retired in 1957 to begin teaching.

==External links==
*Luis Maravilla, Google books
*Saturday review, Volume 36
*Oxford notes Music Library Association
*Biography of Luis Maravilla </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15525075" start="0" end="14" title="Luis Maravilla" label="Luis Maravilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="82" end="90" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="116" end="130" title="Seville, Spain" label="Seville, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="251" end="264" title="Pavon Theatre" label="Pavon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="268" end="275" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="337" end="354" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="370" end="376" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="391" end="396" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="440" end="456" title="Gracia de Triana" label="Gracia de Triana"/>
<link wikidata="Q127643" start="461" end="478" title="Estrellita Castro" label="Estrellita Castro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477031" wikidata="Q1077915" url="?curid=477031" title="Sanshiro Sugata">
<text>is a 1943 Japanese martial arts drama film and the directorial debut of the Japanese film director Akira Kurosawa. 

First released in Japan on March 25, 1943 by Toho film studios, the film was eventually released in the United States on April 28, 1974. The film is based on the novel of the same name written by Tsuneo Tomita, the son of prominent judoka Tsunejirō Tomita, published in 1942. It follows the story of Sanshiro, a talented though willful youth, who travels to the city in order to learn Jujutsu. However, upon his arrival he discovers a new form of self-defence: Judo. The main character is based on Saigō Shirō.

The film is seen as an early example of Kurosawa&#x27;s immediate grasp of the film-making process, and includes many of his directorial trademarks, such as the use of wipes, weather patterns as reflections of character moods, and abruptly changing camera speeds. The film itself was quite influential at the time, and has been remade on no fewer than five occasions. It spawned a sequel, &quot;Sanshiro Sugata Part II&quot;, which was released in 1945 and also directed by Kurosawa.

==Plot==
In 1882, Sanshiro is a talented though willful youth who wishes to become a jujutsu master by becoming a student at one of the city&#x27;s martial arts schools. His first attempts to find a suitable instructor fail, until he finds an accomplished master, Shogoro Yano from the Shudokan Judo school, who he sees successfully defending himself against a group of jujutsu bullies near a river. Initially, Sanshiro is physically capable, but he lacks poise or reflection concerning his self-control and demeanor, even getting into fights at a village festival. His master believes him to be talented but lacking in discipline, describing teaching him judo as &quot;like giving a knife to a madman&quot;. After being told about his lack of care about life, Sanshiro jumps into a lotus pond to prove his strength and loyalty. Clinging to a stake in the pond, he stays the whole day and night before he sees the opening of a lotus blossom and finds self-realization. Leaping out of the pond, he goes to Yano to ask for his forgiveness. He starts to appreciate that there is more to his life and to his art than simple muscle and brawl and soon becomes a leading student in his school.

The city is looking to employ one of the local martial arts schools to guide the training of its local police force, and the school of Sanshiro becomes a leading candidate along with its rival, the local school of Ryōi Shintō-ryū jujutsu led by Hansuke Murai. He first faces Saburo Kodama, a jujutsu tough who had earlier tried to attack Shogoro by the river. The ensuing match leads to Kodama&#x27;s death, after a move by Sanshiro crashes him into a corner. In a scheduled competition between the two schools, Sanshiro is chosen to represent his school in a public match against Murai himself to determine which school is best to train the local police in the martial arts. The scheduled bout gets off to a slow start, but Sanshiro soon comes into his own and begins executing devastating throws which cause internal physical damage to his opponent. Although Murai tries to stand every time, energized by the thought of his daughter Sayo, he is forced to give up after the third time he is violently sent to the ground by Sanshiro.

After the match, Sanshiro makes friends with his defeated opponent and is attracted to his daughter Sayo, who is a local beauty. Another Ryōi Shintō-ryū jujutsu master, Higaki, competes with Sanshiro for her affections. When he challenges Sanshiro to a duel to the death, Sanshiro accepts and defeats him, inflicting permanent crippling damage to Higaki. After emerging victorious from his duel, Sanshiro prepares for his next assignment in Yokohama and is escorted on the local train by Sayo. He promises to return to her after he finishes his journey.

==Cast==

*Susumu Fujita as Sanshiro Sugata
*Denjirō Ōkōchi as Shōgorō Yano
*Yukiko Todoroki as Sayo Murai
*Ryūnosuke Tsukigata as Gennosuke Higaki
*Takashi Shimura as Hansuke Murai
*Ranko Hanai as Osumi Kodana
*Sugisaku Aoyama as Tsunetami Iimura
*Ichiro Sugai as Police Chief Michitsune Mishima
*Yoshio Kosugi as Master Saburō Kodama
*Kokuten Kōdō as Buddhist Priest
*Michisaburō Segawa as Wada
*Akitake Kōno as Yoshima Dan
*Shōji Kiyokawa as Yūjirō Toda
*Kunio Mita as Kōhei Tsuzaki
*Akira Nakamura as Toranosuki Niiseki
*Eisaburō Sakauchi as Nemeto
*Hajime Hikari as Torakichi

==Production==
Following five years of second unit director work on films such as &quot;Uma&quot; and &quot;Roppa&#x27;s Honeymoon&quot;, Kurosawa was finally given the go-ahead to direct his first film, even though he himself claimed that, in films like &quot;Uma&quot;, &quot;I had been so much in charge of production I had felt like the director&quot;. After hearing of a new novel from the writer Tomita Tsuneo in an advertisement, Kurosawa decided the project was for him and asked film producer Iwao Mori to buy the rights for him. Kurosawa, having been told that Toho would not be able to buy the rights until it was published, eagerly awaited its release, to the point where he stalked bookstores night and day until he found a copy; he quickly read the book and wrote a screenplay for it. Despite his enthusiasm, Masahiro Makino was first asked to direct, but he declined.

According to Japanese cinema scholar Donald Richie, the reason Kurosawa was allowed to direct the film was because he had had two film scripts printed, including one of which had won the education minister&#x27;s prize. However, his work was too far away from the government requirements for a wartime film. Tomita&#x27;s novel, on the other hand, was considered &quot;safe&quot;, dealing, as it did, with a Japanese subject such as the martial rivalry between judo and jujitsu; being a period piece; and having a popular subject. Kurosawa deliberately went out to make a &quot;movie-like movie&quot;, as he knew he would not be able to insert any particularly didactic qualities in the film.

When he went to the board of censors (which he likened to being on trial), the film passed on the basis of recommendation by Yasujiro Ozu, who called it an important artistic achievement despite other voices claiming it was too &quot;British-American&quot;. After the initial release, Japanese censors reportedly trimmed the film by 17 minutes. Some of this footage was later recovered and added to a DVD release, and the original script with the missing material still exists; intertitles are included in the release that describe what occurred in the missing parts. The 1952 re-release (from which the 2009 Criterion DVD is made) opens with (translated from the original Japanese text): 

Paul Anderer emphasized Kurosawa&#x27;s attention to the character of Gennosuke Higaki in the film. Higaki, created by Tsuneo Tomita for the novel and inspired by real life jujutsu master Mataemon Tanabe, is the film&#x27;s central villain. Anderer stated: 

==Themes==
The central theme of the film is the education and initiation of Sugata and the way in which, whilst learning the ways of Judo, he also learns about himself. The film&#x27;s central scene concerning this theme is when, after being accosted by Yano for getting involved in a streetfight, Sugata leaps into the cold waters near Yano&#x27;s temple and stays there in order to show his master his dedication, and the fact that he is neither afraid to live nor to die. However, the resident monk chides him for this self-serving display, and he emerges from the pond a humbler man after witnessing the blooming of a lotus blossom, a Buddhist symbol of purity.

==Remakes==
===Films===
&quot;Sanshiro Sugata&quot; has been remade five times since it was initially released, although these versions are even harder to find in the west than the original. The 1955 and 1965 versions share the script of the original versions, whereas the subsequent three releases are all based on the novel rather than Kurosawa&#x27;s screenplay.
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (1955) - Directed by Shigeo Tanaka
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (1965) - Directed by Seiichirō Uchikawa
*&quot;Ninkyō Yawara Ichidai&quot; (1966) - Directed by Sadao Nakajima
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (released in the Philippines as &quot;The Master&quot;; 1970) - Directed by Kunio Watanabe
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (1977) - Directed by Kihachi Okamoto

===Television===
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (1970) was aired on NTV, started by Muga Takewaki.
*&quot;Sugata Sanshirō&quot; (1978-79) was aired on NTV, started by Hiroshi Katsuno and Masaya Oki.

==See also==
*List of incomplete or partially lost films
*Segata Sanshiro

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Sanshiro Sugata&quot; at the Japanese Movie Database
*&quot;Sanshiro Sugata&quot;: Kurosawa&#x27;s Elegy for the Reluctant Kamikaze at Bright Lights Film Journal.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="19" end="31" title="martial arts film" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="32" end="42" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="85" end="98" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="99" end="113" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="162" end="166" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="349" end="355" title="judoka" label="judoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672426" start="356" end="372" title="Tsunejiro Tomita" label="Tsunejirō Tomita"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="502" end="509" title="Jujutsu" label="Jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="578" end="582" title="Judo" label="Judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637587" start="615" end="626" title="Saigō Shirō" label="Saigō Shirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="797" end="802" title="wipe (transition)" label="wipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296227" start="1024" end="1047" title="Sanshiro Sugata Part II" label="Sanshiro Sugata Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="1199" end="1206" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11614428" start="2516" end="2531" title="Ryōi Shintō-ryū" label="Ryōi Shintō-ryū"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="2532" end="2539" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="3778" end="3786" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180677" start="3903" end="3916" title="Susumu Fujita" label="Susumu Fujita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023117" start="3937" end="3951" title="Denjirō Ōkōchi" label="Denjirō Ōkōchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604967" start="3969" end="3984" title="Yukiko Todoroki" label="Yukiko Todoroki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385634" start="4000" end="4019" title="Ryūnosuke Tsukigata" label="Ryūnosuke Tsukigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q40070" start="4041" end="4056" title="Takashi Shimura" label="Takashi Shimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081208" start="4075" end="4086" title="Ranko Hanai" label="Ranko Hanai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4104" end="4119" title="Sugisaku Aoyama" label="Sugisaku Aoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791680" start="4141" end="4153" title="Ichiro Sugai" label="Ichiro Sugai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142982" start="4170" end="4188" title="Michitsune Mishima" label="Michitsune Mishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572686" start="4190" end="4203" title="Yoshio Kosugi" label="Yoshio Kosugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198422" start="4229" end="4241" title="Kokuten Kōdō" label="Kokuten Kōdō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4262" end="4280" title="Michisaburō Segawa" label="Michisaburō Segawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11554244" start="4290" end="4302" title="Akitake Kōno" label="Akitake Kōno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548172" start="4562" end="4565" title="Horse (1941 film)" label="Uma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297122" start="5297" end="5312" title="Masahiro Makino" label="Masahiro Makino"/>
<link wikidata="Q850204" start="5371" end="5386" title="Japanese cinema" label="Japanese cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240288" start="5395" end="5408" title="Donald Richie" label="Donald Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790529" start="5795" end="5810" title="Kodokan-Totsuka rivalry" label="martial rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55402" start="6177" end="6189" title="Yasujiro Ozu" label="Yasujiro Ozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="6661" end="6670" title="The Criterion Collection" label="Criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27950800" start="6931" end="6946" title="Mataemon Tanabe" label="Mataemon Tanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397562" start="8224" end="8238" title="Sadao Nakajima" label="Sadao Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202851" start="8409" end="8424" title="Kihachi Okamoto" label="Kihachi Okamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="8492" end="8495" title="Nippon TV" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932063" start="8508" end="8521" title="Muga Takewaki" label="Muga Takewaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="8575" end="8578" title="Nippon TV" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q610931" start="8591" end="8606" title="Hiroshi Katsuno" label="Hiroshi Katsuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782767" start="8611" end="8621" title="Masaya Oki" label="Masaya Oki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623940" start="8638" end="8680" title="List of incomplete or partially lost films" label="List of incomplete or partially lost films"/>
<link wikidata="Q610438" start="8682" end="8697" title="Segata Sanshiro" label="Segata Sanshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320308" start="8781" end="8804" title="Japanese Movie Database" label="Japanese Movie Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967455" start="8887" end="8913" title="Bright Lights Film Journal" label="Bright Lights Film Journal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477032" wikidata="Q330622" url="?curid=477032" title="Abraham Sinkov">
<text>Abraham Sinkov (August 22, 1907 – January 19, 1998) was a US cryptanalyst. An early employee of the U.S. Army&#x27;s Signal Intelligence Service, he held several leadership positions during World War II, transitioning to the new National Security Agency after the war, where he became a deputy director. After retiring in 1962, he taught mathematics at Arizona State University.

== Biography ==
Sinkov was the son of Jewish immigrants Morris (Mordechai Eliezer) and Ethel (née Etel Constantinowsky) from Alexandria, Russia, which is now Oleksandriya, Kirovohrad Oblast, Ukraine. Sinkov was born in Philadelphia, but grew up in Brooklyn. After graduating from Boys High School he took his B.S. in mathematics from City College of New York. (By coincidence, one of his close friends at Boys High and CCNY was Solomon Kullback). Mr. Sinkov taught in New York City schools but was unhappy with the working conditions and anxious to use his mathematics knowledge in practical ways.

=== Early career ===
The opportunity for a career change came in 1930. Sinkov and Kullback took the Civil Service examination and placed high. Both received mysterious letters from Washington asking about their knowledge of foreign languages. Sinkov knew French and Kullback, Spanish. This was acceptable to their prospective employer, and they were offered positions as junior cryptanalysts. Although neither was quite certain what a cryptanalyst did, they accepted.

The small Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) organization (Sinkov and Kullback were the third and fourth employees there) had the primary mission of compiling codes and ciphers for use by the U.S. Army. Its secondary task was to attempt to solve selected foreign codes and ciphers—this was not necessarily done for intelligence purposes but to keep the cryptanalysts abreast of new developments in the field.

William Friedman put his new employees through a rigorous course of study of his own design in cryptology, bringing them to high levels of skill in making and breaking codes and ciphers. Friedman also encouraged other self-improvement endeavors: his employees trained summers at a camp at Ft. Meade to earn commissions in the military reserves. Both Sinkov and Kullback also went on to receive doctorates in mathematics. Sinkov received his PhD in mathematics in 1933 from The George Washington University. In 1936, Sinkov was assigned to the Panama Canal Zone, where he established the U.S. Army&#x27;s first permanent intercept site outside the continental United States.

=== World War II ===
SIS grew slowly throughout the early 1930s. However, successes against Japanese diplomatic codes using machine systems after 1935 provided the U.S. government with critical information during a series of crises. This success had practical consequences for SIS, as well. For the first time, SIS began to garner respect from its military superiors. Once the military understood that this small organization could read sensitive messages from a potential adversary, the Signal Corps increased the SIS budget and authorized increased hiring of cryptanalysts.

In 1940, even though the United States was not officially a combatant, the U.S. and Britain initiated exchanges of technical material. Included in this was a cautious sharing of cryptologic information: the British in stages revealed the extent of their considerable success against high-level German systems, the U.S. its equivalent success against Japanese. This led to an unprecedented level of cooperation in communication intelligence (COMINT) between the two countries during the war, resulting in more personnel, bigger budgets, and a wider range of activities for the organization.

===Sinkov mission===
In January 1941, while Britain battled Nazi Germany but nearly a year before the United States entered the Second World War, Captain Sinkov was selected as a member of a delegation to the United Kingdom for initial sharing of information about the two countries&#x27; respective cryptologic programs. The delegation returned in April with mixed results to report. Sinkov and his colleagues had been shown Bletchley Park, the secret headquarters for British cryptology, and exchanged information on German and Japanese systems. It is still unclear how much the American delegation was told about British success against the German Enigma machine, but Sinkov later recalled that they were told about the Enigma problem only a short while before the delegation was to leave, and that details were sketchy. Nevertheless, the mission to the UK was a success overall and helped give US-UK cryptologic relations a strong practical foundation.

After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the Japanese also attacked the Philippine Islands. General Douglas MacArthur had been ordered to leave the Philippines and re-establish U.S. Army headquarters in Australia, from whence counterattacks might be launched. MacArthur recognized the need for cryptologic support, thus, on 15 April 1942, he established the Central Bureau (CB), cobbling it together from refugee elements of American cryptologists evacuated from the Philippines, Australian cryptologists, and other Allied contingents. CB began in Melbourne, then moved to Brisbane.

In July 1942, by now Major Sinkov arrived in Melbourne as commander of the American detachment at Central Bureau. The Director of CB on paper was General Spencer B. Akin, MacArthur&#x27;s chief signal officer, but General Akin in practice seldom visited the organization. He had worked with Sinkov in Washington and in Panama, and confidently left CB operations under his control.

Sinkov, who demonstrated strong organizational and leadership qualities in addition to his mathematics skills, brought this group of Americans and Australians—representing also different military services from their countries—into a cohesive unit. CB quickly became a trusted producer of Signals Intelligence (SIGINT) for MacArthur and his senior commanders. This SIGINT enabled consistent success in the air war against the Japanese and allowed MacArthur to win some stunning victories in the ground campaign in New Guinea and the Philippines.

=== Post-war ===
After the war, Sinkov rejoined SIS, now renamed the Army Security Agency, and, in 1949, when the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA)—the first centralized cryptologic organization in the United States—was formed, Sinkov became chief of the Communications Security program. He remained in this position as AFSA made the transition into the National Security Agency.

In 1954, Sinkov became the second NSA official to attend the National War College (the first was Louis Tordella). Upon his return, he became deputy director for production, effectively swapping jobs with his old colleague Frank Rowlett. Sinkov retired from NSA in 1962.

In 1966, he wrote &quot;Elementary Cryptanalysis: A Mathematical Approach&quot;, one of the first books on the subject, directed at high school students and available to the general public.

=== Retirement ===
Abraham Sinkov lived in retirement in Arizona after two careers, 32 years in NSA (and its predecessors), followed by an appointment as a professor of mathematics at Arizona State University.

== Hall of fame ==
Colonel Sinkov is a member of the Military Intelligence Hall of Fame.

== Books written ==
* Abraham Sinkov (1966), &quot;Elementary Cryptanalysis: A Mathematical Approach&quot;, Mathematical Association of America, Washington, D.C. . 2nd edition, revised and updated by Todd Feil (2009), Mathematical Association of America, Washington, D.C. (print), (electronic).

== References ==

* NSA Hall of Honor entry for Sinkov (public domain; a previous version of this article was derived from this NSA work)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q330622" start="0" end="14" title="Abraham Sinkov" label="Abraham Sinkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="61" end="73" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667850" start="117" end="144" title="Signal Intelligence Service" label="Signal Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="229" end="253" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="353" end="377" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="517" end="523" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156734" start="538" end="550" title="Oleksandriia" label="Oleksandriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q180981" start="552" end="569" title="Kirovohrad Oblast" label="Kirovohrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="571" end="578" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="599" end="611" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="628" end="636" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952658" start="660" end="676" title="Boys High School (Brooklyn)" label="Boys High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="697" end="708" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="714" end="738" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q896641" start="808" end="824" title="Solomon Kullback" label="Solomon Kullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="848" end="861" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1160" end="1170" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1234" end="1240" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1255" end="1262" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667850" start="1458" end="1485" title="Signal Intelligence Service" label="Signal Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1639" end="1648" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q969082" start="1857" end="1873" title="William Friedman" label="William Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q509549" start="2146" end="2155" title="Fort Meade" label="Ft. Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="2334" end="2362" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="2400" end="2417" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="Panama Canal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="2504" end="2529" title="continental United States" label="continental United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915867" start="2624" end="2649" title="Japanese army and diplomatic codes" label="Japanese diplomatic codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2696" end="2711" title="U.S. government" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3193" end="3200" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="3550" end="3556" title="COMINT" label="COMINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3760" end="3772" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3828" end="3844" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937293" start="3846" end="3853" title="Captain (United States)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="4126" end="4140" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4219" end="4225" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="4351" end="4365" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="4677" end="4699" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4752" end="4770" title="Philippine Islands" label="Philippine Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="4772" end="4779" title="General officer" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="4780" end="4797" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4883" end="4892" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060480" start="5038" end="5052" title="Central Bureau" label="Central Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="5196" end="5202" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5228" end="5237" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="5253" end="5261" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="5285" end="5290" title="Major (United States)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060480" start="5362" end="5376" title="Central Bureau" label="Central Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q28545365" start="5418" end="5433" title="Spencer B. Akin" label="Spencer B. Akin"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="5583" end="5589" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="5934" end="5954" title="Signals Intelligence" label="Signals Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="6159" end="6169" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="6306" end="6334" title="Armed Forces Security Agency" label="Armed Forces Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="6548" end="6572" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q137269" start="6636" end="6656" title="National War College" label="National War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872034" start="6672" end="6686" title="Louis Tordella" label="Louis Tordella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444058" start="6797" end="6810" title="Frank Rowlett" label="Frank Rowlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="7094" end="7101" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="7221" end="7245" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185112" start="7301" end="7335" title="Military Intelligence Hall of Fame" label="Military Intelligence Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477033" wikidata="Q1343347" url="?curid=477033" title="Hoarding">
<text>Hoarding is the act of engaging in excessive acquisition of items that are not needed or for which no space is available.

==Human hoarding==

Civil unrest or the threat of natural disasters may lead people to hoard foodstuffs, water, gasoline, and other essentials that they believe will soon be in short supply. Survivalists, also known as preppers, often stockpile large supplies of these items in anticipation of a large-scale disaster event.

Other items commonly hoarded include coins considered to have an intrinsic value, such as those minted in silver, or gold, as well as collectibles, jewelry, precious metals and other luxuries.

According to previous studies, anthropomorphism, or the propensity to attribute human characteristics to non-human items, has been associated with hoarding. Additionally, the findings stated that younger individuals had more substantial hoarding and anthropomorphizing cognitions and behaviors, and women demonstrated stronger early anthropomorphizing behaviors compared to men.

== History==
The first documented case of hoarding was in the Collyer Mansion by the brothers Homer and Langley in 1947, New York. Their mansion became an attraction in 1938 because of the extreme level of accumulation and fortune found in their residence after their deaths.

== Anxiety ==

Individuals who meet the diagnostic criteria for hoarding disorder experience feelings of anxiety or discomfort about discarding possessions they do not need. This discomfort arises from an emotional attachment to possessions and a strong belief that their possessions will be needed in the future. Possessions will take on a sentimental value that outweighs their functional value. This is no different from someone without hoarding disorder; the difference lies in the strength of this sentimental value and in how many items take on a sentimental value. For this reason, when discarding items, hoarders may feel like they are throwing away a part of themselves.

In severe cases, a house may become a fire hazard (due to blocked exits and stacked papers) or a health hazard (due to vermin infestation, excreta and detritus from excessive pets, hoarded food and garbage, or the risk of stacks of items collapsing on the occupants and blocking exit routes). Thus, hoarding affects more than just the owner of the objects, as the state of a hoarded house can have a negative effect on all occupants and even neighbors. Furthermore, individuals with hoarding disorder may have a quality of life as poor as those diagnosed with schizophrenia. Eventually, the disorder increases family strain, work impairment, and the risk of serious medical conditions.

Hoarding disorder begins at an average age of 13 years old. The general consensus is that men and women are equally prone to hoarding. Hoarding can run in families, and it may be possible genetics play a role in developing hoarding behaviors. Also, this behavior can be developed due to life circumstances such as difficult losses, depression, financial crises, and living small which make it difficult for people to get rid of their belongings.

According to the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot;, the criteria for hoarding disorder boils down to five main points. Firstly, the hoarder experiences difficulty parting with items regardless of the item&#x27;s value. Secondly, the hoarder feels a need to save items, and when they do part with them, it leads to strong distress. This, in turn, leads to objects cluttering the home to the point that living is compromised and rooms cannot be used for their intended purposes. If the house has not fallen into such a state, it is only because of outside parties intervening. Fourthly, the hoarding has compromised the hoarder&#x27;s life in a clinically significant way, including an inability to maintain a safe living environment. Lastly, the diagnosis is only given if another psychological diagnosis does not fit better and there is no physiological reason to explain the hoarding. For an exact quote of the diagnostic criteria, the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; is available to the public.

In DSM-IV, hoarding was listed as a symptom of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder; however, it was found that hoarding has a relatively weak connection with OCD or OCPD compared to other symptoms. Because of this, hoarding was designated in DSM-5 as a separate disorder. However, hoarding is often found alongside OCD. It has been discovered that patients with OCD who exhibit hoarding symptoms show a specific form of hoarding, where they are more likely to hoard &quot;bizarre items&quot; and perform compulsive rituals associated with their hoarding behaviors, such as rituals of checking items or rituals that must be completed before discarding them.

Approximately 2.6% of the population suffer from hoarding disorder, although some studies suggest that lifetime prevalence may reach up to 14%.

The frequency of hoarding cases increases significantly with age, and individuals over the age of 54 are three times more likely to meet the criteria for hoarding disorder. However, hoarding symptoms typically manifest in early childhood and intensify to clinically significant levels by middle age. More than half of the individuals suffering from hoarding report that the onset of hoarding was associated with a traumatic life event, and in this group, the age of onset of hoarding is significantly higher. Epidemiological studies have shown that the tendency to hoard is twice as common in men, although clinical studies on hoarding tendency are usually conducted predominantly with female participants. This suggests that male hoarders are significantly less studied and receive inadequate treatment.

=== Treatment ===
There are no medications currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for treating the symptoms of hoarding. Although, some medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), can be used off-label for individuals diagnosed with hoarding disorder.

The primary treatment for hoarding disorder is individual psychotherapy. In particular, cognitive behavior therapy is regarded as the gold standard for treating the disorder.

== In literature ==
In the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, those who hoard are depicted as sinners locked in eternal battle with wasters. Overseen by Pluto (the former god of wealth now turned into a demon and that speaks in gibberish) they have to push heavy boulders (representing money) in opposite direction, each time the two lines of sinners meet they accuse and insult each other. The hoarders and wasters have been condemned to Hell for being unable to practice moderation with money.

In William Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Coriolanus&quot;, Caius Marcius and his followers hoard grain, only sharing it with those they deem worthy.

== See also ==
* Collecting
* Digital hoarding
* Hoard (archaeological)
* Hoarding (economics)
* Panic buying
* Plyushkin, fictional Russian hoarder, after which compulsive hoarding is sometimes known as &quot;Plyushkin&#x27;s disorder&quot;
* Psychology of collecting
* Hoarding (animal behavior)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Newell, Sasha, ed (2024). &quot;Of Hoarding and Housekeeping Material Kinship and Domestic Space in Anthropological Perspective&quot;. New York: Berghahn Books.

==External links==
* Photo guide for rating clutter from the International OCD Foundation
* US National Hoarding Resources listed by state</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1343347" start="0" end="8" title="Hoarding" label="Hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q686984" start="143" end="155" title="Civil unrest" label="Civil unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="314" end="325" title="Survivalist" label="Survivalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="431" end="439" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="485" end="489" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="673" end="689" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q681946" start="1116" end="1133" title="Collyer brothers" label="Homer and Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="1404" end="1411" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="2492" end="2507" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="2540" end="2553" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="2855" end="2863" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="2999" end="3009" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="3011" end="3027" title="financial crises" label="financial crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="5896" end="5924" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="6000" end="6038" title="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="6052" end="6096" title="Serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="6267" end="6293" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="6388" end="6401" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6847" end="6866" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q463126" start="6885" end="6895" title="Coriolanus" label="Coriolanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208165" start="7011" end="7021" title="Collecting" label="Collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388539" start="7024" end="7040" title="Digital hoarding" label="Digital hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q164099" start="7043" end="7065" title="Hoard" label="Hoard (archaeological)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406144" start="7068" end="7088" title="Hoarding (economics)" label="Hoarding (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036897" start="7091" end="7103" title="Panic buying" label="Panic buying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365962" start="7106" end="7115" title="Plyushkin" label="Plyushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254872" start="7238" end="7262" title="Psychology of collecting" label="Psychology of collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="7265" end="7291" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)" label="Hoarding (animal behavior)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740908" start="7562" end="7590" title="International OCD Foundation" label="International OCD Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477037" wikidata="Q524738" url="?curid=477037" title="Weather vane">
<text>A wind vane, weather vane, or weathercock is an instrument used for showing the direction of the wind. It is typically used as an architectural ornament to the highest point of a building. The word &quot;vane&quot; comes from the Old English word , meaning &quot;flag&quot;.

Although partly functional, wind vanes are generally decorative, often featuring the traditional cockerel design with letters indicating the points of the compass. Other common motifs include ships, arrows, and horses. Not all wind vanes have pointers. In a sufficiently strong wind, the head of the arrow or cockerel (or equivalent) will indicate the direction from which the wind is blowing.

Wind vanes are also found on small wind turbines to keep the wind turbine pointing into the wind.

==History==
The oldest known textual references to weather vanes date from 1800-1600 BCE Babylon, where a fable called &quot;The Fable of the Willow&quot; describes people looking at a weather vane &quot;for the direction of the wind.&quot; In China, the &quot;Huainanzi&quot;, dating from around 139 BC, mentions a thread or streamer that another commentator interprets as &quot;wind-observing fan&quot; (, ).

The Tower of the Winds in the &quot;agora&quot; in Hellenistic Athens once bore on its roof a weather vane in the form of a bronze Triton holding a rod in his outstretched hand, rotating as the wind changed direction. Below this a frieze depicted the eight Greek wind deities. The eight-metre-high structure also featured sundials, and a water clock inside. It dated from around 50 BC.

Military documents from the Three Kingdoms period of China (220–280 AD) refer to the weather vane as &quot;five ounces&quot; (, ), named after the weight of its materials. By the third century, Chinese weather vanes were shaped like birds and took the name of &quot;wind-indicating bird&quot; (, ). The (), a third-century book written by Miao Changyan about the palaces at Chang&#x27;an, describes a bird-shaped weather vane situated on a tower roof.

The oldest surviving weather vane with the shape of a rooster is the &quot;Gallo di Ramperto&quot;, made in 820 and now preserved in the Museo di Santa Giulia in Brescia, Lombardy.
Pope Leo IV (in office 847 to 855) had a cock placed on the Old St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica or old Constantinian basilica.

Pope Gregory I (in office 590 to 604) regarded the cock as &quot;the most suitable emblem of Christianity&quot;, being the emblem of Saint Peter (a reference to in which Jesus predicts that Peter will deny him three times before the rooster crows).

As a result of this, rooster representations gradually came into use as a weather vanes on church steeples, and in the ninth century Pope Nicholas I (in office 858 to 867) ordered the figure to be placed on every church steeple.

The Bayeux Tapestry of the 1070s depicts a man installing a cock on Westminster Abbey.

One alternative theory about the origin of weathercocks on church steeples sees them as emblems of the vigilance of the clergy calling the people to prayer.

Another theory says that the cock was not a Christian symbol but an emblem of the sun derived from the Goths.

A few churches used weather vanes in the shape of the emblems of their patron saints. The City of London has two surviving examples. The weather vane of St Peter upon Cornhill is not in the shape of a rooster, but of a key; while St Lawrence Jewry&#x27;s weather vane has the form of a gridiron (symbolising Saint Lawrence).

Early weather-vanes had very ornamental pointers, but modern weather-vanes usually feature simple arrows that dispense with the directionals because the instrument is connected to a remote reading station. An early example of this was installed in the Royal Navy&#x27;s Admiralty building in London – the vane on the roof was mechanically linked to a large dial in the boardroom so senior officers were always aware of the wind direction when they met.

Modern &quot;aerovanes&quot; combine the directional vane with an anemometer (a device for measuring the speed of the wind). Co-locating both instruments allows them to use the same axis (a vertical rod) and provides a coordinated readout.

==World&#x27;s largest weather vane==
According to the Guinness World Records, the world&#x27;s largest weather vane is a Tío Pepe sherry advertisement located in Jerez, Spain. The city of Montague, Michigan also claims to have the largest standard-design weather vane, being a ship and arrow which measures tall, with an arrow long.

A challenger for the title of the world&#x27;s largest weather vane is located in Whitehorse, Yukon in Canada. The weather vane is a retired Douglas DC-3 CF-CPY atop a swiveling support. Located at the Yukon Transportation Museum beside Whitehorse International Airport, the weather vane is used by pilots to determine wind direction, used as a landmark by tourists and enjoyed by locals. The weather vane only requires a 5 knot wind to rotate.

A challenger for the world&#x27;s tallest weather vane is located in Westlock, Alberta. The classic weather vane that reaches to is topped by a 1942 Case Model D Tractor. This landmark is located at the Canadian Tractor Museum.

==Slang term==
The term &quot;weather vane&quot; is also a slang word for a politician who has frequent changes of opinion. The National Assembly of Quebec has banned the use of this slang term as an insult after its use by &quot;members&quot; of the legislature.

==Literary references==
* A copper-plated antique weathervane is the subject of the mystery in the children&#x27;s book/Young Adult book entitled &quot;The Mystery of the Phantom Grasshopper&quot; (Trixie Belden series #18) by Kathryn Kenny, 1977. ISBN 0-307-21589-X. Paperback.

==Gallery==

==See also==
* Anemoscope
* Apparent wind indicator, in sailing
* List of weather instruments
* Weather station
* Windsock, in aviation

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="2" end="11" title="Weather vane" label="wind vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="13" end="25" title="Weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="30" end="41" title="Weather vane" label="weathercock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645141" start="48" end="58" title="list of weather instruments" label="instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057900" start="80" end="89" title="wind direction" label="direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="97" end="101" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="230" end="241" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="373" end="381" title="chicken" label="cockerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="417" end="438" title="points of the compass" label="points of the compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="706" end="719" title="wind turbines" label="wind turbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="876" end="881" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q590337" start="1031" end="1040" title="Huainanzi" label="Huainanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q372717" start="1186" end="1204" title="Tower of the Winds" label="Tower of the Winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="1218" end="1223" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1245" end="1251" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q148030" start="1313" end="1319" title="Triton (mythology)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="1413" end="1419" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q51845481" start="1445" end="1457" title="wind gods" label="wind deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="1504" end="1511" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q194173" start="1520" end="1531" title="water clock" label="water clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="1597" end="1611" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="1943" end="1956" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q334267" start="2159" end="2180" title="Museo di Santa Giulia" label="Museo di Santa Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="2184" end="2191" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="2193" end="2201" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228205" start="2203" end="2214" title="Pope Leo IV" label="Pope Leo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="2263" end="2292" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="2300" end="2313" title="Constantine I" label="Constantinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="2325" end="2339" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Pope Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="2458" end="2469" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2495" end="2500" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="2708" end="2723" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q187483" start="2809" end="2824" title="Bayeux Tapestry" label="Bayeux Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="2865" end="2869" title="rooster" label="cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="2873" end="2890" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204231" start="3216" end="3223" title="Saint symbolism" label="emblems"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3252" end="3266" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595372" start="3315" end="3337" title="St Peter upon Cornhill" label="St Peter upon Cornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546006" start="3381" end="3384" title="Keys of Saint Peter" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704046" start="3392" end="3409" title="St Lawrence Jewry" label="St Lawrence Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q390409" start="3448" end="3456" title="Gridiron (cooking)" label="gridiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17590" start="3470" end="3484" title="Saint Lawrence" label="Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q114459664" start="3758" end="3767" title="Admiralty buildings" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q175029" start="3955" end="3963" title="aerovane" label="aerovane"/>
<link wikidata="Q175029" start="4008" end="4018" title="anemometer" label="anemometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="4238" end="4260" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120712" start="4266" end="4299" title="world&amp;#x27;s largest weather vane" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255539" start="4305" end="4313" title="Tío Pepe" label="Tío Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="4314" end="4320" title="sherry" label="sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="4346" end="4351" title="Jerez de la Frontera" label="Jerez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831100" start="4372" end="4390" title="Montague, Michigan" label="Montague, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="4600" end="4617" title="Whitehorse, Yukon" label="Whitehorse, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="4659" end="4671" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433251" start="4755" end="4787" title="Whitehorse International Airport" label="Whitehorse International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004113" start="5033" end="5041" title="Westlock" label="Westlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="5043" end="5050" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="5252" end="5262" title="slang word" label="slang word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="5321" end="5348" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027560" start="5766" end="5776" title="Anemoscope" label="Anemoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516553" start="5779" end="5802" title="Apparent wind indicator" label="Apparent wind indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645141" start="5817" end="5844" title="List of weather instruments" label="List of weather instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="5847" end="5862" title="Weather station" label="Weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q216346" start="5865" end="5873" title="Windsock" label="Windsock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477039" wikidata="Q3355299" url="?curid=477039" title="1880 in art">
<text>Events from the year 1880 in art.

==Events==
* October – Vincent van Gogh enrolls in a beginners art course at the Académie Royale des Beaux-Arts in Brussels.
* Fifth Impressionist exhibition in Paris, at 10 rue des Pyramides. The realist painter Jean-François Raffaëlli is also invited by Degas to exhibit.
* Silver Studio founded by Arthur Silver in London for textile and wallpaper design.
* Anton Mauve paints &quot;Changing Pasture&quot;; his palette and usage of colour influences Vincent van Gogh.
* Michael Ancher marries fellow painter Anna Brøndum.
* National Gallery of Canada established in Ottawa.

==Awards==
* Grand Prix de Rome, painting: Henri Lucien Doucet.
* Grand Prix de Rome, sculpture:
* Grand Prix de Rome, architecture:
* Grand Prix de Rome, music: Lucien Joseph Edouard Hillemacher.

==Works==

* Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi – The &quot;Lion of Belfort&quot;
* Marie Bashkirtseff – &quot;Self-portrait&quot;
* Arnold Böcklin – &quot;Isle of the Dead&quot; (, first two versions)
* Marie Bracquemond – &quot;On the terrace at Sèvres&quot;
* Thomas Brock – &quot;A Moment of Peril&quot; (equestrian bronze)
* Lady Butler – &quot;The Defence of Rorke&#x27;s Drift&quot;
* Alexandre Cabanel – &quot;Phèdre&quot;
* Gustave Caillebotte
** &quot;A Balcony&quot;
** &quot;Boulevard des Italiens&quot;
** &quot;Boulevard Seen from Above&quot;
** &quot;The Bezique Game&quot;
** &quot;In a Café&quot;
** &quot;Interior&quot;
** &quot;Interior, or Woman reading&quot;
** &quot;A refuge, boulevard Haussmann&quot;
** &quot;Man on the balcony, boulevard Haussmann&quot;
** &quot;Man with a top-hat, seated by a window&quot;
** &quot;Nude on a divan&quot;
* Paul Cézanne – &quot;View of Auvers-sur-Oise&quot;
* Carl Conrads - Statue of Alexander Hamilton (granite)
* Pierre Auguste Cot - &quot;The Storm&quot;
* Alphonse-Marie-Adolphe de Neuville – &quot;The Defence of Rorke&#x27;s Drift, 1879&quot;
* Edgar Degas – &quot;Mary Cassatt at the Louvre: The Etruscan Gallery&quot; (etching)
* Thomas Eakins – &quot;The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand&quot;
* Giovanni Fattori – &quot;Quadrato di Villafranca&quot;
* Charles Gauthier – &quot;Cléopâtre&quot; (plaster)
* James Clarke Hook – &quot;Home with the Tide&quot;
* Daniel Huntington – &quot;Portrait of John Adams Dix&quot;
* Ivan Kramskoi
** &quot;Sergey Botkin&quot;
** &quot;Ivan Shishkin&quot;
* Edward Lear – &quot;The Plains of Lombardy from Monte Generoso&quot; (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford)
* Édouard Manet 
** &quot;Émilie Ambre as Carmen&quot;
** &quot;A Bundle of Asparagus&quot;
** &quot;A Sprig of Asparagus&quot;
* Albert Joseph Moore – &quot;Rose Leaves&quot;
* Adolph Alphonse de Neuville – &quot;The Defence of Rorke&#x27;s Drift&quot;
* Frank O&#x27;Meara – &quot;Autumnal greys (Forest of Fontainbleau)&quot;
* William Quiller Orchardson – &quot;Napoleon on Board the Bellerophon&quot;
* Edward Poynter – &quot;A Visit to Aesculapius&quot;
* Pierre-Auguste Renoir
** &quot;Portrait of Irène Cahen d&#x27;Anvers&quot;
** &quot;By the Water&quot;
* Annie Robinson – &quot;Susan Isabel Dacre&quot;
* Dante Gabriel Rossetti – &quot;The Day Dream&quot;
* Fritz Schaper – Goethe Monument (Berlin)
* Viktor Vasnetsov – &quot;Flying Carpet&quot;
* Henry Tanworth Wells – &quot;Victoria Regina&quot;

==Births==
* February 1 – C. T. Loo, Chinese-born art dealer (died 1957)
* February 3 – Frances Darlington, English relief sculpture (died 1940)
* February 8 – Franz Marc, German painter and printmaker, co-founder of &quot;Der Blaue Reiter&quot; (killed in action 1916)
* March 2 – Joseph Ehrismann, German-born painter and stained-glass maker (died 1937)
* March 21 – Hans Hofmann, German-born abstract expressionist painter and teacher (died 1966)
* April 4 – William Russell Flint, Scottish-born watercolourist (died 1969)
* April 7 – Alexander Bogomazov, Ukrainian painter, artist and modern art theoretician of Russian avant-garde (died 1930)
* May 6 – Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, German expressionist painter, co-founder of &quot;Die Brücke&quot; (suicide 1938)
* June 10 – André Derain, French Fauvist painter (died 1954)
* August 2 – Arthur Dove, American painter (died 1946)
* August 22 – George Herriman, American cartoonist (Krazy Kat) (died 1944)
* November 19 – Jacob Epstein, American-born British sculptor (died 1959)

==Deaths==
* January 4 – Anselm Feuerbach, German classicist painter (born 1829)
* February 19 – Constantino Brumidi, American historicist fresco painter (born 1805)
* September 8 – Wilhelm August Rieder, Austrian painter and draughtsman (born 1796)
* October 10 – Giampietro Campana, Italian art collector (born 1808)
* November 20 – Léon Cogniet, French historical and portrait painter (born 1794)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Philippe Joseph Henri Lemaire, French sculptor (born 1798)
** Henry O&#x27;Neill, Irish illustrator and antiquarian (born 1798)
** Nicolae Teodorescu, Moldavian, later Romanian church painter (muralist) (born 1797)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3355299" start="21" end="32" title="1880 in art" label="1880 in art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="58" end="74" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822455" start="116" end="146" title="Académie Royale des Beaux-Arts" label="Académie Royale des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="150" end="158" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="168" end="181" title="Impressionist" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q658862" start="248" end="271" title="Jean-François Raffaëlli" label="Jean-François Raffaëlli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484009" start="311" end="324" title="Silver Studio" label="Silver Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q591907" start="396" end="407" title="Anton Mauve" label="Anton Mauve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="488" end="504" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q468252" start="508" end="522" title="Michael Ancher" label="Michael Ancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q253446" start="546" end="558" title="Anna Ancher" label="Anna Brøndum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068063" start="562" end="588" title="National Gallery of Canada" label="National Gallery of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="604" end="610" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="626" end="644" title="Grand Prix de Rome" label="Grand Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130432" start="656" end="675" title="Henri Lucien Doucet" label="Henri Lucien Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="679" end="697" title="Grand Prix de Rome" label="Grand Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="712" end="730" title="Grand Prix de Rome" label="Grand Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="748" end="766" title="Grand Prix de Rome" label="Grand Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="775" end="808" title="Lucien Joseph Edouard Hillemacher" label="Lucien Joseph Edouard Hillemacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="824" end="850" title="Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi" label="Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q926536" start="863" end="878" title="Lion of Belfort" label="Lion of Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q255253" start="887" end="905" title="Marie Bashkirtseff" label="Marie Bashkirtseff"/>
<link wikidata="" start="914" end="927" title=":File:Bashkirtseff.jpg" label="Self-portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q123071" start="936" end="950" title="Arnold Böcklin" label="Arnold Böcklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q669994" start="959" end="975" title="Isle of the Dead (painting)" label="Isle of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q273552" start="1007" end="1024" title="Marie Bracquemond" label="Marie Bracquemond"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1033" end="1057" title=":File:Bracquemond.sevres.jpg" label="On the terrace at Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591347" start="1066" end="1078" title="Thomas Brock" label="Thomas Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q517349" start="1133" end="1144" title="Elizabeth Thompson" label="Lady Butler"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1153" end="1186" title=":File:Lady butler defense rorkes drift.jpg" label="The Defence of Rorke&amp;#x27;s Drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q310437" start="1195" end="1212" title="Alexandre Cabanel" label="Alexandre Cabanel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1221" end="1227" title=":File:Alexandre Cabanel Phèdre.jpg" label="Phèdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q295144" start="1236" end="1255" title="Gustave Caillebotte" label="Gustave Caillebotte"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1265" end="1274" title=":File:G. Caillebotte - Un balcon (1880).jpg" label="A Balcony"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1290" end="1312" title=":File:Gustave Caillebotte Boulevard des Italiens.jpg" label="Boulevard des Italiens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1328" end="1353" title="Boulevard Seen from Above" label="Boulevard Seen from Above"/>
<link wikidata="Q28110217" start="1369" end="1385" title="The Bezique Game" label="The Bezique Game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1401" end="1410" title=":File:G. Caillebotte - Dans un café.jpg" label="In a Café"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1426" end="1434" title=":File:G. Caillebotte - Intérieur.jpg" label="Interior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1450" end="1476" title="Interior, or Woman reading" label="Interior, or Woman reading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1492" end="1521" title="A refuge, boulevard Haussmann" label="A refuge, boulevard Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1537" end="1576" title=":File:Caillebotte Sur les Champs Elysees.jpg" label="Man on the balcony, boulevard Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1592" end="1630" title="Man with a top-hat, seated by a window" label="Man with a top-hat, seated by a window"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1646" end="1661" title="Nude on a divan" label="Nude on a divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="1670" end="1682" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759194" start="1691" end="1714" title="View of Auvers-sur-Oise" label="View of Auvers-sur-Oise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039992" start="1723" end="1735" title="Carl Conrads" label="Carl Conrads"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473784" start="1738" end="1766" title="Statue of Alexander Hamilton (Central Park)" label="Statue of Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q265665" start="1779" end="1797" title="Pierre Auguste Cot" label="Pierre Auguste Cot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766694" start="1806" end="1815" title="The Storm (painting)" label="The Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494309" start="1824" end="1858" title="Alphonse-Marie-Adolphe de Neuville" label="Alphonse-Marie-Adolphe de Neuville"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1867" end="1906" title=":File:Alphonse de Neuville - The defence of Rorke&amp;#x27;s Drift 1879 - Google Art Project.jpg" label="The Defence of Rorke&amp;#x27;s Drift, 1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="1915" end="1926" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214905" start="2002" end="2015" title="Thomas Eakins" label="Thomas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733111" start="2024" end="2055" title="The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand" label="The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q710089" start="2064" end="2080" title="Giovanni Fattori" label="Giovanni Fattori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375603" start="2089" end="2112" title="Quadrato di Villafranca" label="Quadrato di Villafranca"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279309" start="2121" end="2137" title="Charles Gauthier" label="Charles Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2146" end="2155" title=":File:Charles Gauthier&amp;#x27;s Cleopatra, 1880.jpg" label="Cléopâtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131395" start="2174" end="2191" title="James Clarke Hook" label="James Clarke Hook"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2200" end="2218" title=":File:Home with the tide.JPG" label="Home with the Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q323987" start="2227" end="2244" title="Daniel Huntington (artist)" label="Daniel Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q720259" start="2265" end="2279" title="John Adams Dix" label="John Adams Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q207758" start="2288" end="2301" title="Ivan Kramskoi" label="Ivan Kramskoi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2340" end="2353" title=":File:Iwan Nikolajewitsch Kramskoj 005.jpg" label="Ivan Shishkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309759" start="2362" end="2373" title="Edward Lear" label="Edward Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q636400" start="2432" end="2448" title="Ashmolean Museum" label="Ashmolean Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="2450" end="2456" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="2460" end="2473" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2484" end="2506" title=":File:Manet Emilie Ambre as Carmen.jpg" label="Émilie Ambre as Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223037" start="2522" end="2543" title="A Bundle of Asparagus" label="A Bundle of Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973357" start="2559" end="2579" title="A Sprig of Asparagus" label="A Sprig of Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399837" start="2588" end="2607" title="Albert Joseph Moore" label="Albert Joseph Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494309" start="2636" end="2663" title="Adolph Alphonse de Neuville" label="Adolph Alphonse de Neuville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488759" start="2714" end="2732" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Meara" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Meara"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2741" end="2780" title=":File:Omearaautumnal.jpg" label="Autumnal greys (Forest of Fontainbleau)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017160" start="2789" end="2815" title="William Quiller Orchardson" label="William Quiller Orchardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q465163" start="2866" end="2880" title="Edward Poynter" label="Edward Poynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="2920" end="2941" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937570" start="2951" end="2988" title="Portrait of Irène Cahen d&amp;#x27;Anvers" label="Portrait of Irène Cahen d&amp;#x27;Anvers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3004" end="3016" title=":File:Pierre-Auguste Renoir - By the Water.jpg" label="By the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013053" start="3025" end="3039" title="Annie Swynnerton" label="Annie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3048" end="3066" title=":File:Annie Swynnerton - Susan Isabel Dacre.jpg" label="Susan Isabel Dacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="3075" end="3097" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19897951" start="3106" end="3119" title="The Day Dream (painting)" label="The Day Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q316041" start="3128" end="3141" title="Fritz Schaper" label="Fritz Schaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534095" start="3144" end="3168" title="Goethe Monument (Berlin)" label="Goethe Monument (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q204138" start="3171" end="3187" title="Viktor Vasnetsov" label="Viktor Vasnetsov"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3196" end="3209" title=":File:Vasnetsov samolet.jpg" label="Flying Carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729003" start="3218" end="3238" title="Henry Tanworth Wells" label="Henry Tanworth Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="3283" end="3293" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222604" start="3296" end="3305" title="C. T. Loo" label="C. T. Loo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316354" start="3337" end="3341" title="1957 in art" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315" start="3345" end="3355" title="February 3" label="February 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q107605298" start="3358" end="3376" title="Frances Darlington" label="Frances Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977340" start="3409" end="3413" title="1940 in art" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="3417" end="3427" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q44054" start="3430" end="3440" title="Franz Marc" label="Franz Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="3449" end="3456" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="3493" end="3509" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311446" start="3534" end="3538" title="1916 in art" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390" start="3542" end="3549" title="March 2" label="March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670741" start="3552" end="3568" title="Joseph Ehrismann" label="Joseph Ehrismann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891021" start="3620" end="3624" title="1937 in art" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="3628" end="3636" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q215461" start="3639" end="3651" title="Hans Hofmann" label="Hans Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394435" start="3714" end="3718" title="1966 in art" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="3722" end="3729" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017860" start="3732" end="3753" title="William Russell Flint" label="William Russell Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672245" start="3790" end="3794" title="1969 in art" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505" start="3798" end="3805" title="April 7" label="April 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984317" start="3808" end="3827" title="Alexander Bogomazov" label="Alexander Bogomazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3829" end="3838" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="3866" end="3869" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="3870" end="3882" title="theory" label="theoretician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401605" start="3886" end="3905" title="Russian avant-garde" label="Russian avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983315" start="3912" end="3916" title="1930 in art" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552" start="3920" end="3925" title="May 6" label="May 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q229272" start="3928" end="3949" title="Ernst Ludwig Kirchner" label="Ernst Ludwig Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q152778" start="4001" end="4011" title="Die Brücke" label="Die Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601256" start="4027" end="4031" title="1938 in art" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615" start="4035" end="4042" title="June 10" label="June 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q156272" start="4045" end="4057" title="André Derain" label="André Derain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573078" start="4088" end="4092" title="1954 in art" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785" start="4096" end="4104" title="August 2" label="August 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q709461" start="4107" end="4118" title="Arthur Dove" label="Arthur Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577316" start="4143" end="4147" title="1946 in art" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828" start="4151" end="4160" title="August 22" label="August 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q453440" start="4163" end="4178" title="George Herriman" label="George Herriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577846" start="4218" end="4222" title="1944 in art" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026" start="4226" end="4237" title="November 19" label="November 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="4240" end="4253" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394421" start="4292" end="4296" title="1959 in art" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168" start="4312" end="4321" title="January 4" label="January 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q250194" start="4324" end="4340" title="Anselm Feuerbach" label="Anselm Feuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029758" start="4374" end="4378" title="1829 in art" label="1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340" start="4382" end="4393" title="February 19" label="February 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q983643" start="4396" end="4415" title="Constantino Brumidi" label="Constantino Brumidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029772" start="4459" end="4463" title="1805 in art" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850" start="4467" end="4478" title="September 8" label="September 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q609963" start="4481" end="4502" title="Wilhelm August Rieder" label="Wilhelm August Rieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553461" start="4543" end="4547" title="1796 in art" label="1796"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921" start="4551" end="4561" title="October 10" label="October 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q442379" start="4564" end="4582" title="Giampietro Campana" label="Giampietro Campana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408123" start="4612" end="4616" title="1808 in art" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024" start="4620" end="4631" title="November 20" label="November 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q544646" start="4634" end="4646" title="Léon Cogniet" label="Léon Cogniet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553430" start="4693" end="4697" title="1794 in art" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q354388" start="4729" end="4758" title="Philippe Joseph Henri Lemaire" label="Philippe Joseph Henri Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553495" start="4782" end="4786" title="1798 in art" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726462" start="4791" end="4809" title="Henry O&amp;#x27;Neill (illustrator)" label="Henry O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="4811" end="4816" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553495" start="4851" end="4855" title="1798 in art" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063410" start="4860" end="4878" title="Nicolae Teodorescu" label="Nicolae Teodorescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553477" start="4938" end="4942" title="1797 in art" label="1797"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477045" wikidata="Q621238" url="?curid=477045" title="Apple Display Connector">
<text>The Apple Display Connector (ADC) is a display and data connector developed by Apple Inc. as a proprietary modification of the DVI connector. ADC combines analog and digital video signals, USB, and power all in one cable. It was used in later versions of the Apple Studio Display, including the final 17&quot; CRT model, and most versions of the widescreen Apple Cinema Display, after which Apple adopted standard DVI connectors on later models. 

ADC was first implemented in the July 2000 Power Mac G4 and G4 Cube, but disappeared from displays when Apple introduced the aluminum-clad 20&quot; (51 cm), 23&quot; (58 cm), and 30&quot; (76 cm) Apple Cinema Displays in June 2004, which feature separate DVI, USB and FireWire connectors, and their own power supplies. An ADC port was still included with the Power Mac G5 until April 2005, when new models meant the only remaining Apple product with an ADC interface was the single processor Power Mac G5 introduced in October 2004. This single processor Power Mac G5 was discontinued soon after in June 2005.

==Compatibility==

The Apple Display Connector is physically incompatible with a standard DVI connector. The Apple DVI to ADC Adapter, which cost $149US at launch but was in 2002 available for $99US, takes USB and DVI connections from the computer, adds power from its own integrated power supply, and combines them into an ADC output, allowing ADC monitors to be used with DVI-based machines. 

On some models of Power Mac G4 the ADC connector replaced the DVI connector. This change necessitated a passive ADC to DVI adapter to use a DVI monitor.

The ADC carries up to 100 W of power, an insufficient amount to run most 19-inch (48 cm) or bigger CRTs widely available during ADC&#x27;s debut, nor can it run contemporary flat panels marketed for home entertainment (many of which support DVI or VGA connections) without an adapter. The power limit was an important factor for Apple to abandon ADC when it launched the 30-inch (76 cm) Apple Cinema HD Display.

On newer DVI-based displays lacking ADC, Apple still opted for a single &quot;ganged cable&quot; that connects the separate signal cables to each other so they cannot tangle. Such cables, however, employ standard DVI, power, USB and FireWire connectors, avoiding drawbacks to ADC. Beginning in 2008, Apple began transitioning away from DVI, adopting the increasingly common DisplayPort signalling standard, and developed their own Mini DisplayPort connector beginning with the first LED-backlit Cinema Displays. As of 2013, Apple no longer uses a DVI-based interface for any of its displays.

Apple no longer supports ADC adapters or monitors.

==Pin 3 and 11==
Power is supplied to the ADC port by an additional finger connector on the video card, which plugs into a slot on the motherboard between the AGP slot and the back panel of the computer; on G4 Macs, some power is also sent through AGP pins 3 and 11. When ADC was introduced, AGP pins 3 and 11 were unassigned. In AGP 8x, pins 3 and 11 were assigned, so because of that, G4s are not directly compatible with AGP 8x. G5 Macs draw all power from the finger connector and therefore are 8x compatible. To use an AGP 8x card in a G4, pins 3 and 11 must be somehow disabled; this can be done by placing tape over the conductive part of the pin, slicing the PCB traces, or on some cards, desoldering surface mount resistors.

==See also==
* Apple Displays
* HDI-45 connector (a previous attempt by Apple to integrate other interfaces into a video connector) 
* List of display interfaces

==References==
==External links==
*Apple Unveils All New Family of Displays to Complement Power Mac G4 Cube and Power Mac G4
*&quot;The Apple Display Connector (ADC)&quot; on Low End Mac</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621238" start="4" end="27" title="Apple Display Connector" label="Apple Display Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q621238" start="29" end="32" title="Apple Display Connector" label="ADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="79" end="89" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q337765" start="127" end="130" title="Digital video interface" label="DVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="189" end="192" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="215" end="220" title="Electrical cable" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738857" start="259" end="279" title="Apple Studio Display (1998–2004)" label="Apple Studio Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="310" end="313" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q621224" start="357" end="377" title="Apple Cinema Display" label="Apple Cinema Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q621322" start="491" end="500" title="Power Mac" label="Power Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="501" end="503" title="Power Mac G4" label="G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q428888" start="508" end="515" title="Power Mac G4 Cube" label="G4 Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q621224" start="644" end="664" title="Apple Cinema Display" label="Apple Cinema Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q337765" start="703" end="706" title="Digital Visual Interface" label="DVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="708" end="711" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="716" end="724" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="807" end="819" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="1343" end="1355" title="power supply unit" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644080" start="2100" end="2112" title="octopus cable" label="ganged cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q753452" start="2396" end="2407" title="DisplayPort" label="DisplayPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634810" start="2453" end="2469" title="Mini DisplayPort" label="Mini DisplayPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q621356" start="3417" end="3431" title="Apple Displays" label="Apple Displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629201" start="3434" end="3450" title="HDI-45 connector" label="HDI-45 connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799463" start="3537" end="3563" title="List of display interfaces" label="List of display interfaces"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477050" wikidata="Q626538" url="?curid=477050" title="Dakshin Gangotri">
<text>Dakshin Gangotri was the first scientific base station of India situated in Antarctica, part of the Indian Antarctic Programme. It is located at a distance of from the South Pole. It is currently being used as a supply base and transit camp. The base is named after Dakshin Gangotri Glacier.

It was established during the third Indian expedition to Antarctica in 1983–84. This was the first time an Indian team spent a winter in Antarctica to carry out scientific works. The station was built in eight weeks by an 81-member team that included geologist Sudipta Sengupta. Construction was completed late into January 1984 with help from the Indian army and Indian Republic Day was celebrated at the station along with the Soviets and East Germans.

== Description ==

It was an unmanned station, set up using indigenous Indian equipment, powered by solar energy. The station was entirely computerised to record all data that was researched. It was built using pre-fabricated timber, and was intended as a permanent station. It had an Inmarsat communication terminal, as well as an amateur radio station.

The station was divided into two sections, Blocks A and B. Block A contained generators, fuel supply and workshops while Block B was home to laboratories, radio rooms and other facilities.

An automatic weather recording station, powered by solar energy was set up at the Dakshin Gangotri. Apart from this, the station was used to conduct tests on radio waves in Antarctica. Other functions of the Dakshin Gangotri included observations of physical oceanography, the chemistry of the freshwater lakes around, biological traits of the land, biological traits of the water, geology, glaciology and geomagnetism of the area.

In 1984, site for a new runway was identified at a distance of 2 km from the station. Along with this, 2000 philatelic covers were marked with &quot;Dakshin Gangotri&quot;. Later, in the same year, a small field station was set up in the hills, to allow direct communication over a high frequency satellite link between Indian mainland and the station.

In 1985, instruments such as the Automatic Picture Transmission Receiver, and the Radio Metre Sonde were set up to calculate wind velocities and solar intensities to determine the feasibility of generation of wind energy and solar energy. 2000 philatelic covers were cancelled, while videos were taken on the station. An electrified garage to store snow vehicles and skidoos was constructed as well as a repair workshop for them was constructed along with three cottages made with pre-fabricated material, built by the Defence Research and Development Organisation.The Indian Navy helped set up the communications system for wireless transmission to India.

In 1984, The first Indian post office in Antarctica was established at Dakshin Gangotri and Meteorologist G. Sudhakar Rao was named as the first Indian postmaster in Antarctica in 1988.

== Conversion to supply base and replacement ==
It was abandoned in 1988–1989 after it was submerged in ice. It was succeeded by the Maitri research station, which was set up in a moderate climatic zone at a distance of 90 km and made operational in 1990. Dakshin Gangotri was finally decommissioned on 25 February 1990 and subsequently turned into a supply base.

In 1991, the eleventh Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica conducted geomagnetic observations simultaneously at Dakshin Gangotri and Maitri.

In 2008, India set up its first permanent research base on the Arctic Ocean, Himadri.

In 2012, a third research station, the Bharati was made operational, although only for testing.

In 2014, the second Arctic research station, a moored observatory named IndARC was commissioned.
==See also==
* Indian Antarctic Program
* Bharati (research station) 
* Maitri Second Indian station 1989
* Defence Research and Development Organisation 
* Defence Institute of High Altitude Research
* Indian Astronomical Observatory
* Jantar Mantar, Jaipur
* National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research
* Siachen Base Camp (India)
* List of Antarctic research stations
* List of Antarctic field camps
* List of highest astronomical observatories
==References==
==External links==
* Antarctica, NATIONAL CENTRE FOR ANTARCTIC AND OCEAN RESEARCH (NCAOR)
* Dakshin Gangotri Station: Pride of India
* REVIEW OF THE HISTORIC SITE AND MONUMENT HSM-44 (A PLAQUE ERECTED AT “DAKSHIN GANGOTRI” STATION</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q626538" start="0" end="16" title="Dakshin Gangotri" label="Dakshin Gangotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="58" end="63" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="76" end="86" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348675" start="100" end="124" title="Indian Antarctic Program" label="Indian Antarctic Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="168" end="178" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210079" start="266" end="290" title="Dakshin Gangotri Glacier" label="Dakshin Gangotri Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="329" end="360" title="Indian Antarctic Program#Indian Antarctic expeditions" label="Indian expedition to Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="430" end="440" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633856" start="554" end="570" title="Sudipta Sengupta" label="Sudipta Sengupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139536" start="657" end="676" title="Republic Day (India)" label="Indian Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="849" end="861" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="1034" end="1042" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337681" start="1545" end="1566" title="physical oceanography" label="physical oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1677" end="1684" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52120" start="1686" end="1696" title="glaciology" label="glaciology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="1701" end="1713" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="geomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182964" start="1836" end="1852" title="philatelic cover" label="philatelic cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="2291" end="2302" title="wind energy" label="wind energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182964" start="2326" end="2342" title="philatelic cover" label="philatelic cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154393" start="2601" end="2646" title="Defence Research and Development Organisation" label="Defence Research and Development Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="2651" end="2662" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q626852" start="3060" end="3066" title="Maitri (research station)" label="Maitri"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="3503" end="3515" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977161" start="3517" end="3524" title="Himadri (research station)" label="Himadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q627152" start="3566" end="3573" title="Bharati (research station)" label="Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q61438329" start="3696" end="3702" title="IndARC" label="IndARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348675" start="3736" end="3760" title="Indian Antarctic Program" label="Indian Antarctic Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q627152" start="3763" end="3789" title="Bharati (research station)" label="Bharati (research station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q626852" start="3793" end="3799" title="Maitri (research station)" label="Maitri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154393" start="3829" end="3874" title="Defence Research and Development Organisation" label="Defence Research and Development Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q100956063" start="3878" end="3921" title="Defence Institute of High Altitude Research" label="Defence Institute of High Altitude Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q251629" start="3924" end="3955" title="Indian Astronomical Observatory" label="Indian Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q508634" start="3958" end="3979" title="Jantar Mantar, Jaipur" label="Jantar Mantar, Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351035" start="3982" end="4026" title="National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research" label="National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q132260" start="4029" end="4054" title="Siachen Base Camp (India)" label="Siachen Base Camp (India)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4057" end="4092" title="Research stations in Antarctica#List of research stations" label="List of Antarctic research stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771007" start="4095" end="4124" title="Antarctic field camps" label="List of Antarctic field camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622421" start="4127" end="4169" title="List of highest astronomical observatories" label="List of highest astronomical observatories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477051" wikidata="Q6745540" url="?curid=477051" title="Mambo section">
<text>In Afro-Caribbean music, mambo is the section of an arrangement in Danzón and related styles, which features instrumental improvisation.

==History==
The beginning of the evolution of this section from montuno is attributed to Machito and his Afro-Cubans, who included material, new to Afro-Caribbean music, for brass and saxophones, borrowed from the big band style. 

Israel &quot;Cachao&quot; López added an open vamp to Danzón and called it &quot;nuevo ritmo&quot; (&quot;new rhythm&quot;), which was later called &quot;Mambo section.&quot; and eventually evolved into Mambo music.

==See also==
*
*Afro-Caribbean music 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4690168" start="3" end="23" title="Afro-Caribbean music" label="Afro-Caribbean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745540" start="25" end="30" title="Mambo section" label="mambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165358" start="67" end="73" title="Danzón" label="Danzón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252451" start="202" end="209" title="montuno" label="montuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q462983" start="227" end="234" title="Machito" label="Machito"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690177" start="243" end="254" title="Afro-Cubans (band)" label="Afro-Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="312" end="317" title="brass instruments" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="322" end="331" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="352" end="360" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q562148" start="370" end="401" title="Israel &amp;quot;Cachao&amp;quot; López" label="Israel &amp;quot;Cachao&amp;quot; López"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="411" end="415" title="open-ended improvization" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q216745" start="416" end="420" title="vamp (music)" label="vamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="451" end="462" title="nuevo ritmo" label="nuevo ritmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646666" start="573" end="584" title="Mambo music" label="Mambo music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690168" start="603" end="623" title="Afro-Caribbean music" label="Afro-Caribbean music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477054" wikidata="Q697092" url="?curid=477054" title="Hokianga">
<text>The Hokianga is an area surrounding the Hokianga Harbour, also known as the Hokianga River, a long estuarine drowned valley on the west coast in the north of the North Island of New Zealand.

The original name, still used by local Māori, is &quot;Te Kohanga o Te Tai Tokerau&quot; (&quot;the nest of the northern people&quot;) or &quot;Te Puna o Te Ao Marama&quot; (&quot;the wellspring in the world of light&quot;). The full name of the harbour is Te Hokianga-nui-a-Kupe — &quot;the place of Kupe&#x27;s great return&quot;.

==Geography==
The Hokianga is in the Far North District, which is in the Northland Region. The area is northwest of Whangārei City—and west of Kaikohe—by road. The estuary extends inland for from the Tasman Sea. It is navigable for small craft for much of its length, although there is a bar across the mouth. In its upper reaches the Rangiora Narrows separate the mouths of the Waihou and Mangamuka Rivers from the lower parts of the harbour.

12,000 years ago, the Hokianga was a river valley flanked by steep bush-clad hills. As the last ice age regressed, the dramatic rise in sea level slowly flooded the valley turning it into a tidal saltwater harbour with abundant sheltered deep water anchorages. This was the harbour that the explorer Kupe left from, and in 1822 it was home to the first European timber entrepreneurs. southern right whales possibly frequented the bay historically, prior to significant depletion of the species caused by commercial and illegal hunting. Today, large whales are rarely seen in the bay, although the harbour is a well-regarded area in which to watch smaller dolphins and killer whales.

Numerous small islands dot the Hokianga, notably Ruapapaka Island, Motukaraka Island, and To Motu Island, the latter being the site of a former pā.

===Arms and inlets===
As the Hokianga is a drowned valley, it is the mouth of numerous &quot;tributaries&quot;, many of which retain the name river while effectively being bays or inlets. Clockwise from the mouth of the Hokianga, these include:
*Whakarapa River
*Motuti River
*Whangapapatiki Creek
*Tapuwae River
*Mangamuka River
*Orira River
*Waihou River
*Wairere River
*Waima River
*Omanaia River
*Whirinaki River

===Settlements===
The area around the harbour is divided in three by the estuary. To the south are the settlements of Waimamaku, Ōmāpere, Opononi, Pakanae, Koutu, Whirinaki, Rawene, Omanaia, Waima, and Taheke; to the north are Broadwood, Pawarenga, Panguru, Mitimiti, and Rangi Point; and at the top of the harbour upstream from the narrows are Horeke, Kohukohu, and Mangamuka.

==History==
===Pre-colonial times===
According to Te Tai Tokerau tradition, Kupe and Ngāhue, the legendary Polynesian navigators and explorers, settled in Hokianga in approximately 925 AD, after their journey of discovery from Hawaiki aboard their waka (canoe) named &quot;Matahorua&quot; and &quot;Tāwhirirangi&quot;. When Kupe left the area, he declared that this would be the place of his return, leaving several things behind—including the bailer of his canoe. Later, Kupe&#x27;s grandson Nukutawhiti returned from Hawaiki to settle in Hokianga.

In the 14th century, the great chief Puhi landed just south of the Bay of Islands. The tribe of Puhi, Ngāpuhi, slowly extended westwards to reach the west coast and to colonise both sides of Hokianga. Māori regard Hokianga as one of the oldest settlements in Aotearoa, and it remains a heartland for the people. Rahiri, the 17th-century founder of the Ngāpuhi iwi, was born at Whiria pā to the south of the harbour, where a monument stands to his memory.

In the course of expansion, Ngāpuhi created and maintained over centuries a complex network of walking tracks, many of which evolved into today&#x27;s roads.

====Pā sites====
More than a dozen pā sites lie close to the Hokianga, among them notably Motukauri Pã, located on a headland at the end of a tombolo between the Motuti River and Whangapapatiki Creek mouths.

===The arrival of the Europeans===
Wesleyan (and, later, Anglican) missionaries were guided along the Ngāpuhi walking tracks to make their own discovery of Hokianga and its accessible timber resources. Their reports soon reached merchant captains in the Bay of Islands.

Captain James Herd of the &quot;Providence&quot; responded first, and with missionary Thomas Kendall as guide and translator, crossed the bar and entered the harbour in 1822. His was the first European ship to do so, and it sailed away with the first shipment of timber from the Hokianga. His success inspired a strong following—the deforestation of Hokianga had begun and would be complete by the turn of the century.

The only disincentive to Hokianga&#x27;s exploitation was the harbour bar. Among the hundreds of ships that successfully negotiated it, 16 were recorded as being lost. Most came to grief when leaving fully laden, becoming caught in the wind shadow cast by South Head, where deep water lay. A temporary lull or change in wind direction could cause a sailing ship to lose steerage way and be swept onto the rocky shore. In 1828, the missionary schooner &quot;Herald&quot;, built by Henry Williams and sailed by Gilbert Mair, foundered while trying to enter Hokianga Harbour. The last recorded shipwreck was of the schooner &quot;Isabella de Fraine&quot;, lost with all eight crew in July 1928 after capsizing on the bar.

In 1837, a French adventurer, the self-titled Baron Charles de Thierry, sailed with 60 settlers into this hive of export activity to claim an immense tract of land that he believed he had purchased 15 years earlier in exchange for 36 axes. He was eventually granted about at Rangiahua where he set up his colony, declaring himself &quot;Sovereign Chief of New Zealand&quot;, a title that failed to endear him to Ngāpuhi. His project collapsed, but it highlighted to the Colonial Service the need to protect against rival European powers.

The year after de Thierry arrived, another Frenchman, Bishop Jean Baptiste Pompallier, arrived, with the aim of establishing a Catholic mission. He found the southern shores firmly in the hands of Methodist and Anglican missionaries, but the northern side was ripe for conversion. His remains, recently claimed by Ngāpuhi, lie buried where the mission began. Today the harbour, like the Reformation itself, stands between Protestant and Catholic.

The lawyer and naturalist Sir Walter Lawry Buller was born in Hokianga in 1838.

Within six days of the Waitangi signing, Governor Hobson, keen to secure full Ngāpuhi support, trekked across to the Māngungu Mission near Horeke where 3000 were waiting. The second signing of the Treaty of Waitangi took place on 12 February 1840. With the appropriate signatures (and a few inappropriate entries) Hobson could immediately claim support from the biggest tribe in the country.
While the fate of the country was being signed into history, the axemen of Hokianga scarcely missed a beat. At any one time, as many as 20 ships could be loading Hokianga timber. Whole hillsides, suddenly bared of vegetation, began to slip into the harbour, choking its tributaries with mud.

The relationship between Māori and Pākehā (European) settlers was frequently tense, never more so than during the Dog Tax War of the 1890s, which was largely centred around Hokianga.

By 1900, the bulk of the forest had sailed over the bar and the little topsoil that remained was turned to dairy farming for butter production. Most of the cream delivered to the Motukaraka Dairy Factory was carried there by a fleet of about fifty locally-built launches that criss-crossed the harbour daily, creating in the process a service for both passengers and freight. For half a century, the communities on both sides of the harbour were linked internally by sea transport, before improved roads in the 1950s finally displaced this energetic flotilla and the harbour once again divided the community.

By 1914, a rustic telephone system linked some of the Hokianga communities with each other and with the outside world. A government-subsidised, weekly coastal shipping service ran between Onehunga and Hokianga, bringing in freight and taking away butter.

The communities of Horeke and Rawene are the second- and third-oldest European settlements in New Zealand. Rawene is still the most important of the coastal settlements in the Hokianga and is where the base of Hokianga&#x27;s community owned health services (Hauora Hokianga) is located, on top of the hill at the Hokianga Hospital.

===1918 influenza pandemic===
The influenza pandemic reached Hokianga in September 1918, and remote Waiotemarama was one of the first settlements to succumb. A soup kitchen was organised in each community. On the instructions of Dr George McCall Smith, the Surgeon Superintendent of Rawene Hospital, mounted and armed guards stood at all crossroads to turn back would-be visitors and thus restrict the spread of the disease between settlements. Travellers wishing to enter Hokianga were simply stopped at the boundary. The rule was simple: anyone could leave, but no one could enter.

The local epidemic lasted six weeks and a significant number died. Each community attended to its own, and mass burials were commonplace. Few Maori deaths were recorded – the true impact of the epidemic on Maori is unknown.

==Industry==
The first major industry of the region was based around the kauri trees, both logging and the gum, the strong thick resin which came from the trees. After the forests started to thin, dairying and cheese production took over as the mainstay of the economy, but they too fell away after the closure of the Motukaraka Dairy Cooperative in 1953. For a while during the 1970s and 1980s, there was little economic base for the area, and it became a haven for alternative lifestylers.

In recent years, however, tourism has been revived in the region. Attractions such as the great kauri trees of the Waipoua Forest (including the country&#x27;s largest tree, Tane Mahuta), the historic waterfront villages of Kohukohu and Rawene, cafes, the Horeke basalts, beaches, historic buildings, nature walks, horse trekking, boat trips, and fishing are bringing more visitors every year. In 2002 the first walking tracks were opened at the Wairere Boulders allowing a close inspection of the basalt rocks in the Wairere valley. Hokianga offers varied and interesting accommodation for all styles and budgets for travelers who prefer a quieter holiday than the busier east coast offers. A visit to the Hokianga is to see what New Zealand was like in previous decades with unspoiled landscapes.

==Notable people==
Three iconic and very different figures in New Zealand history have been closely associated with the Hokianga.

===Dame Whina Cooper===
Dame Whina Cooper was born at Te Karaka, Hokianga on 9 December 1895, the daughter of a leader of the Te Rarawa iwi.

From an early age she showed an interest in local community affairs and politics, and her flair and abilities led to her becoming the undisputed Māori leader of the northern Hokianga by her mid-30s.

In 1949 she moved to Auckland, and by 1951 she was elected first president of the new Māori Women&#x27;s Welfare League. The league&#x27;s success was largely due to Whina&#x27;s efforts, and she became well known throughout the country. In 1957 she stepped down as president and the annual conference rewarded her with the title &quot;Te Whaea o te Motu&quot; (&quot;Mother of the Nation&quot;).

Whina Cooper continued to work for the community throughout the 1960s, but it was her 1975 leadership of a hīkoi – a symbolic march – to protest against the loss of Māori land for which she is best remembered. The march, from the northern tip of the North Island to Parliament in Wellington at the other end of the island made her nationally recognised, with her determined figure, no longer strong in body but strong in mana and will, walking at the head of the march from Te Hapua to Wellington.

She was made a DBE in 1981 and a member of the Order of New Zealand in 1991. She had returned to Panguru in the Hokianga in 1983. She died there on 26 March 1994 at the age of 98.

===Jean Baptiste Pompallier===
Bishop Jean Baptiste Pompallier (1802–1871), was the first Roman Catholic bishop in New Zealand. His first mission station was situated at Pūrākau in the Hokianga from 1839 until 1915. He celebrated the first mass on NZ &#x27;terra firma&#x27; at Tōtara Point, Hokianga, in 1838. His remains were reinterred in Motuti, Hokianga, in 2002 after a nationwide hīkoi.

===Opo the dolphin===

Opononi became famous throughout New Zealand during 1955 and 1956 due to the exploits of a bottlenose dolphin (nicknamed &quot;Opo&quot;). Opo was a wild dolphin who started following fishing boats around Opononi in early 1955 after her mother had been killed, and would swim daily in the bay close to town. She was originally named &quot;Opononi Jack&quot;, based on Pelorus Jack, since she was presumed to be male. Unlike the majority of dolphins, she had no qualms about human company, and would perform stunts for locals, play with objects like beach balls and beer bottles, and allow children to swim alongside her and make contact.

The dolphin became a local celebrity but news of her soon spread, and visitors from throughout the country would come to watch her. On 8 March 1956 official protection for Opo, requested by locals, was made law, but on 9 March she was found dead in a rock crevice at Koutu Point. It is suspected that she was killed accidentally by fishermen fishing with gelignite. Her death was reported nationwide, and she was buried with full Māori honours in a special plot next to the town hall.

==Education==
There are composite (years 1–15) schools at Opononi, Panguru and Broadwood.

There are also primary schools at Mangamuka, Horeke, Kohukohu, Matihetihe, Omanaia, Pawarenga, Rawene, Waimā, Whirinaki, and Umawera.

==See also==

*Weller brothers

==References==
==External links==

* Hauora Hokianga Hokianga&#x27;s community governed health services
* Hokianga Tourism Association Local Tourism Members and Information 
* Dictionary of New Zealand Biography essay on Dame Whina Cooper
* Rawene Website
* Kohukohu Community Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697092" start="4" end="12" title="Hokianga" label="Hokianga"/>
<link wikidata="Q697092" start="40" end="56" title="Hokianga" label="Hokianga Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q697092" start="76" end="90" title="Hokianga" label="Hokianga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="99" end="108" title="Estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="162" end="174" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="178" end="189" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="231" end="236" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q697092" start="449" end="471" title="Hokianga" label="Te Hokianga-nui-a-Kupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365839" start="563" end="581" title="Far North (district), New Zealand" label="Far North District"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="599" end="615" title="Northland Region" label="Northland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="642" end="651" title="Whangārei" label="Whangārei"/>
<link wikidata="Q999327" start="669" end="676" title="Kaikohe" label="Kaikohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="726" end="736" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792784" start="1271" end="1275" title="Kupe" label="Kupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="1355" end="1375" title="southern right whale" label="southern right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="1626" end="1633" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="1639" end="1651" title="killer whale" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1704" end="1720" title="Ruapapaka Island" label="Ruapapaka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q32283781" start="1722" end="1739" title="Motukaraka Island" label="Motukaraka Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1745" end="1759" title="To Motu Island" label="To Motu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="1799" end="1801" title="pā" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990469" start="2050" end="2065" title="Whakarapa River" label="Whakarapa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918781" start="2067" end="2079" title="Motuti River" label="Motuti River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2081" end="2101" title="Whangapapatiki Creek" label="Whangapapatiki Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684874" start="2103" end="2116" title="Tapuwae River" label="Tapuwae River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748752" start="2118" end="2133" title="Mangamuka River" label="Mangamuka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102821" start="2135" end="2146" title="Orira River" label="Orira River"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997927" start="2148" end="2160" title="Waihou River (Northland)" label="Waihou River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960330" start="2162" end="2175" title="Wairere River" label="Wairere River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960082" start="2177" end="2188" title="Waima River" label="Waima River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089563" start="2190" end="2203" title="Omanaia River" label="Omanaia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993779" start="2205" end="2220" title="Whirinaki River (Northland)" label="Whirinaki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660155" start="2340" end="2349" title="Waimamaku" label="Waimamaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023019" start="2351" end="2358" title="Ōmāpere" label="Ōmāpere"/>
<link wikidata="Q204227" start="2360" end="2367" title="Opononi" label="Opononi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2369" end="2376" title="Pakanae" label="Pakanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067343" start="2378" end="2383" title="Koutu" label="Koutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566771" start="2385" end="2394" title="Whirinaki, Northland" label="Whirinaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296972" start="2396" end="2402" title="Rawene" label="Rawene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023004" start="2404" end="2411" title="Omanaia" label="Omanaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960082" start="2413" end="2418" title="Waima, Northland" label="Waima"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660131" start="2424" end="2430" title="Taheke" label="Taheke"/>
<link wikidata="Q922968" start="2449" end="2458" title="Broadwood, New Zealand" label="Broadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990619" start="2460" end="2469" title="Pawarenga" label="Pawarenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967248" start="2471" end="2478" title="Panguru" label="Panguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182815" start="2480" end="2488" title="Mitimiti" label="Mitimiti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2494" end="2505" title="Rangi Point" label="Rangi Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903066" start="2567" end="2573" title="Horeke" label="Horeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426162" start="2575" end="2583" title="Kohukohu, New Zealand" label="Kohukohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748756" start="2589" end="2598" title="Mangamuka" label="Mangamuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="2651" end="2665" title="Te Tai tokerau" label="Te Tai Tokerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792784" start="2677" end="2681" title="Kupe" label="Kupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054245" start="2686" end="2692" title="Ngāhue" label="Ngāhue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591621" start="2828" end="2835" title="Hawaiki" label="Hawaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785984" start="2874" end="2883" title="Matahourua" label="Matahorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862520" start="2900" end="2912" title="Tāwhirirangi" label="Tāwhirirangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104713148" start="3045" end="3051" title="Hand bailer" label="bailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q812091" start="3219" end="3233" title="Bay of Islands" label="Bay of Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="3254" end="3261" title="Ngāpuhi" label="Ngāpuhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153785" start="3411" end="3419" title="Aotearoa" label="Aotearoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="3512" end="3515" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="3536" end="3538" title="Pā (Māori)" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="3802" end="3804" title="pā" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q498274" start="3909" end="3916" title="tombolo" label="tombolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4011" end="4019" title="Methodist" label="Wesleyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4033" end="4041" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="4043" end="4055" title="Mission (Christian)" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425362" start="4333" end="4347" title="Thomas Kendall" label="Thomas Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="5109" end="5117" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597377" start="5118" end="5136" title="Herald (1826 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Herald&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730289" start="5147" end="5161" title="Henry Williams (missionary)" label="Henry Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16857933" start="5176" end="5188" title="Gilbert Mair (trader)" label="Gilbert Mair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065772" start="5439" end="5457" title="Charles de Thierry" label="Charles de Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130941" start="5662" end="5671" title="Rangiahua" label="Rangiahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q979672" start="5987" end="6011" title="Jean Baptiste Pompallier" label="Jean Baptiste Pompallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="6313" end="6324" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507378" start="6400" end="6423" title="Walter Buller" label="Sir Walter Lawry Buller"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="6478" end="6494" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Waitangi signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q559857" start="6496" end="6511" title="William Hobson" label="Governor Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872140" start="6572" end="6588" title="Māngungu Mission" label="Māngungu Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="7175" end="7181" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288229" start="7254" end="7265" title="Dog Tax War" label="Dog Tax War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352699" start="8122" end="8130" title="Onehunga" label="Onehunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682745" start="8449" end="8455" title="Hauora" label="Hauora"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="8558" end="8576" title="Spanish flu" label="influenza pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660155" start="8624" end="8636" title="Waiotemarama" label="Waiotemarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542163" start="8753" end="8775" title="George McCall Smith" label="Dr George McCall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q216113" start="9407" end="9412" title="kauri" label="kauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736526" start="9801" end="9822" title="alternative lifestyle" label="alternative lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515785" start="9942" end="9956" title="Waipoua Forest" label="Waipoua Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789423" start="10001" end="10012" title="Tane Mahuta" label="Tane Mahuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426162" start="10051" end="10059" title="Kohukohu, New Zealand" label="Kohukohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296972" start="10064" end="10070" title="Rawene" label="Rawene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903053" start="10083" end="10097" title="Horeke basalts" label="Horeke basalts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960329" start="10273" end="10289" title="Wairere Boulders" label="Wairere Boulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q466142" start="10787" end="10799" title="Whina Cooper" label="Whina Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690952" start="10884" end="10893" title="Te Rarawa" label="Te Rarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="10894" end="10897" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="11121" end="11129" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760660" start="11605" end="11610" title="hīkoi" label="hīkoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="11778" end="11788" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q859517" start="11919" end="11923" title="Mana (Oceanian mythology)" label="mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="12012" end="12015" title="Order of the British Empire" label="DBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q973829" start="12044" end="12064" title="Order of New Zealand" label="Order of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q979672" start="12216" end="12240" title="Jean Baptiste Pompallier" label="Jean Baptiste Pompallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="12687" end="12705" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098372" start="12723" end="12726" title="Opo (dolphin)" label="Opo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068301" start="12964" end="12976" title="Pelorus Jack" label="Pelorus Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q902739" start="13590" end="13599" title="gelignite" label="gelignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q204227" start="13779" end="13786" title="Opononi" label="Opononi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967248" start="13788" end="13795" title="Panguru" label="Panguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q922968" start="13800" end="13809" title="Broadwood, New Zealand" label="Broadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748756" start="13846" end="13855" title="Mangamuka" label="Mangamuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903066" start="13857" end="13863" title="Horeke" label="Horeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426162" start="13865" end="13873" title="Kohukohu, New Zealand" label="Kohukohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787455" start="13875" end="13885" title="Matihetihe" label="Matihetihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023004" start="13887" end="13894" title="Omanaia" label="Omanaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990619" start="13896" end="13905" title="Pawarenga" label="Pawarenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296972" start="13907" end="13913" title="Rawene" label="Rawene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960082" start="13915" end="13920" title="Waima, Northland" label="Waimā"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566771" start="13922" end="13931" title="Whirinaki, Northland" label="Whirinaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529889" start="13937" end="13944" title="Umawera" label="Umawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981224" start="13962" end="13977" title="Weller brothers" label="Weller brothers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477060" wikidata="Q620784" url="?curid=477060" title="Linear trend estimation">
<text>Linear trend estimation is a statistical technique used to analyze data patterns. Data patterns, or trends, occur when the information gathered tends to increase or decrease over time or is influenced by changes in an external factor. Linear trend estimation essentially creates a straight line on a graph of data that models the general direction that the data is heading. 

==Fitting a trend: Least-squares==
Given a set of data, there are a variety of functions that can be chosen to fit the data. The simplest function is a straight line with the dependent variable (typically the measured data) on the vertical axis and the independent variable (often time) on the horizontal axis.

The least-squares fit is a common method to fit a straight line through the data. This method minimizes the sum of the squared errors in the data series formula_1. Given a set of points in time formula_2 and data values formula_3 observed for those points in time, values of formula_4 and formula_5 are chosen to minimize the sum of squared errors

:formula_6.

This formula first calculates the difference between the observed data formula_3 and the estimate formula_8, the difference at each data point is squared, and then added together, giving the &quot;sum of squares&quot; measurement of error. The values of formula_9 and formula_10 derived from the data parameterize the simple linear estimator formula_11. The term &quot;trend&quot; refers to the slope formula_9 in the least squares estimator.

==Data as trend and noise==
To analyze a (time) series of data, it can be assumed that it may be represented as trend plus noise:

:formula_13

where formula_14 and formula_15 are unknown constants and the formula_16&#x27;s are randomly distributed errors. If one can reject the null hypothesis that the errors are non-stationary, then the non-stationary series formula_17 is called trend-stationary. The least-squares method assumes the errors are independently distributed with a normal distribution. If this is not the case, hypothesis tests about the unknown parameters formula_14 and formula_15 may be inaccurate. It is simplest if the formula_16&#x27;s all have the same distribution, but if not (if some have higher variance, meaning that those data points are effectively less certain), then this can be taken into account during the least-squares fitting by weighting each point by the inverse of the variance of that point.

Commonly, where only a single time series exists to be analyzed, the variance of the formula_16&#x27;s is estimated by fitting a trend to obtain the estimated parameter values formula_4 and formula_23 thus allowing the predicted values 
:formula_24

to be subtracted from the data formula_3 (thus &quot;detrending&quot; the data), leaving the residuals formula_26 as the &quot;detrended data&quot;, and estimating the variance of the formula_27&#x27;s from the residuals — this is often the only way of estimating the variance of the formula_27&#x27;s.

Once the &quot;noise&quot; of the series is known, the significance of the trend can be assessed by making the null hypothesis that the trend, formula_14, is not different from 0. From the above discussion of trends in random data with known variance, the distribution of calculated trends is to be expected from random (trendless) data. If the estimated trend, formula_4, is larger than the critical value for a certain significance level, then the estimated trend is deemed significantly different from zero at that significance level, and the null hypothesis of a zero underlying trend is rejected.

The use of a linear trend line has been the subject of criticism, leading to a search for alternative approaches to avoid its use in model estimation. One of the alternative approaches involves unit root tests and the cointegration technique in econometric studies.

The estimated coefficient associated with a linear trend variable such as time is interpreted as a measure of the impact of a number of unknown or known but immeasurable factors on the dependent variable over one unit of time. Strictly speaking, this interpretation is applicable for the estimation time frame only. Outside of this time frame, it cannot be determined how these immeasurable factors behave both qualitatively and quantitatively. 

Research results by mathematicians, statisticians, econometricians, and economists have been published in response to those questions. For example, detailed notes on the meaning of linear time trends in the regression model are given in Cameron (2005); Granger, Engle, and many other econometricians have written on stationarity, unit root testing, co-integration, and related issues (a summary of some of the works in this area can be found in an information paper by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (2003)); and Ho-Trieu &amp; Tucker (1990) have written on logarithmic time trends with results indicating linear time trends are special cases of cycles.

=== Noisy time series ===
It is harder to see a trend in a noisy time series. For example, if the true series is 0, 1, 2, 3, all plus some independent normally distributed &quot;noise&quot; &quot;e&quot; of standard deviation&quot;E&quot;, and a sample series of length 50 is given, then if &quot;E&quot;=0.1, the trend will be obvious; if &quot;E&quot;=100, the trend will probably be visible; but if &quot;E&quot;=10000, the trend will be buried in the noise.

Consider a concrete example, such as the global surface temperature record of the past 140 years as presented by the IPCC. The interannual variation is about 0.2°C, and the trend is about 0.6°C over 140 years, with 95% confidence limits of 0.2°C (by coincidence, about the same value as the interannual variation). Hence, the trend is statistically different from 0. However, as noted elsewhere, this time series doesn&#x27;t conform to the assumptions necessary for least-squares to be valid.

==Goodness of fit (&quot;r&quot;-squared) and trend==
The least-squares fitting process produces a value, r-squared (&quot;r&quot;2), which is 1 minus the ratio of the variance of the residuals to the variance of the dependent variable. It says what fraction of the variance of the data is explained by the fitted trend line. It does not relate to the statistical significance of the trend line (see graph); the statistical significance of the trend is determined by its t-statistic. Often, filtering a series increases &quot;r&quot;2 while making little difference to the fitted trend.

==Advanced models==
Thus far, the data have been assumed to consist of the trend plus noise, with the noise at each data point being independent and identically distributed random variables with a normal distribution. Real data (for example, climate data) may not fulfill these criteria. This is important, as it makes an enormous difference to the ease with which the statistics can be analyzed so as to extract maximum information from the data series. If there are other non-linear effects that have a correlation to the independent variable (such as cyclic influences), the use of least-squares estimation of the trend is not valid. Also, where the variations are significantly larger than the resulting straight line trend, the choice of start and end points can significantly change the result. That is, the model is mathematically misspecified. Statistical inferences (tests for the presence of a trend, confidence intervals for the trend, etc.) are invalid unless departures from the standard assumptions are properly accounted for, for example, as follows:

*Dependence: autocorrelated time series might be modelled using autoregressive moving average models.
*Non-constant variance: in the simplest cases, weighted least squares might be used.
*Non-normal distribution for errors: in the simplest cases, a generalized linear model might be applicable.
*Unit root: taking first (or occasionally second) differences of the data, with the level of differencing being identified through various unit root tests.
In R, the linear trend in data can be estimated by using the &#x27;tslm&#x27; function of the &#x27;forecast&#x27; package.

==Trends in clinical data==
Medical and biomedical studies often seek to determine a link between sets of data, such as of a clinical or scientific metric in three different diseases. But data may also be linked in time (such as change in the effect of a drug from baseline, to month 1, to month 2), or by an external factor that may or may not be determined by the researcher and/or their subject (such as no pain, mild pain, moderate pain, or severe pain). In these cases, one would expect the effect test statistic (e.g., influence of a statin on levels of cholesterol, an analgesic on the degree of pain, or increasing doses of different strengths of a drug on a measurable index, i.e. a dose - response effect) to change in direct order as the effect develops. Suppose the mean level of cholesterol before and after the prescription of a statin falls from 5.6 mmol/L at baseline to 3.4 mmol/L at one month and to 3.7 mmol/L at two months. Given sufficient power, an ANOVA (analysis of variance) would most likely find a significant fall at one and two months, but the fall is not linear. Furthermore, a post-hoc test may be required. An alternative test may be a repeated measures (two way) ANOVA or Friedman test, depending on the nature of the data. Nevertheless, because the groups are ordered, a standard ANOVA is inappropriate. Should the cholesterol fall from 5.4 to 4.1 to 3.7, there is a clear linear trend. The same principle may be applied to the effects of allele/genotype frequency, where it could be argued that a single-nucleotide polymorphism in nucleotides XX, XY, YY are in fact a trend of no Y&#x27;s, one Y, and then two Y&#x27;s.

The mathematics of linear trend estimation is a variant of the standard ANOVA, giving different information, and would be the most appropriate test if the researchers hypothesize a trend effect in their test statistic. One example is levels of serum trypsin in six groups of subjects ordered by age decade (10–19 years up to 60–69 years). Levels of trypsin (ng/mL) rise in a direct linear trend of 128, 152, 194, 207, 215, 218 (data from Altman). Unsurprisingly, a &#x27;standard&#x27; ANOVA gives &quot;p&quot; &lt; 0.0001, whereas linear trend estimation gives &quot;p&quot; = 0.00006. Incidentally, it could be reasonably argued that as age is a natural continuously variable index, it should not be categorized into decades, and an effect of age and serum trypsin is sought by correlation (assuming the raw data is available). A further example is of a substance measured at four time points in different groups:

This is a clear trend. ANOVA gives &quot;p&quot; = 0.091, because the overall variance exceeds the means, whereas linear trend estimation gives &quot;p&quot; = 0.012. However, should the data have been collected at four time points in the same individuals, linear trend estimation would be inappropriate, and a two-way (repeated measures) ANOVA would have been applied.

==See also==
*Estimation
*Extrapolation
*Forecasting
*Least squares
*Least-squares spectral analysis
*Line fitting
*Prediction interval
*Regression analysis

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q620784" start="0" end="23" title="Linear trend estimation" label="Linear trend estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="29" end="40" title="statistics" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="67" end="71" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="82" end="86" title="Data" label="Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="123" end="134" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="300" end="305" title="Graph theory" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="309" end="313" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="357" end="361" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="426" end="430" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="455" end="464" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="528" end="541" title="Line (geometry)" label="straight line"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="692" end="705" title="least-squares" label="least-squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q984063" start="782" end="791" title="Optimization problem" label="minimizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="1743" end="1749" title="errors and residuals" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307899" start="1809" end="1823" title="unit root" label="non-stationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838282" start="1877" end="1893" title="trend-stationary process" label="trend-stationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063540" start="2210" end="2225" title="heteroskedasticity" label="higher variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="2772" end="2781" title="errors and residuals" label="residuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="3094" end="3109" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="3225" end="3233" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="3404" end="3422" title="significance level" label="significance level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307899" start="3780" end="3789" title="unit root" label="unit root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751675" start="3804" end="3817" title="cointegration" label="cointegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503302" start="4953" end="4958" title="cycle (sequence)" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="5169" end="5187" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763713" start="5466" end="5492" title="global surface temperature" label="global surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="5542" end="5546" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192830" start="6026" end="6035" title="Coefficient of determination" label="r-squared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="6104" end="6113" title="Errors and residuals" label="residuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="6272" end="6296" title="statistical significance" label="statistical significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667935" start="6391" end="6402" title="t-statistic" label="t-statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="6641" end="6697" title="independent and identically distributed random variables" label="independent and identically distributed random variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="7013" end="7024" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575010" start="7346" end="7358" title="Statistical model specification" label="misspecified"/>
<link wikidata="Q290467" start="7639" end="7674" title="autoregressive moving average model" label="autoregressive moving average model"/>
<link wikidata="Q20025290" start="7724" end="7746" title="weighted least squares" label="weighted least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501882" start="7824" end="7848" title="generalised linear model" label="generalized linear model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307899" start="7871" end="7880" title="Unit root" label="Unit root"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="8029" end="8030" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="8191" end="8201" title="biomedical" label="biomedical"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="8691" end="8697" title="statin" label="statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="8711" end="8722" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="8727" end="8736" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="9016" end="9022" title="mmol/L" label="mmol/L"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="9122" end="9150" title="Analysis of variance" label="ANOVA (analysis of variance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457633" start="9356" end="9369" title="Friedman test" label="Friedman test"/>
<link wikidata="Q656595" start="9631" end="9649" title="genotype frequency" label="genotype frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="9683" end="9713" title="single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="single-nucleotide polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="10057" end="10064" title="trypsin" label="trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255134" start="11110" end="11120" title="Estimation statistics" label="Estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q744069" start="11122" end="11135" title="Extrapolation" label="Extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7216332" start="11137" end="11148" title="Forecasting" label="Forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="11150" end="11163" title="Least squares" label="Least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q10569022" start="11165" end="11196" title="Least-squares spectral analysis" label="Least-squares spectral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20999616" start="11198" end="11210" title="Line fitting" label="Line fitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106171" start="11212" end="11231" title="Prediction interval" label="Prediction interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="11233" end="11252" title="Regression analysis" label="Regression analysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477062" wikidata="Q3229648" url="?curid=477062" title="Leon Mandrake">
<text>Leon Giglio (April 11, 1911 – January 27, 1993), better known by his stage name Leon Mandrake, was an Italian-Canadian magician, mentalist, illusionist, escapologist, ventriloquist and stunt performer known worldwide as &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot;, albeit simultaneously and unrelatedly to the comic strip character Mandrake the Magician.

==Early life==
Born April 11, 1911 in Washington state, Mandrake was very young when his mother brought him to New Westminster, British Columbia on the West Coast of Canada to live with his aunt Mildred. As a child, he watched magicians at the local Edison Theatre and attended circus shows at the Pacific National Exhibition. He studied the great vaudeville magicians when they came to town. One year he was given the props and costumes of a magician who had left the show. He soon learned to perform magic acts from some of the greats of that time, such as Howard Thurston, Alexander (The Man Who Knows), Chefalo, Doc Verge, Ralph Richards (The Wizard) and Bannister. In 1922, at 11 years old, he began his magic career giving vaudeville performances in New Westminster, British Columbia. He took the stage as one of the vaudeville acts of the Edison Theater in New Westminster. In 1925, at 14 years old, he performed at the Moyer&#x27;s Carnival for the Pacific National Exhibition. By this time, he learned fire-eating, mind-reading and ventriloquism. In 1927, at 16 years old, he joined the Ralph Richards touring magic show for 6 months, traveling across North America until the tour ended in Winnipeg, Manitoba. By the 1930s, he traveled with his own magic show.

==Comic strip==
Mandrake, the stage magician, known for his black top hat, black cape, and thin handlebar mustache, bears a strong resemblance to the central character in the &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot; comic strip. In fact, Leon Mandrake had been performing well over ten years before creator Lee Falk introduced the comic strip character, and today, most people acknowledge the striking physical resemblance between them. Many sources assert that the comic strip character was drawn to resemble Leon. Phil Davis, the strip&#x27;s artist, did meet Leon Mandrake and they became good friends and corresponded for years. Falk was said to have invented the name Mandrake the Magician coincidentally; though there is no written contract, both parties verbally agreed to cross-promote each other, with the result that Mandrake the Magician became recognized throughout North America.

==Personal life==
Mandrake was married twice, both times to his chief on-stage assistants. In 1939, he married Narda (&quot;Princess Narda&quot;). Princess Narda also appeared in the Mandrake the Magician comics of the time. When his first marriage ended in 1946, Leon also lost his main assistant. In December 1946, Leon Mandrake&#x27;s manager, Bernard Abrams, paired him with Louise Salerno, who was an actress, line-dancer and former assistant to well-known magician Blackstone. Leon gave her the stage name Velvet and she became his new assistant. Having grown up on the road with her parents, Vaudeville musicians Betty and Frank Salerno, this was a lifestyle familiar to Leon&#x27;s new 20-year-old assistant. After two weeks on the road together, Velvet and Leon were married. It was a small marital ceremony, and only two hours later, they were again on stage performing the first of two acts for the evening. They later honed a two-hour magic show for nightclubs during the 1940s and into the 1950s. Their four children, Lon, Ron, Kimball and Geelia were all born on the road. Lon in Illinois, Ron in Florida, Kimball in Ohio, and Geelia in Oregon. In 1958, after Geelia was born, they brought the children to Vancouver B.C., Canada to go to school. The children often stayed with a nanny as Leon and Velvet continued to travel.

==Nightclubs==
In the 1940s, movies became so popular that many theater performers turned to the nightclubs. The transition was a challenge for most stage magicians as they were accustomed to being in theaters with audiences seated directly in front of the stage and the appropriate stage lighting. In nightclubs, audiences were often sitting on three sides of the performers with less than ideal lighting situations. Also, there was the distraction of alcohol being served and occasional rowdy audience members. Mandrake the Magician was among the very few who were able to make the transition. With his original ideas and devotion to his craft, Mandrake invented new magic acts and innovative ways to perform illusions for nightclubs. Among these performances was his famous &quot;Spook in a Bottle&quot; (aka the Dancing Handkerchief) act.

==Publicity stunts==
Mandrake kept his persona fresh with crowd-pleasing publicity stunts. He was known for driving a car while blindfolded, hypnotizing people to fall asleep in department store windows, making great escapes from boxes and doing mind reading on city streets. This kept him and the show on the road.

==Television==
When television rose in popularity in the 1950s, it became increasingly difficult to keep the live performances going as most people were inclined to stay home and watch TV. Live shows were getting canceled more and more frequently. In 1951, Mandrake bought the rights to former magician Alexander&#x27;s material and reinvented his image. He started a television show as mentalist &quot;Alexander.&quot; He had a series of programs entitled &quot;Alexander the Great&quot; which performed out of Portland, Oregon for 36 weeks and Richland, Washington for 20 weeks in 1955–1956. In 1963, Mandrake made another attempt at TV. This time as himself, performing with Velvet before a live audience on CBC&#x27;s &quot;Mandrake Special.&quot; In 1970, Mandrake was on CBC television series &quot;The Manipulators&quot; and in 1977, he played himself on an episode of &quot;The Beachcombers.&quot;

==On the road==
Mandrake the Magician often went back out on the road with wife and assistant Velvet. As the nightclub shows became less and less popular, they brought back old carnival acts such as fire-eating, palm reading, balloon tricks, and ventriloquism to street fairs in the summers, home shows, conventions.

==Lectures==
Between road shows in the 1970s, he gave lectures on the occult, mysticism and Eastern philosophy at different universities in British Columbia, Canada.

==Awards==
On March 11, 1978, Leon Mandrake was honored by his peers for his lifelong service to the profession. He was awarded the Performing Fellowship at the Academy of the Magical Arts (The World Famous Hollywood The Magic Castle). The award acknowledged the contribution to the dignity and stature of magic made by Leon and Velvet Mandrake over their lifetime in magic.

==Last show and later life==
Mandrake performed his last magic show in 1985 for the Chocolate Festival in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, ending a 62-year career in show business. He died of emphysema at Surrey Memorial Hospital on January 27, 1993. A wake was held at the old Edison Theater in New Westminster, now the Paramount Theater, the first place Mandrake worked as a child magician.

On August 28, 2016, Mandrake&#x27;s home until his death, located at the corner of Grosvenor Road and Kindersley Drive in Surrey, British Columbia, was engulfed in flame and destroyed, displacing several homeless persons. Surrey City Council had considered giving heritage status to the old, abandoned home, and it was still being considered for heritage status as recently as May 2015. Mandrake&#x27;s son Lon has stated that during his childhood the home contained secret rooms and passages.

==Biography and documentary==
*&quot;Mandrake the Incomparable&quot; (Hades Publications Inc.) is a biography written in 1998.
*&quot;Mandrake, A Magical Life&quot; is a 2001 documentary.

==References==
==External links==
* Billboard listing from 20 September 1947
* MandrakeWiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3229648" start="0" end="11" title="Leon Mandrake" label="Leon Giglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229648" start="80" end="93" title="Leon Mandrake" label="Leon Mandrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q828524" start="129" end="138" title="mentalist" label="mentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="153" end="165" title="escapologist" label="escapologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q661045" start="167" end="180" title="ventriloquist" label="ventriloquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q465501" start="185" end="200" title="stunt performer" label="stunt performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59694" start="322" end="343" title="Mandrake the Magician" label="Mandrake the Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179402" start="644" end="671" title="Pacific National Exhibition" label="Pacific National Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="694" end="704" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921054" start="905" end="920" title="Howard Thurston" label="Howard Thurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q59694" start="1798" end="1819" title="Mandrake the Magician" label="Mandrake the Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q554900" start="1917" end="1925" title="Lee Falk" label="Lee Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889528" start="2126" end="2136" title="Phil Davis (cartoonist)" label="Phil Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2615" end="2620" title="Princess_Narda" label="Narda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718152" start="5308" end="5324" title="Alexander (magician)" label="Alexander&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216507" start="5887" end="5903" title="The Beachcombers" label="The Beachcombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q373273" start="6614" end="6630" title="The Magic Castle" label="The Magic Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="6879" end="6905" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="6968" end="6977" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646827" start="6981" end="7005" title="Surrey Memorial Hospital" label="Surrey Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q390583" start="7292" end="7316" title="Surrey, British Columbia" label="Surrey, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637776" start="7735" end="7757" title="Hades Publications" label="Hades Publications Inc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477067" wikidata="Q254596" url="?curid=477067" title="Dominique Dunne">
<text>Dominique Ellen Dunne (November 23, 1959 – November 4, 1982) was an American actress. Born and raised in Santa Monica, California, she made her on-screen debut with the television film &quot;Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker&quot; (1979) and played recurring roles in the drama series &quot;Family&quot; (1980) and the comedy series &quot;Breaking Away&quot; (1980–1981). Her breakthrough role was Dana Freeling in the blockbuster horror film &quot;Poltergeist&quot; (1982). Afterwards, she headlined the Western film &quot;The Shadow Riders&quot; and the crime series &quot;CHiPs&quot; (both 1982).

On October 30, 1982, Dunne was strangled by her ex-boyfriend John Sweeney during an argument on the driveway of her West Hollywood home. She fell into a coma and died five days later on November 4, 1982.

==Early life and education==
Dunne was born in Santa Monica, California, the youngest child of Ellen Beatriz &quot;Lenny&quot; (née Griffin), a ranching heiress, and Dominick Dunne, a writer, producer, and actor. Dunne had Irish and Mexican ancestry, her father was born and raised in an Irish Catholic family with her maternal grandfather an Irish-American and her maternal grandmother a Mexican who was from Sonora, Mexico. Dunne had two older brothers, Alexander &quot;Alex&quot; and Griffin Dunne, who is an actor, producer and director. She was also the niece of married writers John Gregory Dunne and Joan Didion. Her godparents were Maria Cooper-Janis, daughter of actors Gary Cooper and Veronica &quot;Rocky&quot; Cooper, and producer Martin Manulis. Her parents divorced in 1965.

Dunne attended Harvard-Westlake School in Los Angeles, Taft School in Watertown, Connecticut, and Fountain Valley School in Fountain, Colorado. After graduation, she spent a year in Florence, Italy, where she studied art and learned Italian. She studied acting at Milton Katselas&#x27; Workshop and appeared in various stage productions, including &quot;West Side Story&quot;, &quot;The Mousetrap&quot;, and &quot;My Three Angels&quot;.

== Career ==

Dunne&#x27;s first role was in the 1979 television film, &quot;Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker&quot;. She then got supporting roles in episodes of popular 1980s television series, such as &quot;Lou Grant&quot;, &quot;Family&quot;, &quot;Hart to Hart,&quot; and &quot;Fame&quot;. Dunne also had a recurring role on the comedy-drama television series, &quot;Breaking Away,&quot; and she also appeared in several other television films.

After her television appearances, in 1981, Dunne was cast in the supernatural horror film &quot;Poltergeist&quot; in the main role of Dana Freeling, the teenaged daughter of a couple whose family is terrorized by malevolent ghosts. The film was produced by Steven Spielberg and directed by Tobe Hooper, and served as her feature film debut. &quot;Poltergeist&quot; was theatrically released in 1982, which marks both her first starring role and her only appearance in a theatrical feature. It went on to become a critical and commercial success, becoming the eighth-highest-grossing film of 1982, and since its release it has acquired a cult following. She was set to reprise the role in the following installments of the franchise, but she died before production began on the sequels; &quot;Poltergeist II: The Other Side&quot;, filmed in 1985 and released in 1986, explains her character&#x27;s absence by stating that she has gone off to attend college.

Her last on-screen appearance was in the &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot; episode &quot;Requiem For a Hairbag&quot;, which aired on November 18, 1982, only two weeks after her death. In the episode, she played a teenage mother who was a victim of parental abuse and chose to give her baby up for adoption, out of fear of repeating the cycle of abuse that she endured with her own mother; due to an altercation with her abusive partner John Sweeney that occurred just before the episode was filmed, her bruises on screen were real. The episode was dedicated to her memory.

Dunne was cast in the miniseries &quot;V&quot; in 1982; she died during filming, so her role was portrayed by actress Blair Tefkin. According to series creator Kenneth Johnson, recovered footage of Dunne was used in a cameo appearance. The series was released in 1983, and is dedicated to her memory.

==Death==
Dunne met John Thomas Sweeney, a sous-chef at the restaurant Ma Maison, at a party in 1981. After a few weeks of dating, they moved into a one-bedroom house together on Rangely Avenue in West Hollywood. Due to Sweeney&#x27;s jealousy and possessiveness, however, the relationship quickly deteriorated.

On October 30, 1982, Sweeney strangled Dunne outside of her home. She was transported to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, where she was placed on life support. She never regained consciousness. On November 4, her parents consented to have her removed from life support. At the request of her mother, Dunne&#x27;s kidneys and heart were donated to transplant recipients. Her funeral was held on November 6 at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills. Her godfather, Martin Manulis, delivered the eulogy. She was buried in Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery.

==Filmography==
==See also==

*The &quot;Poltergeist&quot; curse

==Footnotes==
===References===
* 
* 
==External links==
*
*Justice for Homicide Victims - The official site of the victim&#x27;s rights organization founded by Dominique&#x27;s mother in 1984
*&quot;Justice: A Father&#x27;s Account Of the Trial Of His Daughter&#x27;s Killer&quot; by Dominick Dunne at Vanityfair.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254596" start="0" end="21" title="Dominique Dunne" label="Dominique Ellen Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="105" end="129" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="169" end="184" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q119064876" start="191" end="220" title="Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker" label="Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277124" start="287" end="293" title="Family (1976 TV series)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817898" start="335" end="348" title="Breaking Away (TV series)" label="Breaking Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959682" start="372" end="389" title="breakthrough role" label="breakthrough role"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951780" start="394" end="407" title="Poltergeist (franchise)" label="Dana Freeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="415" end="426" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="445" end="456" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="501" end="513" title="Western film" label="Western film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763552" start="514" end="543" title="The Shadow Riders (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Shadow Riders&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="571" end="576" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131159543" start="618" end="670" title="Murder of Dominique Dunne" label="Dunne was strangled by her ex-boyfriend John Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="713" end="727" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="849" end="873" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884505" start="897" end="942" title="Ellen Griffin Dunne" label="Ellen Beatriz &amp;quot;Lenny&amp;quot; (née Griffin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q448767" start="968" end="982" title="Dominick Dunne" label="Dominick Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="1090" end="1104" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="1212" end="1218" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q470260" start="1289" end="1302" title="Griffin Dunne" label="Griffin Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q705022" start="1386" end="1404" title="John Gregory Dunne" label="John Gregory Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q267691" start="1409" end="1420" title="Joan Didion" label="Joan Didion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="1481" end="1492" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922400" start="1497" end="1530" title="Veronica Cooper" label="Veronica &amp;quot;Rocky&amp;quot; Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904542" start="1545" end="1559" title="Martin Manulis" label="Martin Manulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676252" start="1607" end="1630" title="Harvard-Westlake School" label="Harvard-Westlake School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1634" end="1645" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675047" start="1647" end="1658" title="Taft School" label="Taft School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207502" start="1662" end="1684" title="Watertown, Connecticut" label="Watertown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474780" start="1690" end="1712" title="Fountain Valley School" label="Fountain Valley School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003250" start="1716" end="1734" title="Fountain, Colorado" label="Fountain, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1774" end="1782" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13382715" start="1856" end="1886" title="Milton Katselas" label="Milton Katselas&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="1946" end="1961" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051472" start="1975" end="1988" title="The Mousetrap" label="The Mousetrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946509" start="2006" end="2021" title="My Three Angels (play)" label="My Three Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q119064876" start="2107" end="2136" title="Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker" label="Diary of a Teenage Hitchhiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q421733" start="2236" end="2245" title="Lou Grant (TV series)" label="Lou Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277124" start="2259" end="2265" title="Family (1976 TV series)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="2279" end="2291" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q640994" start="2309" end="2313" title="Fame (1982 TV series)" label="Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817898" start="2398" end="2411" title="Breaking Away (TV series)" label="Breaking Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q43911809" start="2542" end="2566" title="supernatural horror film" label="supernatural horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="2573" end="2584" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951780" start="2611" end="2624" title="Poltergeist (franchise)" label="Dana Freeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="2734" end="2750" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q450728" start="2767" end="2778" title="Tobe Hooper" label="Tobe Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="3114" end="3128" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951780" start="3169" end="3208" title="Poltergeist (franchise)" label="following installments of the franchise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3269" end="3299" title="Poltergeist II: The Other Side" label="Poltergeist II: The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="3482" end="3499" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284586" start="4044" end="4045" title="V (1983 miniseries)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905749" start="4123" end="4135" title="Blair Tefkin" label="Blair Tefkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572548" start="4165" end="4180" title="Kenneth Johnson (producer)" label="Kenneth Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="4223" end="4239" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352171" start="4350" end="4359" title="sous-chef" label="sous-chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222123" start="4378" end="4387" title="Ma Maison" label="Ma Maison"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="4504" end="4518" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="4709" end="4736" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624498" start="4777" end="4789" title="life support" label="life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210318" start="5043" end="5070" title="Church of the Good Shepherd (Beverly Hills, California)" label="Church of the Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="5074" end="5087" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904542" start="5104" end="5118" title="Martin Manulis" label="Martin Manulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="5160" end="5199" title="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5233" end="5266" title="Poltergeist (film series)#Poltergeist curse" label="The &amp;quot;Poltergeist&amp;quot; curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="5570" end="5584" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanityfair.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477069" wikidata="Q1062856" url="?curid=477069" title="Anniversary">
<text>An anniversary is the date on which an event took place or an institution was founded.

Most countries celebrate national anniversaries, typically called national days. These could be the date of independence of the nation or the adoption of a new constitution or form of government. There is no definite method for determining the date of establishment of an institution, and it is generally decided within the institution by convention. The important dates in a sitting monarch&#x27;s reign may also be commemorated, an event often referred to as a &quot;jubilee&quot;.

==Names==
* Birthdays are the most common type of anniversary, on which someone&#x27;s birthdate is commemorated each year. The actual celebration is sometimes moved for practical reasons, as in the case of an official birthday or one falling on February 29.
* Wedding anniversaries are also often celebrated, on the same day of the year as the wedding occurred.
* Death anniversaries.

The Latin phrase &quot;dies natalis&quot; (literally &quot;birth day&quot;) has become a common term, adopted in many languages, especially in intellectual and institutional circles, for the anniversary of the founding (&quot;legal or statutory birth&quot;) of an institution, such as an &quot;alma mater&quot; (college or other school). In ancient Rome, the &quot;[dies] Aquilae natalis&quot; was the &quot;birthday of the eagle&quot;, the anniversary of the official founding of a legion.

Anniversaries of nations are usually marked by the number of years elapsed, expressed with Latin words or Roman numerals.

===Numerical===

Latin terms for anniversaries are mostly straightforward, particularly those relating to the first thirty years (1–30), or multiples of ten years (30, 40, 50, 60, 70 etc.), or multiples of centuries or millenniums (100, 200, 300, 1000, 2000, 3000, etc.). In these instances, the name of the anniversary is generally derived from the Latin word(s) for the respective number of years. When anniversaries relate to fractions of centuries (125, 150, 175, 225, 250, 275 years—i.e. 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, 2.25, 2.5, and 2.75 centuries), the situation is not as simple.

Roman fractions were based on a duodecimal system. From to they were expressed as multiples of twelfths (&quot;uncia&quot; &quot;twelfth&quot;; the source of the English words &quot;inch&quot; and &quot;ounce&quot;) and from to they were expressed as multiple twelfths less than the next whole unit—i.e. a whole unit less , or respectively. There were also special terms for quarter (&quot;quadrans&quot;), half (&quot;semis&quot;), and three-quarters (&quot;dodrans&quot;). &quot;Dodrans&quot; is a Latin contraction of &quot;de-quadrans&quot; which means &quot;a whole unit less a quarter&quot; (&quot;de&quot; means &quot;from&quot;; &quot;quadrans&quot; means &quot;quarter&quot;). Thus for the example of 175 years, the term is a quarter century less than the next whole (bi)century or 175 = (−25 + 200).

In Latin, it seems that this rule did not apply precisely for . While &quot;secundus&quot; is Latin for &quot;second&quot;, and &quot;bis&quot; for &quot;twice&quot;, these terms are not used such as in sesqui-secundus. Instead &quot;sesqui&quot; (or &quot;ses&quot;) is used by itself.

==Symbols==
Many anniversaries have special names. &quot;Etiquette in Society, in Business, in Politics and at Home&quot; by Emily Post, published in 1922, contained suggestions for wedding anniversary gifts for 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 50, and 75 years. Wedding anniversary gift suggestions for other years were added in later editions and publications; they now comprise what is referred to as the &quot;traditional&quot; list. Generally speaking, the longer the period, the more precious or durable the material associated with it.

There are variations according to some national traditions. There exist numerous partially overlapping, partially contradictory lists of anniversary gifts (such as wedding stones), separate from the &quot;traditional&quot; names.
The concepts of a person&#x27;s birthday stone and zodiac stone, by contrast, are fixed for life according to the day of the week, month, or astrological sign corresponding to the recipient&#x27;s birthday.

==See also==

* List of historical anniversaries
* Quinquennial Neronia

==References==
== External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1062856" start="3" end="14" title="Anniversary" label="anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="62" end="73" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="154" end="166" title="national day" label="national day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788791" start="188" end="208" title="List of national independence days" label="date of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="248" end="260" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="427" end="437" title="Convention (norm)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q47223" start="585" end="593" title="Birthday" label="Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q47223" start="783" end="800" title="official birthday" label="official birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="819" end="830" title="February 29" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136848" start="834" end="855" title="Wedding anniversary" label="Wedding anniversaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202197" start="938" end="957" title="Death anniversary" label="Death anniversaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="964" end="969" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="983" end="995" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#dies natalis" label="dies natalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="1254" end="1264" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q427910" start="1543" end="1554" title="Latin words" label="Latin words"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="1558" end="1572" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="2150" end="2165" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q212177" start="2182" end="2199" title="duodecimal" label="duodecimal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052833" start="2261" end="2266" title="Uncia (coin)" label="uncia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249076" start="2540" end="2548" title="quadrans" label="quadrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249093" start="2569" end="2574" title="semis" label="semis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234467" start="2609" end="2616" title="dodrans" label="dodrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234467" start="2631" end="2638" title="Dodrans" label="Dodrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915964" start="3374" end="3384" title="Emily Post" label="Emily Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144700" start="4044" end="4058" title="Birthstones" label="birthday stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47223" start="4209" end="4217" title="birthday" label="birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328144" start="4236" end="4268" title="List of historical anniversaries" label="List of historical anniversaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414554" start="4271" end="4291" title="Quinquennial Neronia" label="Quinquennial Neronia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="477073" wikidata="Q1147227" url="?curid=477073" title="Cybiko">
<text>The Cybiko is a line of personal digital assistants and handheld game consoles first released by Cybiko Inc. in 2000. Cybiko Inc. was a startup company founded by David Yang; the eponymous PDA was first test marketed in New York in April 2000 and rolled out nationwide in May 2000. It was designed for teens, featuring its own two-way radio text messaging system. It has over 430 &quot;official&quot; freeware games and applications. It features a rubber QWERTY keyboard. An MP3 player add-on with a SmartMedia card slot was made for the unit as well. Cybikos can communicate with each other up to a maximum range of . Several Cybikos can chat with each other in a wireless chatroom. By the end of 2000, the Cybiko Classic had sold over 500,000 units. The company stopped manufacturing the units after two product versions and a few years on the market.

== History ==
Cybiko development was initiated in 1998 by Russian entrepreneur David Yang, founder of ABBYY Software House. The concept for the device emerged from social research conducted in six countries, which identified a need for digital communication among youth. The first prototype was completed by October 1998. By the end of 1999, three industrial samples had been produced, and a radio protocol was patented. This protocol allowed up to 3,000 Cybiko devices to form a network without using auxiliary stations. By early 1999, the Moscow-based development team had grown to 40 employees. The Cybiko was designed as a handheld computer for teenagers, combining communication capabilities with entertainment features. It included a QWERTY keyboard, a monochrome display, short-range radio messaging, and support for downloadable applications and games.

Inventec, a Taiwanese manufacturer, was contracted for device production, while marketing was entrusted to Poznik &amp; Kolker, an American firm known for their successful promotion of Furby toys. Although initially scheduled for September 1999, Cybiko&#x27;s launch was delayed until early 2000 due to difficulties in casing production. This issue consumed a significant portion of the project&#x27;s initial budget, with $70,000 of the $120,000 allocated to casing development. Prior to Cybiko&#x27;s official New York presentation, David Yang met with ICQ founder Yossi Vardi. Vardi, impressed by the device, introduced Yang to America Online CEO Steve Case, which subsequently led to substantial investment in the project.

Cybiko was released in the U.S. market in 2000 after securing $20 million in investments. The device launched in April with a trial run in select New York retailers, including FAO Schwarz, Virgin Megastore, and Software Etc/Babbage&#x27;s, before expanding nationwide in mid-May. Its features, such as short-range messaging, file sharing, and the ability to discover nearby users, quickly garnered popularity and media attention. The initial retail price was set at $139. Sales performance was strong, with devices worth $25 million sold during the first three weeks of the holiday season, contributing to total first-year sales of approximately 250,000 units.

In 2001, Cybiko introduced an upgraded model, the Cybiko Xtreme, featuring improved design and specifications. However, the emergence of more affordable internet-capable mobile phones posed significant competition. Despite initial market success, the company encountered financial challenges exacerbated by the early 2000s dot-com crisis, which hindered new investment efforts. A planned London device launch on September 15, 2001, was canceled due to the September 11 attacks, further impacting the company&#x27;s financial position.

Late 2001 saw the company restructure into two entities: Cybiko Advance Technologies, retaining ownership of the wireless network, and CWAG (Cybiko Wireless Applications and Games), which acquired the game development portfolio and other intellectual assets. CWAG subsequently began collaborating with mobile companies such as Motorola, Sprint, and Nokia to adapt its software for mobile phone platforms. In 2003, Cybiko Inc. announced that it would cease production of its communicators.

== Models ==

=== Cybiko Classic ===
There are two models of the Classic Cybiko. Visually, the only difference is that the original version has a power switch on the side, while the updated version uses the &quot;escape&quot; key for power management. Internally, the differences between the two models are in the internal memory and the firmware location.

The CPU is a Hitachi H8S/2241 clocked at 11.0592 MHz and the Cybiko Classic also has an Atmel AT90S2313 co-processor, clocked at 4 MHz to provide some support for RF communications. It has 512KB flash memory-based ROM flash memory and 256KB RAM installed. An add-on slot is located in the rear.

The Cybiko Classics were sold in five colors: blue, purple, neon green, white, and black. The black version has a yellow keypad, instead of the white unit found on other Cybikos.

The add-on slot has the same pin arrangement as a PC card, but it is not electrically compatible.

=== Cybiko Xtreme ===
The Cybiko Xtreme is the second-generation Cybiko handheld. It features various improvements over the original Cybiko, such as a faster processor, more RAM, more ROM, a new operating system, a new keyboard layout and case design, greater wireless range, a microphone, improved audio output, and smaller size.

The CPU is a Hitachi H8S/2323 at 18 MHz, and like the original version, it also has an Atmel AT90S2313 co-processor at 4 MHz to provide some support for RF communications. 512KiB ROM flash memory and 1.5MiB RAM is installed. It features an add-on slot in the rear, which is compatible with the MP3 player.

It was released in two variants. US variant (Model No. CY44801) has frequency range of 902-928 MHz and European variant (Model No. CY44802) with frequency range of 868-870 MHz. No other functional difference exists between these variants.

== Options ==

=== MP3 player ===
*Classic MP3 Player: The MP3 player for the Classic plugs into the bottom of the Cybiko and used SmartMedia cards; it can support a maximum size of 64 MB. The player has built-in controls.
*Xtreme MP3 Player: The MP3 player plugs into the rear of the Cybiko Xtreme. It has a slot for one MMC memory card. The MP3 player can only be controlled from the Cybiko. A memory card from the MP3 player can also be addressed from the Cybiko and used for data and program storage.

=== 1MB Expansion Memory ===
The memory expansion card plugs into the rear of the Cybiko. It provides 256 kilobytes of static RAM, and 1 megabyte of data flash memory. The RAM allows programs with larger memory requirements to run. The data flash allows more programs to be stored. Some Cybiko programs will not run unless the Expansion Memory is plugged in.

== Games ==
A large number of games were produced for the Cybiko. Programs were posted daily on the website and can be downloaded using the CyberLoad application. Many games support multiplayer mode with automatic saves, which allowed resuming the game in case of a connection loss. Some of the &#x27; company games were ported to the Cybiko, including &quot;Color Lines&quot; under the &quot;Funny Balls&quot; title, and &#x27;.

The first games on the Cybiko were initially created in the genre of classic board games – chess, checkers, backgammon, kalah, renju and seega. The &quot;casual&quot; puzzle games &quot;Phat Cash&quot; and &quot;Tooty Fruity&quot; were also made, with the latter requiring the Cybiko to be held horizontally. A first-person shooter engine was written, on which the game &quot;Lost in Labyrinth&quot; is built, similar in gameplay to &quot;Wolfenstein 3D&quot;. The popular skateboarding game &quot;Blazing Boards&quot; is based on the racing engine which was later used as the basis for &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Pro Skater&quot; for cell phones, in a collaboration between Cybiko and THQ. Turn-based strategy and real-time strategy games include &quot;Warfare&quot; and &quot;Land of Kings&quot;, with the latter requiring a memory card to work.

The flagship game on the system is &quot;CyLandia&quot;, which combines the tamagotchi and economic strategy genres. Cybiko devices with the game installed have pets called Cy-B (also called &quot;cypets&quot;), which the player has to raise. The game continues on switched-off devices, and in case of insufficient attention, Cy-B could &quot;run away&quot; to any other Cybiko within range. Players can also voluntarily send pets to other devices.

Toward the end of the Cybiko&#x27;s lifecycle, quest and RPG genre games were being developed, but were not released. However, the fighting game &quot;Knight&#x27;s Tournament&quot; contains role-playing elements, where player characters can be outfitted with various equipment won in tournaments. After the September 11 attacks, a problem of game censorship emerged, which led to the cancellation of the beat-&#x27;em-up game &quot;Renegade&quot; by the American management, in part because the main character is a police officer who beats up hooligans.

== Comparison ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1147227" start="4" end="10" title="Cybiko" label="Cybiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="24" end="50" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="56" end="77" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147227" start="97" end="108" title="Cybiko" label="Cybiko Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2406468" start="203" end="214" title="test market" label="test market"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="401" end="409" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051763" start="500" end="510" title="SmartMedia" label="SmartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845401" start="934" end="944" title="David Yang (businessman)" label="David Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q286774" start="957" end="962" title="ABBYY" label="ABBYY"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="1595" end="1601" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q932209" start="1902" end="1907" title="Furby" label="Furby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027187" start="2284" end="2295" title="Yossi Vardi" label="Yossi Vardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2348" end="2362" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q562917" start="2367" end="2377" title="Steve Case" label="Steve Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="4471" end="4479" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="4495" end="4498" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="4504" end="4511" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630069" start="4512" end="4514" title="H8 Family" label="H8"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="4579" end="4584" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="4595" end="4607" title="co-processor" label="co-processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="4686" end="4698" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="4705" end="4708" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="4709" end="4721" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="4732" end="4735" title="random access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q932506" start="5017" end="5024" title="PC card" label="PC card"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="5261" end="5277" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630069" start="5419" end="5421" title="H8 Family" label="H8"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="5581" end="5593" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051763" start="6076" end="6086" title="SmartMedia" label="SmartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="6267" end="6282" title="MultiMediaCard" label="MMC memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="6577" end="6580" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683596" start="7170" end="7181" title="Color Lines" label="Color Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="7333" end="7338" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="7340" end="7348" title="checkers" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="7350" end="7360" title="backgammon" label="backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721933" start="7362" end="7367" title="kalah" label="kalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139103" start="7369" end="7374" title="renju" label="renju"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727318" start="7379" end="7384" title="Seega (game)" label="seega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050023" start="7396" end="7402" title="Casual game" label="casual"/>
<link wikidata="Q18940" start="7681" end="7695" title="Wolfenstein 3D" label="Wolfenstein 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189289" start="7829" end="7868" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s (series)" label="&amp;quot;Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q580866" start="7924" end="7927" title="THQ" label="THQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="8065" end="8076" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q207786" start="8163" end="8173" title="tamagotchi" label="tamagotchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198141" start="8178" end="8195" title="Business simulation game" label="economic strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8845" end="8865" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219954" start="9081" end="9090" title="Hooliganism" label="hooligans"/>
</links>
</doc>
