<doc id="26983" wikidata="Q8581" url="?curid=26983" title="Saladin">
<text>Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub ( – 4 March 1193), commonly known as Saladin, was the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty. Hailing from a Kurdish family, he was the first sultan of both Egypt and Syria. An important figure of the Third Crusade, he spearheaded the Muslim military effort against the Crusader states in the Levant. At the height of his power, the Ayyubid realm spanned Egypt, Syria, Upper Mesopotamia, the Hejaz, Yemen, and Nubia.

Alongside his uncle Shirkuh, a Kurdish mercenary commander in service of the Zengid dynasty, Saladin was sent to Fatimid Egypt in 1164, on the orders of the Zengid ruler Nur ad-Din. With their original purpose being to help restore Shawar as the vizier to the teenage Fatimid caliph al-Adid, a power struggle ensued between Shirkuh and Shawar after the latter was reinstated. Saladin, meanwhile, climbed the ranks of the Fatimid government by virtue of his military successes against Crusader assaults and his personal closeness to al-Adid. After Shawar was assassinated and Shirkuh died in 1169, al-Adid appointed Saladin as vizier. During his tenure, Saladin, a Sunni Muslim, began to undermine the Fatimid establishment; following al-Adid&#x27;s death in 1171, he abolished the Cairo-based Isma&#x27;ili Shia Muslim Fatimid Caliphate and realigned Egypt with the Baghdad-based Sunni Abbasid Caliphate.

In the following years, he led forays against the Crusaders in Palestine, commissioned the successful conquest of Yemen, and staved off pro-Fatimid rebellions in Egypt. Not long after Nur ad-Din died in 1174, Saladin launched his conquest of Syria, peacefully entering Damascus at the request of its governor. By mid-1175, Saladin had conquered Hama and Homs, inviting the animosity of other Zengid lords, who were the official rulers of Syria&#x27;s principalities; he subsequently defeated the Zengids at the Battle of the Horns of Hama in 1175 and was thereafter proclaimed the &#x27;Sultan of Egypt and Syria&#x27; by the Abbasid caliph al-Mustadi. Saladin launched further conquests in northern Syria and Upper Mesopotamia, escaping two attempts on his life by the Assassins before returning to Egypt in 1177 to address local issues there. By 1182, Saladin had completed the conquest of Islamic Syria after capturing Aleppo but failed to take over the Zengid stronghold of Mosul.

Under Saladin&#x27;s command, the Ayyubid army defeated the Crusaders at the decisive Battle of Hattin in 1187, capturing Jerusalem and re-establishing Muslim military dominance in the Levant. Although the Crusaders&#x27; Kingdom of Jerusalem persisted until the late 13th century, the defeat in 1187 marked a turning point in the Christian military effort against Muslim powers in the region. Saladin died in Damascus in 1193, having given away much of his personal wealth to his subjects; he is buried in a mausoleum adjacent to the Umayyad Mosque. Alongside his significance to Muslim culture, Saladin is revered prominently in Kurdish, Turkic, and Arab culture. He has frequently been described as the most famous Kurdish figure in history.

==Early life==

Saladin was born in Tikrit in present-day Iraq. His personal name was &quot;Yusuf&quot;; &quot;Salah ad-Din&quot; is a &quot;laqab&quot;, an honorific epithet, meaning &quot;Righteousness of the Faith&quot;. His family was of Kurdish ancestry, and had originated from the village of Ajdanakan near the city of Dvin in central Armenia. He was the son of a Kurdish mercenary, Najm ad-Din Ayyub. The Rawadiya tribe he hailed from had been partially assimilated into the Arabic-speaking world by this time.

In Saladin&#x27;s era, no scholar had more influence than sheikh Abdul Qadir Gilani, and Saladin was strongly influenced and aided by him and his pupils. In 1132, the defeated army of Zengi, Atabeg of Mosul, found their retreat blocked by the Tigris River opposite the fortress of Tikrit, where Saladin&#x27;s father, Najm ad-Din Ayyub served as the warden. Ayyub provided ferries for the army and gave them refuge in Tikrit. Mujahid ad-Din Bihruz, a former Greek slave who had been appointed as the military governor of northern Mesopotamia for his service to the Seljuks, reprimanded Ayyub for giving Zengi refuge and in 1137 banished Ayyub from Tikrit after his brother Asad ad-Din Shirkuh killed a friend of Bihruz. According to Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad, Saladin was born the same night his family left Tikrit. In 1139, Ayyub and his family moved to Mosul, where Imad ad-Din Zengi acknowledged his debt and appointed Ayyub commander of his fortress in Baalbek. After the death of Zengi in 1146, his son, Nur ad-Din, became the regent of Aleppo and the leader of the Zengids.

Saladin, who now lived in Damascus, was reportedly fond of the city, but information on his early childhood is scarce. About education, Saladin wrote, &quot;Children are brought up in the way in which their elders were brought up&quot;. According to his biographers, Anne-Marie Eddé and al-Wahrani, Saladin was able to answer questions on Euclid, the Almagest, arithmetic, and law, but this was an academic ideal. It was his knowledge of the Qur&#x27;an and the &quot;sciences of religion&quot; that linked him to his contemporaries; several sources claim that during his studies, he was more interested in religious studies than joining the military.&lt;ref name=&quot;Who2 Biography: Saladin, Sultan/Military Leader&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Another factor which may have affected his interest in religion was that, during the First Crusade, Jerusalem was taken by the Christians. In addition to Islam, Saladin knew the genealogies, biographies, and histories of the Arabs, as well as the bloodlines of Arabian horses. More significantly, he knew the &quot;Hamasah&quot; of Abu Tammam by heart. He spoke Kurdish and Arabic and knew Turkish and Persian.

== Personality and religious leanings ==

According to Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad (one of Saladin&#x27;s contemporary biographers), Saladin was a pious Muslim—he loved hearing Quran recitals, prayed punctually, and &quot;hated the philosophers, those that denied God&#x27;s attributes, the materialists and those who stubbornly rejected the Holy Law.&quot; He was also a supporter of Sufism and a patron of khanqahs (Sufi hostels) in Egypt and Syria, in addition to madrasas that provided orthodox Sunni teachings. Above all else he was a devotee of jihad:
In 1174, Saladin ordered the arrest of a Sufi mystic, Qadid al-Qaffas (), in Alexandria. In 1191, he ordered his son to execute the Sufi philosopher Yahya al-Suhrawardi, the founder of the Illuminationist current in Islamic philosophy, in Aleppo. Ibn Shaddad, who describes this event as part of his chapter on the sultan&#x27;s piety, states that Al-Suhrawardi was said to have &quot;rejected the Holy Law and declared it invalid.&quot; After consulting with some of the &quot;ulama&quot; (religious scholars), Saladin ordered al-Suhrawardi&#x27;s execution. Saladin also opposed the Order of Assassins, an extremist Isma&#x27;ili Shi&#x27;i sect in Iran and Syria, seeing them as heretics and as being too close with the Crusaders.

Saladin welcomed Asiatic Sufis to Egypt and he and his followers founded and endowed many khanqahs and zawiyas of which al-Maqrizi gives a long list. But it is not yet clear what Saladin&#x27;s interests in the khanqah actually were and why he specifically wanted Sufis from outside Egypt. The answers to these questions lie in the kinds of Sufis he wished to attract. In addition to requiring that the Sufis come from outside Egypt, the waqfiyya seems to have specified that they be of a very particular type: 

==Early expeditions==

Saladin&#x27;s military career began under the tutelage of his paternal uncle Asad ad-Din Shirkuh, a prominent military commander under Nur ad-Din, the Zengid emir of Damascus and Aleppo and the most influential teacher of Saladin. In 1163, the vizier to the Fatimid caliph al-Adid, Shawar, had been driven out of Egypt by his rival Dirgham, a member of the powerful Banu Ruzzaik tribe. He asked for military backing from Nur ad-Din, who complied and, in 1164, sent Shirkuh to aid Shawar in his expedition against Dirgham. Saladin, at age 26, went along with them. After Shawar was successfully reinstated as vizier, he demanded that Shirkuh withdraw his army from Egypt for a sum of 30,000 gold dinars, but he refused, insisting it was Nur ad-Din&#x27;s will that he remain. Saladin&#x27;s role in this expedition was minor, and it is known that he was ordered by Shirkuh to collect stores from Bilbais prior to its siege by a combined force of Crusaders and Shawar&#x27;s troops.

After the sacking of Bilbais, the Crusader–Egyptian force and Shirkuh&#x27;s army were to engage in the Battle of al-Babein on the desert border of the Nile, just west of Giza. Saladin played a major role, commanding the right-wing of the Zengid army, while a force of Kurds commanded the left, and Shirkuh was stationed in the centre. Muslim sources at the time, however, put Saladin in the &quot;baggage of the centre&quot; with orders to lure the enemy into a trap by staging a feigned retreat. The Crusader force enjoyed early success against Shirkuh&#x27;s troops, but the terrain was too steep and sandy for their horses, and commander Hugh of Caesarea was captured while attacking Saladin&#x27;s unit. After scattered fighting in little valleys to the south of the main position, the Zengid central force returned to the offensive; Saladin joined in from the rear.

The battle ended in a Zengid victory, and Saladin is credited with having helped Shirkuh in one of the &quot;most remarkable victories in recorded history&quot;, according to Ibn al-Athir, although more of Shirkuh&#x27;s men were killed and the battle is considered by most sources as not a total victory. Saladin and Shirkuh moved towards Alexandria where they were welcomed, given money and arms, and provided a base. Faced by a superior Crusader–Egyptian force attempting to besiege the city, Shirkuh split his army. He and the bulk of his force withdrew from Alexandria, while Saladin was left with the task of guarding the city, where he was besieged.

==In Egypt==
===Vizier of Egypt===
Shirkuh was in a power struggle over Egypt with Shawar and Amalric I of Jerusalem in which Shawar requested Amalric&#x27;s assistance. In 1169, Shawar was reportedly assassinated by Saladin, and Shirkuh died later that year. Following his death, a number of candidates were considered for the role of vizier to al-Adid, most of whom were ethnic Kurds. Their ethnic solidarity came to shape the Ayyubid family&#x27;s actions in their political career. Saladin and his close associates were wary of Turkish influence. On one occasion Isa al-Hakkari, a Kurdish lieutenant of Saladin, urged a candidate for the viziership, Emir Qutb ad-Din al-Hadhbani, to step aside by arguing that &quot;both you and Saladin are Kurds and you will not let the power pass into the hands of the Turks&quot;. Nur ad-Din chose a successor for Shirkuh, but al-Adid appointed Saladin to replace Shawar as vizier.

The reasoning behind the Shia caliph al-Adid&#x27;s selection of Saladin, a Sunni, varies. Ibn al-Athir claims that the caliph chose him after being told by his advisers that &quot;there is no one weaker or younger&quot; than Saladin, and &quot;not one of the emirs [commanders] obeyed him or served him&quot;. However, according to this version, after some bargaining, he was eventually accepted by the majority of the emirs. Al-Adid&#x27;s advisers were also suspected of promoting Saladin in an attempt to split the Syria-based Zengids. Al-Wahrani wrote that Saladin was selected because of the reputation of his family in their &quot;generosity and military prowess&quot;. Imad ad-Din wrote that after the brief mourning period for Shirkuh, during which &quot;opinions differed&quot;, the Zengid emirs decided upon Saladin and forced the caliph to &quot;invest him as vizier&quot;. Although positions were complicated by rival Muslim leaders, the bulk of the Syrian commanders supported Saladin because of his role in the Egyptian expedition, in which he gained a record of military qualifications.

Inaugurated as vizier on 26 March, Saladin repented &quot;wine-drinking and turned from frivolity to assume the dress of religion&quot;, according to Arabic sources of the time. Having gained more power and independence than ever before in his career, he still faced the issue of ultimate loyalty between al-Adid and Nur ad-Din. Later in the year, a group of Egyptian soldiers and emirs attempted to assassinate Saladin, but having already known of their intentions thanks to his intelligence chief Ali ibn Safyan, he had the chief conspirator, Naji, Mu&#x27;tamin al-Khilafa—the civilian controller of the Fatimid Palace—arrested and killed. The day after, 50,000 Black African soldiers from the regiments of the Fatimid army opposed to Saladin&#x27;s rule, along with Egyptian emirs and commoners, staged a revolt. By 23 August, Saladin had decisively quelled the uprising, and never again had to face a military challenge from Cairo.

Towards the end of 1169, Saladin, with reinforcements from Nur ad-Din, defeated a massive Crusader-Byzantine force near Damietta. Afterwards, in the spring of 1170, Nur ad-Din sent Saladin&#x27;s father to Egypt in compliance with Saladin&#x27;s request, as well as encouragement from the Baghdad-based Abbasid caliph, al-Mustanjid, who aimed to pressure Saladin in deposing his rival caliph, al-Ad. Saladin himself had been strengthening his hold on Egypt and widening his support base there. He began granting his family members high-ranking positions in the region; he ordered the construction of a college for the Maliki branch of Sunni Islam in the city, as well as one for the Shafi&#x27;i denomination to which he belonged in al-Fustat.

After establishing himself in Egypt, Saladin launched a campaign against the Crusaders, besieging Darum in 1170. Amalric withdrew his Templar garrison from Gaza to assist him in defending Darum, but Saladin evaded their force and captured Gaza in 1187. In 1191 Saladin destroyed the fortifications in Gaza built by King Baldwin III for the Knights Templar. It is unclear exactly when, but during that same year, he attacked and captured the Crusader castle of Eilat, built on an island off the head of the Gulf of Aqaba. It did not pose a threat to the passage of the Muslim navy but could harass smaller parties of Muslim ships, and Saladin decided to clear it from his path.

===Sultan of Egypt===
According to Imad ad-Din, Nur ad-Din wrote to Saladin in June 1171, telling him to reestablish the Abbasid caliphate in Egypt, which Saladin coordinated two months later after additional encouragement by Najm ad-Din al-Khabushani, the Shafi&#x27;i &quot;faqih&quot;, who vehemently opposed Shia rule in the country. Several Egyptian emirs were thus killed, but al-Adid was told that they were killed for rebelling against him. He then fell ill or was poisoned according to one account. While ill, he asked Saladin to pay him a visit to request that he take care of his young children, but Saladin refused, fearing treachery against the Abbasids, and is said to have regretted his action after realizing what al-Adid had wanted. He died on 13 September, and five days later, the Abbasid &quot;khutba&quot; was pronounced in Cairo and al-Fustat, proclaiming al-Mustadi as caliph.

On 25 September, Saladin left Cairo to take part in a joint attack on Kerak and Montréal, the desert castles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, with Nur ad-Din who would attack from Syria. Prior to arriving at Montreal, Saladin however withdrew back to Cairo as he received the reports that in his absence the Crusader leaders had increased their support to the traitors inside Egypt to attack Saladin from within and lessen his power, especially the Fatimid who started plotting to restore their past glory. Because of this, Nur ad-Din went on alone.

During the summer of 1173, a Nubian army along with a contingent of Armenian former Fatimid troops were reported on the Egyptian border, preparing for a siege against Aswan. The emir of the city had requested Saladin&#x27;s assistance and was given reinforcements under Turan-Shah, Saladin&#x27;s brother. Consequently, the Nubians departed; but returned in 1173 and were again driven off. This time, Egyptian forces advanced from Aswan and captured the Nubian town of Ibrim. Saladin sent a gift to Nur ad-Din, who had been his friend and teacher, 60,000 dinars, &quot;wonderful manufactured goods&quot;, some jewels, and an elephant. While transporting these goods to Damascus, Saladin took the opportunity to ravage the Crusader countryside. He did not press an attack against the desert castles but attempted to drive out the Muslim Bedouins who lived in Crusader territory with the aim of depriving the Franks of guides.

On 31 July 1173, Saladin&#x27;s father Ayyub was wounded in a horse-riding accident, ultimately causing his death on 9 August. In 1174, Saladin sent Turan-Shah to conquer Yemen to allocate it and its port Aden to the territories of the Ayyubid Dynasty.

==Conquest of Syria==

===Conquest of Damascus===
In the early summer of 1174, Nur ad-Din was mustering an army, sending summons to Mosul, Diyar Bakr, and the Jazira in an apparent preparation of an attack against Saladin&#x27;s Egypt. The Ayyubids held a council upon the revelation of these preparations to discuss the possible threat and Saladin collected his own troops outside Cairo. On 15 May, Nur ad-Din died after falling ill the previous week and his power was handed to his eleven-year-old son as-Salih Ismail al-Malik. His death left Saladin with political independence and in a letter to as-Salih, he promised to &quot;act as a sword&quot; against his enemies and referred to the death of his father as an &quot;earthquake shock&quot;.

In the wake of Nur ad-Din&#x27;s death, Saladin faced a difficult decision; he could move his army against the Crusaders from Egypt or wait until invited by as-Salih in Syria to come to his aid and launch a war from there. He could also take it upon himself to annex Syria before it could possibly fall into the hands of a rival, but he feared that attacking a land that formerly belonged to his master—forbidden in the Islamic principles in which he believed—could portray him as hypocritical, thus making him unsuitable for leading the war against the Crusaders. Saladin saw that in order to acquire Syria, he needed either an invitation from as-Salih or to warn him that potential anarchy could give rise to danger from the Crusaders.

When as-Salih was removed to Aleppo in August, Gumushtigin, the emir of the city and a captain of Nur ad-Din&#x27;s veterans assumed guardianship over him. The emir prepared to unseat all his rivals in Syria and the Jazira, beginning with Damascus. In this emergency, the emir of Damascus appealed to Saif ad-Din of Mosul (a cousin of Gumushtigin) for assistance against Aleppo, but he refused, forcing the Syrians to request the aid of Saladin, who complied. Saladin rode across the desert with 700 picked horsemen, passing through al-Kerak then reaching Bosra. According to his own account, was joined by &quot;emirs, soldiers, and Bedouins—the emotions of their hearts to be seen on their faces.&quot; On 23 November, he arrived in Damascus amid general acclamation and rested at his father&#x27;s old home there, until the gates of the Citadel of Damascus, whose commander Raihan initially refused to surrender, were opened to Saladin four days later, after a brief siege by his brother Tughtakin ibn Ayyub. He installed himself in the castle and received the homage and salutations of the inhabitants.

===Further conquests in Syria===

Leaving his brother Tughtakin ibn Ayyub as Governor of Damascus, Saladin proceeded to reduce other cities that had belonged to Nur ad-Din, but were now practically independent. His army conquered Hama with relative ease, but avoided attacking Homs because of the strength of its citadel. Saladin moved north towards Aleppo, besieging it on 30 December after Gumushtigin refused to abdicate his throne. As-Salih, fearing capture by Saladin, came out of his palace and appealed to the inhabitants not to surrender him and the city to the invading force. One of Saladin&#x27;s chroniclers claimed &quot;the people came under his spell&quot;.

Gumushtigin requested Rashid ad-Din Sinan, chief &quot;da&#x27;i&quot; of the Assassins of Syria, who were already at odds with Saladin since he replaced the Fatimids of Egypt, to assassinate Saladin in his camp. On 11 May 1175, a group of thirteen Assassins easily gained admission into Saladin&#x27;s camp, but were detected immediately before they carried out their attack by Nasih ad-Din Khumartekin of Abu Qubays. One was killed by one of Saladin&#x27;s generals and the others were slain while trying to escape. To deter Saladin&#x27;s progress, Raymond of Tripoli gathered his forces by Nahr al-Kabir, where they were well placed for an attack on Muslim territory. Saladin later moved toward Homs instead, but retreated after being told a relief force was being sent to the city by Saif ad-Din.

Meanwhile, Saladin&#x27;s rivals in Syria and Jazira waged a propaganda war against him, claiming he had &quot;forgotten his own condition [servant of Nur ad-Din]&quot; and showed no gratitude for his old master by besieging his son, rising &quot;in rebellion against his Lord&quot;. Saladin aimed to counter this propaganda by ending the siege, claiming that he was defending Islam from the Crusaders; his army returned to Hama to engage a Crusader force there. The Crusaders withdrew beforehand and Saladin proclaimed it &quot;a victory opening the gates of men&#x27;s hearts&quot;. Soon after, Saladin entered Homs and captured its citadel in March 1175, after stubborn resistance from its defenders.

Saladin&#x27;s successes alarmed Saif ad-Din. As head of the Zengids, including Gumushtigin, he regarded Syria and Mesopotamia as his family estate and was angered when Saladin attempted to usurp his dynasty&#x27;s holdings. Saif ad-Din mustered a large army and dispatched it to Aleppo, whose defenders anxiously had awaited them. The combined forces of Mosul and Aleppo marched against Saladin in Hama. Heavily outnumbered, Saladin initially attempted to make terms with the Zengids by abandoning all conquests north of the Damascus province, but they refused, insisting he return to Egypt. Seeing that confrontation was unavoidable, Saladin prepared for battle, taking up a superior position at the Horns of Hama, hills by the gorge of the Orontes River. On 13 April 1175, the Zengid troops marched to attack his forces, but soon found themselves surrounded by Saladin&#x27;s Ayyubid veterans, who crushed them. The battle ended in a decisive victory for Saladin, who pursued the Zengid fugitives to the gates of Aleppo, forcing as-Salih&#x27;s advisers to recognize Saladin&#x27;s control of the provinces of Damascus, Homs, and Hama, as well as a number of towns outside Aleppo such as Ma&#x27;arat al-Numan.

After his victory against the Zengids, Saladin proclaimed himself king and suppressed the name of as-Salih in Friday prayers and Islamic coinage. From then on, he ordered prayers in all the mosques of Syria and Egypt as the sovereign king and he issued at the Cairo mint gold coins bearing his official title—&quot;al-Malik an-Nasir Yusuf Ayyub, ala ghaya&quot; &quot;the King Strong to Aid, Joseph son of Job; exalted be the standard.&quot; The Abbasid caliph in Baghdad graciously welcomed Saladin&#x27;s assumption of power and declared him &quot;Sultan of Egypt and Syria&quot;. The Battle of Hama did not end the contest for power between the Ayyubids and the Zengids, with the final confrontation occurring in the spring of 1176. Saladin had gathered massive reinforcements from Egypt while Saif ad-Din was levying troops among the minor states of Diyarbakir and al-Jazira. When Saladin crossed the Orontes, leaving Hama, the sun was eclipsed. He viewed this as an omen, but he continued his march north. He reached the Sultan&#x27;s Mound, roughly from Aleppo, where his forces encountered Saif ad-Din&#x27;s army. A hand-to-hand fight ensued and the Zengids managed to plough Saladin&#x27;s left-wing, driving it before him when Saladin himself charged at the head of the Zengid guard. The Zengid forces panicked and most of Saif ad-Din&#x27;s officers ended up being killed or captured—Saif ad-Din narrowly escaped. The Zengid army&#x27;s camp, horses, baggage, tents, and stores were seized by the Ayyubids. The Zengid prisoners of war, however, were given gifts and freed. All of the booty from the Ayyubid victory was accorded to the army, Saladin not keeping anything himself.

He continued towards Aleppo, which still closed its gates to him, halting before the city. On the way, his army took Buza&#x27;a and then captured Manbij. From there, they headed west to besiege the fortress of A&#x27;zaz on 15 May. Several days later, while Saladin was resting in one of his captain&#x27;s tents, an Assassin rushed forward at him and struck at his head with a knife. The cap of his head armour was not penetrated and he managed to grip the Assassin&#x27;s hand—the dagger only slashing his gambeson—and the assailant was soon killed. Saladin was unnerved at the attempt on his life, which he accused Gumushtugin and the Assassins of plotting, and so increased his efforts in the siege.

A&#x27;zaz capitulated on 21 June, and Saladin then hurried his forces to Aleppo to punish Gumushtigin. His assaults were again resisted, but he managed to secure not only a truce, but a mutual alliance with Aleppo, in which Gumushtigin and as-Salih were allowed to continue their hold on the city, and in return, they recognized Saladin as the sovereign over all of the dominions he conquered. The &quot;emirs&quot; of Mardin and Keyfa, the Muslim allies of Aleppo, also recognised Saladin as the King of Syria. When the treaty was concluded, the younger sister of as-Salih came to Saladin and requested the return of the Fortress of A&#x27;zaz; he complied and escorted her back to the gates of Aleppo with numerous presents.

===Campaign against the Assassins===

Saladin had by now agreed to truces with his Zengid rivals and the Kingdom of Jerusalem (the latter occurred in the summer of 1175), but faced a threat from the Isma&#x27;ili sect known as the Assassins, led by Rashid ad-Din Sinan. Based in the an-Nusayriyah Mountains, they commanded nine fortresses, all built on high elevations. As soon as he dispatched the bulk of his troops to Egypt, Saladin led his army into the an-Nusayriyah range in August 1176. He retreated the same month, after laying waste to the countryside, but failing to conquer any of the forts. Most Muslim historians claim that Saladin&#x27;s uncle, the governor of Hama, mediated a peace agreement between him and Sinan.

Saladin had his guards supplied with link lights and had chalk and cinders strewed around his tent outside Masyaf—which he was besieging—to detect any footsteps by the Assassins. According to this version, one night Saladin&#x27;s guards noticed a spark glowing down the hill of Masyaf and then vanishing among the Ayyubid tents. Presently, Saladin awoke to find a figure leaving the tent. He saw that the lamps were displaced and beside his bed laid hot scones of the shape peculiar to the Assassins with a note at the top pinned by a poisoned dagger. The note threatened that he would be killed if he did not withdraw from his assault. Saladin gave a loud cry, exclaiming that Sinan himself was the figure that had left the tent.

Another version claims that Saladin hastily withdrew his troops from Masyaf because they were urgently needed to fend off a Crusader force in the vicinity of Mount Lebanon. In reality, Saladin sought to form an alliance with Sinan and his Assassins, consequently depriving the Crusaders of a potent ally against him. Viewing the expulsion of the Crusaders as a mutual benefit and priority, Saladin and Sinan maintained cooperative relations afterwards, the latter dispatching contingents of his forces to bolster Saladin&#x27;s army in a number of decisive subsequent battlefronts.

==Return to Cairo and forays in Palestine==

After leaving the an-Nusayriyah Mountains, Saladin returned to Damascus and had his Syrian soldiers return home. He left Turan Shah in command of Syria and left for Egypt with only his personal followers, reaching Cairo on 22 September. Having been absent for roughly two years, he had much to organize and supervise in Egypt, namely fortifying and reconstructing Cairo. The city walls were repaired and their extensions laid out, while the construction of the Cairo Citadel was commenced. The deep Bir Yusuf (&quot;Joseph&#x27;s Well&quot;) was built on Saladin&#x27;s orders. The chief public work he commissioned outside of Cairo was the large bridge at Giza, which was intended to form an outwork of defence against a potential Moorish invasion.

Saladin remained in Cairo supervising its improvements, building colleges such as the Madrasa of the Sword Makers and ordering the internal administration of the country. In November 1177, he set out upon a raid into Palestine; the Crusaders had recently forayed into the territory of Damascus, so Saladin saw the truce as no longer worth preserving. The Christians sent a large portion of their army to besiege the fortress of Harim north of Aleppo, so southern Palestine bore few defenders. Saladin found the situation ripe and marched to Ascalon, which he referred to as the &quot;Bride of Syria&quot;. William of Tyre recorded that the Ayyubid army consisted of soldiers, of which 8,000 were elite forces and were black soldiers from Sudan. This army proceeded to raid the countryside, sack Ramla and Lod, and disperse themselves as far as the Gates of Jerusalem.

===Battles and truce with Baldwin===
The Ayyubids allowed Baldwin IV of Jerusalem to enter Ascalon with his famous Gaza-based Knights Templar without taking any precautions against a sudden attack. Although the Crusader force consisted of only 375 knights, Saladin hesitated to ambush them because of the presence of highly skilled templar generals. On 25 November, while the greater part of the Ayyubid army was absent, Saladin and his men were surprised near Ramla in the battle of Montgisard (possibly at Gezer, also known as Tell Jezar). Before they could form up, the Templar force hacked the Ayyubid army down by body-to-body of sword. Initially, Saladin attempted to organize his men into battle order, but as his bodyguards were being killed, he saw that defeat was inevitable and so with a small remnant of his troops mounted a swift camel, riding all the way to the territories of Egypt.

Not discouraged by his defeat at Montgisard, Saladin was prepared to fight the Crusaders once again. In the spring of 1178, he was encamped under the walls of Homs, and a few skirmishes occurred between his generals and the Crusader army. His forces in Hama won a victory over their enemy and brought the spoils, together with many prisoners of war, to Saladin who ordered the captives to be beheaded for &quot;plundering and laying waste the lands of the Faithful&quot;. He spent the rest of the year in Syria without a confrontation with his enemies.

Saladin&#x27;s intelligence services reported to him that the Crusaders were planning a raid into Syria. He ordered one of his generals, Farrukh-Shah, to guard the Damascus frontier with a thousand of his men to watch for an attack, then to retire, avoiding battle, and to light warning beacons on the hills, after which Saladin would march out. In April 1179, the Crusaders and Templars led by King Baldwin expected no resistance and waited to launch a surprise attack on Muslim herders grazing their herds and flocks east of the Golan Heights. Baldwin advanced too rashly in pursuit of Farrukh-Shah&#x27;s force, which was concentrated southeast of Quneitra and was subsequently defeated by the Ayyubids. With this victory, Saladin decided to call in more troops from Egypt; he requested al-Adil to dispatch 1,500 horsemen.

In the summer of 1179, King Baldwin had set up an outpost on the road to Damascus and aimed to fortify a passage over the Jordan River, known as Jacob&#x27;s Ford, that commanded the approach to the Banias plain (the plain was divided by the Muslims and the Christians). Saladin had offered 100,000 gold pieces to Baldwin to abandon the project, which was particularly offensive to the Muslims, but to no avail. He then resolved to destroy the fortress, called &quot;Chastellet&quot; and defended by the Templars knights, moving his headquarters to Banias. As the Crusaders hurried down to attack the Muslim forces, they fell into disorder, with the infantry falling behind. Despite early success, they pursued the Muslims far enough to become scattered, and Saladin took advantage by rallying his troops and charging at the Crusaders. The engagement ended in a decisive Ayyubid victory, and many high-ranking knights were captured. Saladin then moved to besiege the fortress, which fell on 30 August 1179.

In the spring of 1180, while Saladin was in the area of Safad, anxious to commence a vigorous campaign against the Kingdom of Jerusalem, King Baldwin sent messengers to him with proposals of peace. Because droughts and bad harvests hampered his commissariat, Saladin agreed to a truce. Raymond of Tripoli denounced the truce but was compelled to accept after an Ayyubid raid on his territory in May and upon the appearance of Saladin&#x27;s naval fleet off the port of Tartus.

==Domestic affairs==

In June 1180, Saladin hosted a reception for Nur ad-Din Muhammad, the Artuqid &quot;emir&quot; of Keyfa, at Geuk Su, in which he presented him and his brother Abu Bakr with gifts, valued at over 100,000 dinars according to Imad ad-Din. This was intended to cement an alliance with the Artuqids and to impress other &quot;emirs&quot; in Mesopotamia and Anatolia. Previously, Saladin offered to mediate relations between Nur ad-Din and Kilij Arslan II—the Seljuk sultan of Rûm—after the two came into conflict. The latter demanded that Nur ad-Din return the lands given to him as a dowry for marrying his daughter when he received reports that she was being abused and used to gain Seljuk territory. Nur ad-Din asked Saladin to mediate the issue, but Arslan refused.

After Nur ad-Din and Saladin met at Geuk Su, the top Seljuk emir, Ikhtiyar ad-Din al-Hasan, confirmed Arslan&#x27;s submission, after which an agreement was drawn up. Saladin was later enraged when he received a message from Arslan accusing Nur ad-Din of more abuses against his daughter. He threatened to attack the city of Malatya, saying, &quot;it is two days march for me and I shall not dismount [my horse] until I am in the city.&quot; Alarmed at the threat, the Seljuks pushed for negotiations. Saladin felt that Arslan was correct to care for his daughter, but Nur ad-Din had taken refuge with him, and therefore he could not betray his trust. It was finally agreed that Arslan&#x27;s daughter would be sent away for a year and if Nur ad-Din failed to comply, Saladin would move to abandon his support for him.

Leaving Farrukh-Shah in charge of Syria, Saladin returned to Cairo at the beginning of 1181. According to Abu Shama, he intended to spend the fast of Ramadan in Egypt and then make the &quot;hajj&quot; pilgrimage to Mecca in the summer. For an unknown reason, he apparently changed his plans regarding the pilgrimage and was seen inspecting the Nile River banks in June. He was again embroiled with the Bedouin; he removed two-thirds of their fiefs to use as compensation for the fief-holders at Fayyum. The Bedouin were also accused of trading with the Crusaders and, consequently, their grain was confiscated and they were forced to migrate westward. Later, Ayyubid warships were deployed against Bedouin river pirates, who were plundering the shores of Lake Tanis.

In the summer of 1181, Saladin&#x27;s former palace administrator Baha ad-Din Qaraqush led a force to arrest Majd ad-Din—a former deputy of Turan-Shah in the Yemeni town of Zabid—while he was entertaining Imad ad-Din al-Ishfahani at his estate in Cairo. Saladin&#x27;s intimates accused Majd ad-Din of misappropriating the revenues of Zabid, but Saladin himself believed there was no evidence to back the allegations. He had Majd ad-Din released in return for a payment of 80,000 dinars. In addition, other sums were to be paid to Saladin&#x27;s brothers al-Adil and Taj al-Muluk Buri. The controversial detainment of Majd ad-Din was a part of the larger discontent associated with the aftermath of Turan-Shah&#x27;s departure from Yemen. Although his deputies continued to send him revenues from the province, centralized authority was lacking and an internal quarrel arose between Izz ad-Din Uthman of Aden and Hittan of Zabid. Saladin wrote in a letter to al-Adil: &quot;this Yemen is a treasure house ... We conquered it, but up to this day we have had no return and no advantage from it. There have been only innumerable expenses, the sending out of troops ... and expectations which did not produce what was hoped for in the end.&quot;

==Imperial expansions==

===Campaign against the Franks and War with the Zengids===

Saif ad-Din had died earlier in June 1181 and his brother Izz ad-Din inherited leadership of Mosul. On 4 December, the crown prince of the Zengids, as-Salih, died in Aleppo. Prior to his death, he had his chief officers swear an oath of loyalty to Izz ad-Din, as he was the only Zengid ruler strong enough to oppose Saladin. Izz ad-Din was welcomed in Aleppo, but possessing it and Mosul put too great of a strain on his abilities. He thus, handed Aleppo to his brother Imad ad-Din Zangi, in exchange for Sinjar. Saladin offered no opposition to these transactions in order to respect the treaty he previously made with the Zengids.

On 11 May 1182, Saladin, along with half of the Egyptian Ayyubid army and numerous non-combatants, left Cairo for Syria. On the evening before he departed, he sat with his companions and the tutor of one of his sons quoted a line of poetry: &quot;enjoy the scent of the ox-eye plant of Najd, for after this evening it will come no more&quot;. Saladin took this as an evil omen and he never saw Egypt again. Knowing that Crusader forces were massed upon the frontier to intercept him, he took the desert route across the Sinai Peninsula to Ailah at the head of the Gulf of Aqaba. Meeting no opposition, Saladin ravaged the countryside of Montreal, whilst Baldwin&#x27;s forces watched on, refusing to intervene. He arrived in Damascus in June to learn that Farrukh-Shah had attacked the Galilee, sacking Daburiyya and capturing Habis Jaldek, a fortress of great importance to the Crusaders. In July, Saladin led his army across the Jordan and into Galilee, where he marched south to sack Bethsan. He was met by a substantial Crusader force in an inconclusive battle near Belvoir Castle, but he was unable to destroy the Christian army and could not logistically sustain his own army any longer, so he withdrew across the river. In August, he passed through the Beqaa Valley to Beirut, where he rendezvoused with the Egyptian fleet and laid siege to the city. Failing to make any headway, he withdrew after a few days to deal with matters in Mesopotamia.

Kukbary (Muzaffar ad-Din Gökböri), the &quot;emir&quot; of Harran, invited Saladin to occupy the Jazira region, making up northern Mesopotamia. He complied and the truce between him and the Zengids officially ended in September 1182. Prior to his march to Jazira, tensions had grown between the Zengid rulers of the region, primarily concerning their unwillingness to pay deference to Mosul. Before he crossed the Euphrates, Saladin besieged Aleppo for three days, signaling that the truce was over.

Once he reached Bira, near the river, he was joined by Kukbary and Nur ad-Din of Hisn Kayfa and the combined forces captured the cities of Jazira, one after the other. First, Edessa fell, followed by Saruj, then Raqqa, Qirqesiya and Nusaybin. Raqqa was an important crossing point and held by Qutb ad-Din Inal, who had lost Manbij to Saladin in 1176. Upon seeing the large size of Saladin&#x27;s army, he made little effort to resist and surrendered on the condition that he would retain his property. Saladin promptly impressed the inhabitants of the town by publishing a decree that ordered a number of taxes to be canceled and erased all mention of them from treasury records, stating &quot;the most miserable rulers are those whose purses are fat and their people thin&quot;. From Raqqa, he moved to conquer al-Fudain, al-Husain, Maksim, Durain, &#x27;Araban, and Khabur—all of which swore allegiance to him.

Saladin proceeded to take Nusaybin which offered no resistance. A medium-sized town, Nusaybin was not of great importance, but it was located in a strategic position between Mardin and Mosul and within easy reach of Diyarbakir. In the midst of these victories, Saladin received word that the Crusaders were raiding the villages of Damascus. He replied, &quot;Let them... whilst they knock down villages, we are taking cities; when we come back, we shall have all the more strength to fight them.&quot; Meanwhile, in Aleppo, the &quot;emir&quot; of the city Zangi raided Saladin&#x27;s cities to the north and east, such as Balis, Manbij, Saruj, Buza&#x27;a, al-Karzain. He also destroyed his own citadel at A&#x27;zaz to prevent it from being used by the Ayyubids if they were to conquer it.

===Fight for Mosul===

As Saladin approached Mosul, he faced the issue of taking over a large city and justifying the action. The Zengids of Mosul appealed to an-Nasir, the Abbasid caliph at Baghdad whose vizier favored them. An-Nasir sent Badr al-Badr (a high-ranking religious figure) to mediate between the two sides. Saladin arrived at the city on 10 November 1182. Izz ad-Din would not accept his terms because he considered them disingenuous and extensive, and Saladin immediately laid siege to the heavily fortified city.

After several minor skirmishes and a stalemate in the siege that was initiated by the caliph, Saladin intended to find a way to withdraw without damage to his reputation while still keeping up some military pressure. He decided to attack Sinjar, which was held by Izz ad-Din&#x27;s brother Sharaf ad-Din. It fell after a 15-day siege on 30 December. Saladin&#x27;s soldiers broke their discipline, plundering the city; Saladin managed to protect the governor and his officers only by sending them to Mosul. After establishing a garrison at Sinjar, he awaited a coalition assembled by Izz ad-Din consisting of his forces, those from Aleppo, Mardin, and Armenia. Saladin and his army met the coalition at Harran in February 1183, but on hearing of his approach, the latter sent messengers to Saladin asking for peace. Each force returned to their cities and al-Fadil wrote: &quot;They [Izz ad-Din&#x27;s coalition] advanced like men, like women they vanished.&quot;

On 2 March, al-Adil from Egypt wrote to Saladin that the Crusaders had struck the &quot;heart of Islam&quot;. Raynald de Châtillon had sent ships to the Gulf of Aqaba to raid towns and villages off the coast of the Red Sea. It was not an attempt to extend the Crusader influence into that sea or to capture its trade routes, but merely a piratical move. Nonetheless, Imad ad-Din writes the raid was alarming to the Muslims because they were not accustomed to attacks on that sea, and Ibn al-Athir adds that the inhabitants had no experience with the Crusaders either as fighters or traders.

Ibn Jubair was told that sixteen Muslim ships were burnt by the Crusaders, who then captured a pilgrim ship and caravan at Aidab. He also reported that they intended to attack Medina and remove Muhammad&#x27;s body. Al-Maqrizi added to the rumor by claiming Muhammad&#x27;s tomb was going to be relocated to Crusader territory so Muslims would make pilgrimages there. Al-Adil had his warships moved from Fustat and Alexandria to the Red Sea under the command of an Armenian mercenary Lu&#x27;lu. They broke the Crusader blockade, destroyed most of their ships, and pursued and captured those who anchored and fled into the desert. The surviving Crusaders, numbered at 170, were ordered to be killed by Saladin in various Muslim cities.
From the point of view of Saladin, in terms of territory, the war against Mosul was going well, but he still failed to achieve his objectives and his army was shrinking; Taqi ad-Din took his men back to Hama, while Nasir ad-Din Muhammad and his forces had left. This encouraged Izz ad-Din and his allies to take the offensive. The previous coalition regrouped at Harzam some 140 km from Harran. In early April, without waiting for Nasir ad-Din, Saladin and Taqi ad-Din commenced their advance against the coalition, marching eastward to Ras al-Ein unhindered. By late April, after three days of &quot;actual fighting&quot;, according to Saladin, the Ayyubids had captured Amid. He handed the city to Nur ad-Din Muhammad together with its stores, which consisted of 80,000 candles, a tower full of arrowheads, and 1,040,000 books. In return for a diploma—granting him the city, Nur ad-Din swore allegiance to Saladin, promising to follow him in every expedition in the war against the Crusaders, and repairing the damage done to the city. The fall of Amid, in addition to territory, convinced Il-Ghazi of Mardin to enter the service of Saladin, weakening Izz ad-Din&#x27;s coalition.

Saladin attempted to gain the Caliph an-Nasir&#x27;s support against Izz ad-Din by sending him a letter requesting a document that would give him legal justification for taking over Mosul and its territories. Saladin aimed to persuade the caliph claiming that while he conquered Egypt and Yemen under the flag of the Abbasids, the Zengids of Mosul openly supported the Seljuks (rivals of the caliphate) and only came to the caliph when in need. He also accused Izz ad-Din&#x27;s forces of disrupting the Muslim &quot;Holy War&quot; against the Crusaders, stating &quot;they are not content not to fight, but they prevent those who can&quot;. Saladin defended his own conduct claiming that he had come to Syria to fight the Crusaders, end the heresy of the Assassins, and stop the wrong-doing of the Muslims. He also promised that if Mosul was given to him, it would lead to the capture of Jerusalem, Constantinople, Georgia, and the lands of the Almohads in the Maghreb, &quot;until the word of God is supreme and the Abbasid caliphate has wiped the world clean, turning the churches into mosques&quot;. Saladin stressed that all this would happen by the will of God, and instead of asking for financial or military support from the caliph, he would capture and give the caliph the territories of Tikrit, Daquq, Khuzestan, Kish Island, and Oman.

===Possession of Aleppo===

Saladin turned his attention from Mosul to Aleppo, sending his brother Taj al-Muluk Buri to capture Tell Khalid, 130 km northeast of the city. A siege was set, but the governor of Tell Khalid surrendered upon the arrival of Saladin himself on 17 May before a siege could take place. According to Imad ad-Din, after Tell Khalid, Saladin took a detour northwards to Aintab, but he gained possession of it when his army turned towards it, allowing him to quickly move backward another c. 100 km towards Aleppo. On 21 May, he camped outside the city, positioning himself east of the Citadel of Aleppo, while his forces encircled the suburb of Banaqusa to the northeast and Bab Janan to the west. He stationed his men dangerously close to the city, hoping for an early success.

Zangi did not offer long resistance. He was unpopular with his subjects and wished to return to his Sinjar, the city he governed previously. An exchange was negotiated where Zangi would hand over Aleppo to Saladin in return for the restoration of his control of Sinjar, Nusaybin, and Raqqa. Zangi would hold these territories as Saladin&#x27;s vassals in terms of military service. On 12 June, Aleppo was formally placed in Ayyubid hands. The people of Aleppo had not known about these negotiations and were taken by surprise when Saladin&#x27;s standard was hoisted over the citadel. Two &quot;emir&quot;s, including an old friend of Saladin, Izz ad-Din Jurduk, welcomed and pledged their service to him. Saladin replaced the Hanafi courts with Shafi&#x27;i administration, despite a promise that he would not interfere in the religious leadership of the city. Although he was short of money, Saladin also allowed the departing Zangi to take all the stores of the citadel that he could travel with and to sell the remainder—which Saladin purchased himself. In spite of his earlier hesitation to go through with the exchange, he had no doubts about his success, stating that Aleppo was &quot;the key to the lands&quot; and &quot;this city is the eye of Syria and the citadel is its pupil&quot;. For Saladin, the capture of the city marked the end of over eight years of waiting since he told Farrukh-Shah that &quot;we have only to do the milking and Aleppo will be ours&quot;.

After spending one night in Aleppo&#x27;s citadel, Saladin marched to Harim, near the Crusader-held Antioch. The city was held by Surhak, a &quot;minor &quot;mamluk&quot;&quot;. Saladin offered him the city of Busra and property in Damascus in exchange for Harim, but when Surhak asked for more, his own garrison in Harim forced him out. He was arrested by Saladin&#x27;s deputy Taqi ad-Din on allegations that he was planning to cede Harim to Bohemond III of Antioch. When Saladin received its surrender, he proceeded to arrange the defense of Harim from the Crusaders. He reported to the caliph and his own subordinates in Yemen and Baalbek that he was going to attack the Armenians. Before he could move, however, there were a number of administrative details to be settled. Saladin agreed to a truce with Bohemond in return for Muslim prisoners being held by him and then he gave A&#x27;zaz to Alam ad-Din Suleiman and Aleppo to Saif ad-Din al-Yazkuj—the former was an &quot;emir&quot; of Aleppo who joined Saladin and the latter was a former &quot;mamluk&quot; of Shirkuh who helped rescue him from the assassination attempt at A&#x27;zaz.

==Wars against Crusaders==

Crusader attacks provoked further responses by Saladin. Raynald of Châtillon, in particular, harassed Muslim trading and pilgrimage routes with a fleet on the Red Sea, a water route that Saladin needed to keep open. Raynald threatened to attack the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. On 29 September 1183, Saladin crossed the Jordan River to attack Beisan, which was found to be empty. The next day his forces sacked and burned the town and moved westwards. They intercepted Crusader reinforcements from Karak and Shaubak along the Nablus road and took prisoners. Meanwhile, the main Crusader force under Guy of Lusignan moved from Sepphoris to al-Fula. Saladin sent out 500 skirmishers to harass their forces, and he himself marched to Ain Jalut. When the Crusader force—reckoned to be the largest the kingdom ever produced from its own resources, but still outmatched by the Muslims—advanced, the Ayyubids unexpectedly moved down the stream of Ain Jalut. After a few Ayyubid raids—including attacks on Zir&#x27;in, Forbelet, and Mount Tabor—the Crusaders still were not tempted to attack their main force, and Saladin led his men back across the river once provisions and supplies ran low. Saladin still had to exact retribution on Raynald, so he twice besieged Kerak, Raynald&#x27;s fortress in Oultrejordain. The first time was in 1183, following his unsuccessful campaign into Galilee, but a relief force caused him to withdraw. He opened his campaign of 1184 with a second siege of Kerak, hoping this time to draw the Crusader army into battle on open ground, but they outmaneuvered him and successfully relieved the fortress.

Following the failure of his Kerak sieges, Saladin temporarily turned his attention back to another long-term project and resumed attacks on the territory of Izz ad-Din (Mas&#x27;ud ibn Mawdud ibn Zangi), around Mosul, which he had begun with some success in 1182. However, since then, Masʻūd had allied himself with the powerful governor of Azerbaijan and Jibal, who in 1185 began moving his troops across the Zagros Mountains, causing Saladin to hesitate in his attacks. The defenders of Mosul, when they became aware that help was on the way, increased their efforts, and Saladin subsequently fell ill, so in March 1186 a peace treaty was signed. Meanwhile, Raynald retaliated for the earlier sieges of Kerak by looting a caravan of pilgrims on the Hajj during the winter of 1186–87. According to the later 13th-century &quot;Old French Continuation of William of Tyre&quot;, Raynald captured Saladin&#x27;s sister in a raid on a caravan; this claim is not attested in contemporary sources, Muslim or Frankish, however, instead stating that Raynald had attacked a preceding caravan, and Saladin set guards to ensure the safety of his sister and her son, who came to no harm. On hearing of the attack, Saladin vowed that he would personally slay Raynald for breaking the truce, a vow he would keep. The outrage also led Saladin to resolve to dispense with half-measures to rein in the unruly lord of Kerak, and to instead topple the entire edifice of the Christian Kingdom of Jerusalem, thus precipitating the invasion of the summer of 1187.

On 4 July 1187, Saladin faced the combined forces of Guy of Lusignan, King Consort of Jerusalem, and Raymond III of Tripoli at the Battle of Hattin. In this battle alone the Crusader force was largely annihilated by Saladin&#x27;s determined army. It was a major disaster for the Crusaders and a turning point in the history of the Crusades. Saladin captured Raynald and was personally responsible for his execution in retaliation for his attacks against Muslim caravans. The members of these caravans had, in vain, besought his mercy by reciting the truce between the Muslims and the Crusaders, but Raynald ignored this and insulted the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, before murdering and torturing some of them. Upon hearing this, Saladin swore an oath to personally execute Raynald. Guy of Lusignan was also captured. Seeing the execution of Raynald, he feared he would be next. However, his life was spared by Saladin, who said of Raynald, &quot;[i]t is not the wont of kings, to kill kings; but that man had transgressed all bounds, and therefore did I treat him thus.&quot;

===Capture of Jerusalem===

Saladin had captured almost every Crusader city. Saladin preferred to take Jerusalem without bloodshed and offered generous terms, but those inside refused to leave their holy city, vowing to destroy it in a fight to the death rather than see it handed over peacefully. Jerusalem capitulated to his forces on Friday, 2 October 1187, after a siege. When the siege had started, Saladin was unwilling to promise terms of quarter to the Frankish inhabitants of Jerusalem. Balian of Ibelin threatened to kill every Muslim hostage, estimated at 5,000, and to destroy Islam&#x27;s holy shrines of the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque if such quarter were not provided. Saladin consulted his council and the terms were accepted. The agreement was read out through the streets of Jerusalem so that everyone might within forty days provide for himself and pay to Saladin the agreed tribute for his freedom. An unusually low ransom was to be paid for each Frank in the city, whether man, woman, or child, but Saladin, against the wishes of his treasurers, allowed many families who could not afford the ransom to leave. Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem organised and contributed to a collection that paid the ransoms for about 18,000 of the poorer citizens, leaving another 15,000 to be enslaved. Saladin&#x27;s brother al-Adil &quot;asked Saladin for a thousand of them for his own use and then released them on the spot.&quot; Most of the foot soldiers were sold into slavery. Upon the capture of Jerusalem, Saladin summoned the Jews and permitted them to resettle in the city. In particular, the residents of Ascalon, a large Jewish settlement, responded to his request.

Tyre, on the coast of modern-day Lebanon, was the last major Crusader city that was not captured by Muslim forces. Strategically, it would have made more sense for Saladin to capture Tyre before Jerusalem; Saladin, however, chose to pursue Jerusalem first because of the importance of the city to Islam. Tyre was commanded by Conrad of Montferrat, who strengthened its defences and withstood two sieges by Saladin. In 1188, at Tortosa, Saladin released Guy of Lusignan and returned him to his wife Sibylla of Jerusalem. They went first to Tripoli, then to Antioch. In 1189, they sought to reclaim Tyre for their kingdom but were refused admission by Conrad, who did not recognize Guy as king. Guy then set about besieging Acre.

Saladin was on friendly terms with Queen Tamar of Georgia. Saladin&#x27;s biographer Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad reports that, after Saladin&#x27;s conquest of Jerusalem, the Georgian Queen sent envoys to the sultan to request the return of confiscated possessions of the Georgian monasteries in Jerusalem. Saladin&#x27;s response is not recorded, but the queen&#x27;s efforts seem to have been successful as Jacques de Vitry, the Bishop of Acre, reports the Georgians were, in contrast to the other Christian pilgrims, allowed a free passage into the city with their banners unfurled. Ibn Šaddād furthermore claims that Queen Tamar outbid the Byzantine emperor in her efforts to obtain the relics of the True Cross, offering 200,000 gold pieces to Saladin who had taken the relics as booty at the battle of Hattin, but to no avail.

According to Baha ad-Din, after these victories, Saladin mused of invading Europe, saying: &quot;I think that when God grants me victory over the rest of Palestine I shall divide my territories, make a will stating my wishes, then set sail on this sea for their far-off lands in and pursue the Franks there, so as to free the earth of anyone who does not believe in God, or die in the attempt.&quot;

===Third Crusade===

Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem prompted the Third Crusade (1189–1192), which was partially financed by a special &quot;Saladin tithe&quot; in 1188. King Richard I led Guy&#x27;s siege of Acre, conquered the city and executed almost 3,000 Muslim prisoners of war. Baha ad-Din wrote:

The armies of Saladin engaged in combat with the army of King Richard at the Battle of Arsuf on 7 September 1191, at which Saladin&#x27;s forces suffered heavy losses and were forced to withdraw. After the battle of Arsuf, Richard occupied Jaffa, restoring the city&#x27;s fortifications. Meanwhile, Saladin moved south, where he dismantled the fortifications of Ascalon to prevent this strategically important city, which lay at the junction between Egypt and Palestine, from falling into Crusader hands.

In October 1191, Richard began restoring the inland castles on the coastal plain beyond Jaffa in preparation for an advance on Jerusalem. During this period, Richard and Saladin passed envoys back and forth, negotiating the possibility of a truce. Richard proposed that his sister Joan should marry Saladin&#x27;s brother and that Jerusalem could be their wedding gift. However, Saladin rejected this idea when Richard insisted that Saladin&#x27;s brother convert to Christianity. Richard suggested that his niece Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany be the bride instead, an idea that Saladin also rejected.

In January 1192, Richard&#x27;s army occupied Beit Nuba, just twelve miles from Jerusalem, but withdrew without attacking the Holy City. Instead, Richard advanced south on Ascalon, where he restored the fortifications. In July 1192, Saladin tried to threaten Richard&#x27;s command of the coast by attacking Jaffa. The city was besieged, and Saladin very nearly captured it; however, Richard arrived a few days later and defeated Saladin&#x27;s army in a battle outside the city.

The Battle of Jaffa (1192) proved to be the last military engagement of the Third Crusade. After Richard reoccupied Jaffa and restored its fortifications, he and Saladin again discussed terms. At last Richard agreed to demolish the fortifications of Ascalon, while Saladin agreed to recognize Crusader control of the Palestinian coast from Tyre to Jaffa. The Christians would be allowed to travel as unarmed pilgrims to Jerusalem, and Saladin&#x27;s kingdom would be at peace with the Crusader states for the following three years.

==Death==


Saladin died of a fever on 4 March 1193 () at Damascus, not long after King Richard&#x27;s departure. In Saladin&#x27;s possession at the time of his death were one piece of gold and forty pieces of silver. He had given away his great wealth to his poor subjects, leaving nothing to pay for his funeral. He was buried in a mausoleum in the garden outside the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, Syria. Originally the tomb was part of a complex which also included a school, Madrassah al-Aziziah, of which little remains except a few columns and an internal arch. Seven centuries later, Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany donated a new marble sarcophagus to the mausoleum. However, the original sarcophagus was not replaced; instead, the mausoleum, which is open to visitors, now has two sarcophagi: the marble one placed on the side and the original wooden one, which covers Saladin&#x27;s tomb.

==Family==
Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani compiled a list of Saladin&#x27;s sons along with their dates of birth, according to information provided by Saladin late in his reign. Notable members of Saladin&#x27;s progeny, as listed by Imad, include:
# al-Afḍal Nur ad-Din Ali, emir of Damascus (b. 1 Shawwal 565 AH ( June 1170) in Egypt)
# al-&#x27;Azīz Imad ad-Din Abu al-Fath Uthman, sultan of Egypt (b. 8 Jumada I 567 AH ( January 1172) in Egypt)
# al-Ẓāhir Ghiyath ad-Din Abu Mansur Ghazi, emir of Aleppo (b. mid-Ramadan 568 AH (May 1173) in Egypt)
# al-Mu&#x27;aẓẓam Fakhr ad-Din Abu Mansur Turanshah, (b. Rabi I 577 AH (July/August 1181) in Egypt)

The sons listed by Imad number fifteen, but elsewhere he writes that Saladin was survived by seventeen sons and one daughter. Saladin&#x27;s daughter is said to have married her cousin al-Kamil Muhammad ibn Adil. Saladin may also have had other children who died before him. One son, Al-Zahir Dawud, whom Imad listed eighth, is recorded as being Saladin&#x27;s twelfth son in a letter written by his minister.

Not much is known of Saladin&#x27;s wives or slave-women. He married Ismat ad-Din Khatun, the widow of Nur ad-Din Zengi, in 1176. She did not have children. One of his wives, Shamsah, is buried with her son al-Aziz in the tomb of al-Shafi&#x27;i.

==Recognition and legacy==
===Muslim world===

Saladin has become a prominent figure in Islamic, Arab, Turkish and Kurdish culture, and he has been described as the most famous Kurd in history. Historian ibn Munqidh mentioned him as the person who revived the reign of &quot;Rashidun Caliphs&quot;. The Turkish writer Mehmet Akif Ersoy called him the most beloved sultan of the Orient.

In 1898, German emperor Wilhelm II visited Saladin&#x27;s tomb to pay his respects. The visit, coupled with anti-imperialist sentiments, encouraged the image in the Arab world of Saladin as a hero of the struggle against the West, building on was the romantic one created by Walter Scott and other Europeans in the West at the time. Saladin&#x27;s reputation had previously been largely forgotten in the Muslim world, eclipsed by more successful figures, such as Baybars of Egypt.

Modern Arab states have sought to commemorate Saladin through various measures, often based on the image created of him in the 19th-century west. A governorate centered around Tikrit and Samarra in modern-day Iraq is named after him, as is Salahaddin University in Erbil, the largest city of Iraqi Kurdistan. A suburban community of Erbil, Masif Salahaddin, is also named after him.

Few structures associated with Saladin survive within modern cities. Saladin first fortified the Citadel of Cairo (1175–1183), which had been a domed pleasure pavilion with a fine view in more peaceful times. In Syria, even the smallest city is centred on a defensible citadel, and Saladin introduced this essential feature to Egypt.

Although the Ayyubid dynasty that he founded would outlive him by only 57 years, the legacy of Saladin within the Arab world continues to this day. With the rise of Arab nationalism in the 20th century, particularly with regard to the Arab–Israeli conflict, Saladin&#x27;s heroism and leadership gained a new significance. Saladin&#x27;s recapture of Palestine from the European Crusaders is considered an inspiration for modern-day Arabs&#x27; opposition to Zionism. Moreover, the glory and comparative unity of the Arab world under Saladin was seen as the perfect symbol for the new unity sought by Arab nationalists, such as Gamal Abdel Nasser. For this reason, the Eagle of Saladin became the symbol of revolutionary Egypt, and was subsequently adopted by several other Arab states (the United Arab Republic, Iraq, Libya, the State of Palestine, and Yemen).

Among Egyptian Shias, Saladin is dubbed as &quot;Kharab ad-Din&quot;, the destroyer of religion—a derisive play on the name &quot;Saladin.&quot;

===Western world===
Saladin was widely renowned in medieval Europe as a model of kingship, and in particular of the courtly virtue of regal generosity. As early as 1202/03, Walther von der Vogelweide urged the German King Philip of Swabia to be more like Saladin, who believed that a king&#x27;s hands should have holes to let the gold fall through.
By the 1270s, Jans der Enikel was spreading the fictitious but approving story of Saladin&#x27;s table, which presented him as both pious and wise to religious diversity.
In &quot;The Divine Comedy&quot; (1308–1320), Dante mentions him as one of the virtuous non-Christians in limbo, and he is also depicted favorably in Boccaccio&#x27;s &quot;The Decameron&quot; (1438–53).

Although Saladin faded into history after the Middle Ages, he appears in a sympathetic light in modern literature, first in Lessing&#x27;s play &quot;Nathan the Wise&quot; (1779), which transfers the central idea of &quot;Saladin&#x27;s table&quot; to the post-medieval world. He is a central character in Sir Walter Scott&#x27;s novel &quot;The Talisman&quot; (1825), which more than any other single text influenced the romantic view of Saladin. Scott presented Saladin as a &quot;modern [19th-century] liberal European gentlemen, beside whom medieval Westerners would always have made a poor showing&quot;. 20th-century French author Albert Champdor described him as &quot;Le plus pur héros de l&#x27;Islam&quot; (). Despite the Crusaders&#x27; slaughter when they originally conquered Jerusalem in 1099, Saladin granted amnesty and free passage to all common Catholics and even to the defeated Christian army, as long as they were able to pay the aforementioned ransom (the Greek Orthodox Christians were treated even better because they often opposed the western Crusaders).

Notwithstanding the differences in beliefs, the Muslim Saladin was respected by Christian lords, Richard especially. Richard once praised Saladin as a great prince, saying that he was, without doubt, the greatest and most powerful leader in the Islamic world. Saladin, in turn, stated that there was not a more honorable Christian lord than Richard. After the treaty, Saladin and Richard sent each other many gifts as tokens of respect but never met face to face. In April 1191, a Frankish woman&#x27;s three-month-old baby had been stolen from her camp and sold on the market. The Franks urged her to approach Saladin herself with her grievance. According to Ibn Shaddad, Saladin used his own money to buy the child back:

Mark Cartwright, the publishing director of &quot;World History Encyclopedia&quot;, writes: &quot;Indeed, it is somewhat ironic that the Muslim leader became one of the great exemplars of chivalry in 13th century European literature. Much has been written about the sultan during his own lifetime and since, but the fact that an appreciation for his diplomacy and leadership skills can be found in both contemporary Muslim and Christian sources would suggest that Saladin is indeed worthy of his position as one of the great medieval leaders.&quot;

==Cultural depictions of Saladin==
===Novels===
* &quot;The Talisman&quot; by Walter Scott. Published in 1825 it is set during the Third Crusade and centres on the relationship between Richard I of England and Saladin.
* The &quot;Crusades&quot; trilogy (1998–2000) by Jan Guillou is about a young nobleman from present-day Sweden who is exiled and forced to participate in the Crusades in the Middle East. In it he comes across Saladin who in the story has the role of a &quot;helper.&quot;
* &quot;The Book of Saladin&quot; (1998) by Tariq Ali, a novel based on Saladin&#x27;s life.

===Film, television and animation===
* &quot;Ghazi Salahuddin&quot;, a 1939 Indian drama film by I. A. Hafesjee. The first depiction of Saladin on film, it stars Ghulam Mohammed as the sultan, Ratan Bai as Rihana, Mazhar Khan as Richard, Lalita Devi as Isabella, Mohammed Ishaq as Saifuddin, Yakub as Conrad, Ishwarlal as Nooruddin, W.M. Khan as Humphrey, Bhupatrai as Frederick, and Mirza Musharraf as Yanoos.
* &quot;Saladin the Victorious&quot; – a 1963 Egyptian war drama film. Ahmed Mazhar as Saladin, Salah Zulfikar as Issa Al Awwam and Hamdy Gheith as Richard.
* &quot;Doctor Who&quot; – Saladin is portrayed by Bernard Kay in the 1965 serial &quot;The Crusade&quot; opposite Julian Glover as Richard the Lionheart along with series regulars William Hartnell, William Russell, Jacqueline Hill and Maureen O&#x27;Brien as The First Doctor, Ian Chesterton, Barbara Wright and Vicki, respectively.
* &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; – Saladin&#x27;s role was played by Ghassan Massoud.
* &quot;King Richard and the Crusaders&quot; – Saladin&#x27;s role was played by Rex Harrison.
* &quot;Salah ad-Deen Al-Ayyobi&quot; – a 2001 TV series on Salah ad-Din&#x27;s life.
* &quot;&quot; – an animated project inspired by the life of Salah ad-Din.
* &quot;Kudüs Fatihi Selahaddin Eyyubi&quot; – Salahuddin al-Ayyubi is portrayed in Turkish TV series by Uğur Güneş.
* &quot;&quot; – Saladin&#x27;s role was played by Milind Soman.

===Video games===
* Saladin appears as the leader of the Arabian civilization in several installments of Sid Meier&#x27;s &quot;Civilization&quot; video game series. He also appears as the leader of the Ayyubids in the &quot;Into the Renaissance&quot; scenario from the Gods &amp; Kings expansion for &quot;Civilization V&quot;.
* Saladin is a playable character in the Mobile/PC Game Rise of Kingdoms.
* The popular real-time strategy video game &quot;Age of Empires II: The Age of Kings&quot; features a campaign based on the exploits of Saladin.

=== Visual art ===
* The Statue of Saladin is an oversize equestrian bronze statue depicting Saladin located in front of the 11th century Citadel of Damascus in the Ancient City of Damascus in Damascus, Syria.

==See also==

* Battles of Saladin
* List of Ayyubid rulers
* List of Kurdish dynasties and countries
* Sharaf Khan Bidlisi
* &quot;Libellus de expugnatione Terrae Sanctae per Saladinum&quot;
* &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot;
* &quot;King Richard and the Crusaders&quot;
* &quot;Saladin the Victorious&quot;
* &quot;Salah ad-Din (TV series)&quot;
* Kufranjah City
* &quot;Arn – The Knight Templar&quot;
==Notes==
==References==

==Bibliography==

===Primary sources===
* 

===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Rosebault Ch.J. Saladin. Prince of Chivalri
* De expugnatione terrae sanctae per Saladinum A European account of Saladin&#x27;s conquests of the Crusader states. 
* Saladin: The Sultan and His Times, 1138–1193 
* Richard and Saladin: Warriors of the Third Crusade
* Full transcript of: Lane-Poole, Stanley (1906). Saladin and the Fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="0" end="28" title="Saladin" label="Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="66" end="73" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="98" end="113" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="130" end="137" title="Kurds" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="163" end="169" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="178" end="183" title="Egypt in the Middle Ages#Ayyubid period" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="188" end="193" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="222" end="235" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="291" end="306" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="314" end="320" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="390" end="407" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="413" end="418" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="420" end="425" title="South Arabia" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="431" end="436" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379886" start="459" end="466" title="Shirkuh" label="Shirkuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="516" end="530" title="Zengid dynasty" label="Zengid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="552" end="565" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="609" end="619" title="Nur ad-Din (died 1174)" label="Nur ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q118594" start="671" end="677" title="Shawar" label="Shawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52770826" start="685" end="691" title="Vizier (Fatimid Caliphate)" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q286460" start="722" end="729" title="al-Adid" label="al-Adid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="1103" end="1115" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1220" end="1225" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="1232" end="1245" title="Ismailism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="1246" end="1257" title="Shia Muslim" label="Shia Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1305" end="1312" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="1325" end="1342" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="1408" end="1417" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="1614" end="1622" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="1690" end="1694" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="1699" end="1703" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22935722" start="1856" end="1883" title="Battle of the Horns of Hama" label="Battle of the Horns of Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115925" start="1932" end="1957" title="Sultan of Egypt" label="Sultan of Egypt and Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q293646" start="1986" end="1996" title="al-Mustadi" label="al-Mustadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="2115" end="2124" title="Order of Assassins" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="2267" end="2273" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="2323" end="2328" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="2417" end="2433" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2453" end="2462" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="2553" end="2573" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q257153" start="2838" end="2849" title="Mausoleum of Saladin" label="a mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183562" start="2866" end="2880" title="Umayyad Mosque" label="Umayyad Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340372" start="2912" end="2926" title="Islamic culture" label="Muslim culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282291" start="2962" end="2969" title="Kurdish culture" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2971" end="2977" title="Turkic culture" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="2983" end="2995" title="Arab culture" label="Arab culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="3113" end="3119" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3135" end="3139" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q624240" start="3218" end="3223" title="laqab" label="laqab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="3319" end="3326" title="Kurds" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q429059" start="3403" end="3407" title="Dvin (ancient city)" label="Dvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="3419" end="3426" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q735636" start="3467" end="3484" title="Najm al-Din Ayyub" label="Najm ad-Din Ayyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q307365" start="3662" end="3680" title="Abdul Qadir Gilani" label="Abdul Qadir Gilani"/>
<link wikidata="Q189550" start="3781" end="3786" title="Imad ad-Din Zengi" label="Zengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346998" start="3788" end="3803" title="Atabeg of Mosul" label="Atabeg of Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="3840" end="3852" title="Tigris River" label="Tigris River"/>
<link wikidata="Q735636" start="3915" end="3932" title="Najm ad-Din Ayyub" label="Najm ad-Din Ayyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="4162" end="4169" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q379886" start="4270" end="4289" title="Asad al-Din Shirkuh" label="Asad ad-Din Shirkuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q253568" start="4330" end="4353" title="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad" label="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="4552" end="4559" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="4604" end="4614" title="Nur ad-Din (died 1174)" label="Nur ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="4666" end="4673" title="Zengids" label="Zengids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="4702" end="4710" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="5015" end="5021" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="5027" end="5035" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="5118" end="5129" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="5501" end="5514" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5516" end="5525" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="5530" end="5535" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="taken"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5641" end="5646" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="5677" end="5690" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19494482" start="5731" end="5738" title="Kitab al-Hamasah" label="Hamasah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750054" start="5748" end="5758" title="Abu Tammam" label="Abu Tammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="5778" end="5785" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="5790" end="5796" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="5806" end="5813" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="5818" end="5825" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q253568" start="5883" end="5906" title="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad" label="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="6001" end="6006" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="6056" end="6068" title="philosophers" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="6115" end="6127" title="materialists" label="materialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="6166" end="6174" title="Sharia" label="Holy Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="6209" end="6215" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q833913" start="6232" end="6239" title="khanqah" label="khanqah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="6291" end="6299" title="madrasas" label="madrasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="6323" end="6328" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="6375" end="6380" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6459" end="6469" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q282883" start="6531" end="6550" title="Shihab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi" label="Yahya al-Suhrawardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q716920" start="6571" end="6586" title="Illuminationism" label="Illuminationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="6598" end="6616" title="Islamic philosophy" label="Islamic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="6621" end="6627" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="6860" end="6865" title="ulama" label="ulama"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="6967" end="6985" title="Order of Assassins" label="Order of Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="7000" end="7013" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ili" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="7014" end="7024" title="Shi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="7105" end="7114" title="Crusades" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001465" start="7220" end="7227" title="Zawiya (institution)" label="zawiyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="7237" end="7247" title="al-Maqrizi" label="al-Maqrizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q815509" start="7555" end="7559" title="waqf" label="waqf"/>
<link wikidata="Q379886" start="7731" end="7750" title="Shirkuh" label="Asad ad-Din Shirkuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q52770826" start="7898" end="7904" title="Vizier (Fatimid Caliphate)" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="7912" end="7919" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q286460" start="7927" end="7934" title="al-Adid" label="al-Adid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118594" start="7936" end="7942" title="Shawar" label="Shawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917330" start="7986" end="7993" title="Dirgham" label="Dirgham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220294" start="8344" end="8354" title="gold dinar" label="gold dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q393495" start="8549" end="8556" title="Bilbais" label="Bilbais"/>
<link wikidata="Q248565" start="8581" end="8608" title="Crusader invasions of Egypt" label="combined force of Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872816" start="8740" end="8759" title="Battle of al-Babein" label="Battle of al-Babein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="8788" end="8792" title="River Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="8807" end="8811" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441540" start="9117" end="9132" title="feigned retreat" label="feigned retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635056" start="9278" end="9294" title="Hugh of Caesarea" label="Hugh of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334854" start="9684" end="9696" title="Ibn al-Athir" label="Ibn al-Athir"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="9849" end="9859" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q130581258" start="10156" end="10164" title="Siege of Alexandria (1167)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="10261" end="10283" title="Amalric I of Jerusalem" label="Amalric I of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q742319" start="11768" end="11779" title="Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani" label="Imad ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664544" start="12995" end="13010" title="Battle of the Blacks" label="staged a revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="13232" end="13241" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189383" start="13253" end="13261" title="Damietta" label="Damietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="13436" end="13443" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q293448" start="13452" end="13464" title="al-Mustanjid" label="al-Mustanjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="13751" end="13757" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="13816" end="13828" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="13866" end="13875" title="al-Fustat" label="al-Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q557383" start="13976" end="13981" title="Deir al-Balah" label="Darum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="14012" end="14019" title="Knights Templars" label="Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="14034" end="14038" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="14338" end="14343" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="14384" end="14397" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14782" end="14807" title="Najm ad-Din al-Khabushani" label="Najm ad-Din al-Khabushani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999841" start="14832" end="14837" title="faqih" label="faqih"/>
<link wikidata="Q738826" start="15370" end="15376" title="khutba" label="khutba"/>
<link wikidata="Q293646" start="15434" end="15444" title="al-Mustadi" label="al-Mustadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844694" start="15527" end="15532" title="Kerak Castle" label="Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362749" start="15537" end="15545" title="Montréal (castle)" label="Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="16033" end="16038" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="16072" end="16080" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="16171" end="16176" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400207" start="16274" end="16284" title="Turan-Shah" label="Turan-Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121453" start="16473" end="16478" title="Qasr Ibrim" label="Ibrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119142" start="17101" end="17106" title="Islamic history of Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="17135" end="17139" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="17166" end="17181" title="Ayyubid Dynasty" label="Ayyubid Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285024" start="17323" end="17333" title="Diyar Bakr" label="Diyar Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="17343" end="17349" title="al-Jazira, Mesopotamia" label="Jazira"/>
<link wikidata="Q285519" start="17688" end="17712" title="as-Salih Ismail al-Malik" label="as-Salih Ismail al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="18701" end="18707" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828052" start="18973" end="18984" title="Ghazi II Saif ud-Din" label="Saif ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="19228" end="19233" title="Bosra" label="Bosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q206246" start="19512" end="19531" title="Citadel of Damascus" label="Citadel of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20390484" start="19663" end="19682" title="Tughtakin ibn Ayyub" label="Tughtakin ibn Ayyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q20390484" start="19834" end="19853" title="Tughtakin ibn Ayyub" label="Tughtakin ibn Ayyub"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="20010" end="20014" title="Hamah" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="20057" end="20061" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q124746531" start="20476" end="20495" title="Rashid ad-Din Sinan" label="Rashid ad-Din Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="20532" end="20541" title="Order of Assassins" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052712" start="20861" end="20871" title="Abu Qubays, Syria" label="Abu Qubays"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="21006" end="21024" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553222" start="21048" end="21061" title="Nahr al-Kabir" label="Nahr al-Kabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="21153" end="21157" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="22023" end="22029" title="Zengid" label="Zengid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="22077" end="22088" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15693389" start="22488" end="22505" title="Jund Dimashq" label="Damascus province"/>
<link wikidata="Q22935722" start="22664" end="22677" title="Battle of the Horns of Hama" label="Horns of Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q188871" start="22705" end="22718" title="Orontes River" label="Orontes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q728226" start="23153" end="23174" title="Ma&amp;#x27;arat al-Numan" label="Ma&amp;#x27;arat al-Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83387" start="24031" end="24041" title="Diyarbakir" label="Diyarbakir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697516" start="24203" end="24222" title="Tell Sultan" label="Sultan&amp;#x27;s Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="24706" end="24722" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146939" start="25015" end="25021" title="Manbij" label="Manbij"/>
<link wikidata="Q277674" start="25079" end="25089" title="A&amp;#x27;zaz" label="A&amp;#x27;zaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492928" start="25377" end="25385" title="gambeson" label="gambeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188022" start="25994" end="26000" title="Mardin" label="Mardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q756957" start="26005" end="26010" title="Hasankeyf" label="Keyfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="26534" end="26543" title="Order of Assassins" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q124746531" start="26552" end="26571" title="Rashid ad-Din Sinan" label="Rashid ad-Din Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q978233" start="26586" end="26609" title="an-Nusayriyah Mountains" label="an-Nusayriyah Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623940" start="26631" end="26641" title="List of Ismaili castles" label="fortresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q825818" start="27142" end="27148" title="Masyaf" label="Masyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="27926" end="27939" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988240" start="28857" end="28870" title="Cairo Citadel" label="Cairo Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="29053" end="29057" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="29128" end="29135" title="Moorish" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q771907" start="29575" end="29580" title="Harem, Syria" label="Harim"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="29688" end="29695" title="Ashkelon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311822" start="29753" end="29768" title="William of Tyre" label="William of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="29885" end="29890" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q221447" start="29942" end="29947" title="Ramla" label="Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="29952" end="29955" title="Lod" label="Lod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975358" start="29995" end="30013" title="Gates in Jerusalem&amp;#x27;s Old City Walls" label="Gates of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="30074" end="30097" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="30142" end="30157" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q847287" start="30490" end="30510" title="battle of Montgisard" label="battle of Montgisard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466687" start="30524" end="30529" title="Gezer" label="Gezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="32000" end="32013" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q576368" start="32120" end="32128" title="Quneitra" label="Quneitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q285133" start="32259" end="32266" title="al-Adil" label="al-Adil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="32418" end="32430" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916595" start="32441" end="32458" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q606295" start="32495" end="32501" title="Banias" label="Banias"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="32595" end="32599" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236782" start="33251" end="33271" title="Battle of Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="besiege the fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q188336" start="33360" end="33365" title="Safad" label="Safad"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956065" start="33549" end="33561" title="commissariat" label="commissariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="33590" end="33608" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q174916" start="33773" end="33779" title="Tartus" label="Tartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133431" start="33874" end="33881" title="Artuqid" label="Artuqid"/>
<link wikidata="Q756957" start="33902" end="33907" title="Hasankeyf" label="Keyfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q732201" start="33912" end="33919" title="Geuk Su" label="Geuk Su"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="34156" end="34164" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58982" start="34238" end="34253" title="Kilij Arslan II" label="Kilij Arslan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="34258" end="34278" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Seljuk sultan of Rûm"/>
<link wikidata="Q165995" start="34895" end="34902" title="Malatya" label="Malatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q481455" start="35496" end="35505" title="Abu Shama" label="Abu Shama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="35540" end="35547" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="35581" end="35585" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="35606" end="35611" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="35735" end="35745" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="35886" end="35892" title="Fayyum" label="Fayyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745834" start="36225" end="36245" title="Baha al-Din Qaraqush" label="Baha ad-Din Qaraqush"/>
<link wikidata="Q138986" start="36332" end="36337" title="Zabid" label="Zabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q742319" start="36364" end="36388" title="Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani" label="Imad ad-Din al-Ishfahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="37063" end="37067" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050784" start="37545" end="37555" title="Izz ad-Din Mas&amp;#x27;ud" label="Izz ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q955690" start="37992" end="37998" title="Sinjar" label="Sinjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208154" start="38407" end="38411" title="Najd" label="Najd"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="38641" end="38656" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="38660" end="38665" title="Ailah" label="Ailah"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="38685" end="38698" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362749" start="38758" end="38766" title="Montreal (Crusader castle)" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="38907" end="38914" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915531" start="38924" end="38933" title="Daburiyya" label="Daburiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="39068" end="39075" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="39108" end="39115" title="Bethsan" label="Bethsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836863" start="39166" end="39205" title="Battle of Belvoir Castle" label="inconclusive battle near Belvoir Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="39381" end="39393" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="39397" end="39403" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="39561" end="39572" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639250" start="39584" end="39607" title="Gökböri" label="Muzaffar ad-Din Gökböri"/>
<link wikidata="Q199547" start="39634" end="39640" title="Harran" label="Harran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="39989" end="39998" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070004" start="40143" end="40167" title="Nur al-Din Muhammad" label="Nur ad-Din of Hisn Kayfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="40251" end="40257" title="Edessa, Mesopotamia" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q917836" start="40276" end="40281" title="Saruj" label="Saruj"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="40288" end="40293" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092772" start="40295" end="40304" title="Circesium" label="Qirqesiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553052" start="40309" end="40317" title="Nusaybin" label="Nusaybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q284750" start="41942" end="41950" title="an-Nasir" label="an-Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="42965" end="42972" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828499" start="43388" end="43423" title="Crusader raids on the Red Sea" label="Raynald de Châtillon had sent ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q81611" start="43431" end="43444" title="Gulf of Aqaba" label="Gulf of Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="43493" end="43500" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q367319" start="43870" end="43880" title="Ibn Jubair" label="Ibn Jubair"/>
<link wikidata="Q404028" start="43993" end="43998" title="Aidab" label="Aidab"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="44046" end="44052" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="44064" end="44072" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="44086" end="44096" title="Al-Maqrizi" label="Al-Maqrizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83387" start="45278" end="45282" title="Amid" label="Amid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="46690" end="46704" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="46706" end="46713" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="46736" end="46743" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="46752" end="46759" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q165444" start="47087" end="47093" title="Tikrit" label="Tikrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625867" start="47095" end="47100" title="Daquq" label="Daquq"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="47102" end="47111" title="Khuzestan" label="Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q221883" start="47113" end="47124" title="Kish Island" label="Kish Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="47130" end="47134" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338" start="47529" end="47535" title="Aintab" label="Aintab"/>
<link wikidata="Q206231" start="47744" end="47761" title="Citadel of Aleppo" label="Citadel of Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837229" start="47834" end="47843" title="Bab al-Jinan" label="Bab Janan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="48666" end="48672" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="49518" end="49525" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="49576" end="49582" title="mamluk" label="mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="49628" end="49633" title="Bosra" label="Busra"/>
<link wikidata="Q771907" start="49675" end="49680" title="Harem, Syria" label="Harim"/>
<link wikidata="Q349062" start="49862" end="49885" title="Bohemond III, Prince of Antioch" label="Bohemond III of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="50053" end="50060" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="50093" end="50100" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="50648" end="50668" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="50751" end="50758" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="50856" end="50861" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="50866" end="50872" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="50916" end="50928" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="50939" end="50945" title="Beisan" label="Beisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362749" start="51104" end="51111" title="Shaubak" label="Shaubak"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="51122" end="51128" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="51195" end="51210" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132798" start="51222" end="51231" title="Sepphoris" label="Sepphoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q152462" start="51235" end="51242" title="Afula" label="al-Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q603425" start="51327" end="51336" title="Ain Jalut" label="Ain Jalut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899965" start="51594" end="51605" title="Zir&amp;#x27;in" label="Zir&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916840" start="51607" end="51615" title="Taibe, Galilee" label="Forbelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193785" start="51621" end="51632" title="Mount Tabor" label="Mount Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246708" start="51673" end="51696" title="Battle of Al-Fule (1183)" label="attack their main force"/>
<link wikidata="Q815156" start="51845" end="51859" title="Siege of Kerak" label="besieged Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006572" start="51888" end="51901" title="Oultrejordain" label="Oultrejordain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="52436" end="52441" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="52566" end="52576" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q304840" start="52581" end="52586" title="Jibal" label="Jibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="52635" end="52651" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="52976" end="52980" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="53691" end="53711" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="53822" end="53837" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329104" start="53839" end="53851" title="King Consort" label="King Consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="53870" end="53892" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="53900" end="53916" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="54175" end="54184" title="execution" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="54424" end="54432" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="54949" end="54958" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="55144" end="55153" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q815161" start="55213" end="55220" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1187)" label="a siege"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55307" end="55315" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem#Population" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q374385" start="55342" end="55358" title="Balian of Ibelin" label="Balian of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="55468" end="55484" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="55493" end="55507" title="Qibli Mosque" label="al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q653774" start="55990" end="56022" title="Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem" label="Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="56482" end="56489" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="56545" end="56549" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="56578" end="56585" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169329" start="56871" end="56891" title="Conrad of Montferrat" label="Conrad of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176345" start="56937" end="56947" title="Siege of Tyre (1187)" label="two sieges"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="57043" end="57063" title="Sibylla of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="57101" end="57108" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="57257" end="57271" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="besieging Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q244007" start="57315" end="57331" title="Tamar of Georgia" label="Tamar of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253568" start="57359" end="57382" title="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad" label="Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="57430" end="57439" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q654608" start="57679" end="57695" title="Jacques de Vitry" label="Jacques de Vitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22243199" start="57701" end="57715" title="Latin Catholic Diocese of Acre" label="Bishop of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="57729" end="57738" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="57975" end="57985" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="58068" end="58084" title="battle of Hattin" label="battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246960" start="58526" end="58532" title="Hattin" label="Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="58572" end="58585" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573647" start="58647" end="58660" title="Saladin tithe" label="Saladin tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="58676" end="58690" title="Richard I of England" label="King Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="58715" end="58719" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="58721" end="58739" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="conquered the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784466" start="58744" end="58752" title="Massacre at Ayyadieh" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="58773" end="58789" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q940026" start="58888" end="58903" title="Battle of Arsuf" label="Battle of Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q235418" start="59599" end="59603" title="Joan of England, Queen of Sicily" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091197" start="59832" end="59862" title="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany" label="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008448" start="60407" end="60429" title="Battle of Jaffa (1192)" label="Battle of Jaffa (1192)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="60994" end="61002" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q257153" start="61271" end="61280" title="Mausoleum of Saladin" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183562" start="61307" end="61321" title="Umayyad Mosque" label="Umayyad Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="61335" end="61340" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="61534" end="61544" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="61548" end="61555" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q742319" start="61843" end="61866" title="Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani" label="Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q767220" start="62076" end="62099" title="Al-Afdal ibn Salah ad-Din" label="al-Afḍal Nur ad-Din Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q249058" start="62164" end="62208" title="al-Aziz Uthman" label="al-&amp;#x27;Azīz Imad ad-Din Abu al-Fath Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q287039" start="62276" end="62316" title="Az-Zahir Ghazi" label="al-Ẓāhir Ghiyath ad-Din Abu Mansur Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29890657" start="62379" end="62429" title="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;azzam Turanshah ibn Salah al-Din" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;aẓẓam Fakhr ad-Din Abu Mansur Turanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="62664" end="62690" title="Al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil Muhammad ibn Adil"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197547" start="62935" end="62946" title="concubinage in Islam" label="slave-women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084969" start="62959" end="62978" title="Ismat al-Din Khatun" label="Ismat ad-Din Khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="62993" end="63009" title="Nur al-Din Zengi" label="Nur ad-Din Zengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q294281" start="63120" end="63135" title="al-Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="al-Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340372" start="63226" end="63233" title="Islamic culture" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="63235" end="63239" title="Arab culture" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082380" start="63241" end="63248" title="Turkish culture" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282291" start="63253" end="63268" title="Kurdish culture" label="Kurdish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q451427" start="63342" end="63353" title="Usama ibn Munqidh" label="ibn Munqidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="63413" end="63428" title="Rashidun Caliph" label="Rashidun Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q316443" start="63456" end="63473" title="Mehmet Akif Ersoy" label="Mehmet Akif Ersoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="63502" end="63508" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="63534" end="63548" title="German emperor" label="German emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="63549" end="63559" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q267028" start="63560" end="63587" title="Wilhelm II&amp;#x27;s voyage to the Levant in 1898" label="visited Saladin&amp;#x27;s tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="63633" end="63649" title="anti-imperialist" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="63690" end="63700" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="63929" end="63941" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q192960" start="63988" end="63995" title="Baybars" label="Baybars"/>
<link wikidata="Q841753" start="64155" end="64166" title="Governorates of Iraq" label="governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170047" start="64194" end="64201" title="Samarra" label="Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="64216" end="64220" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q190131" start="64221" end="64239" title="Saladin Governorate" label="is named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q369629" start="64247" end="64268" title="Salahaddin University" label="Salahaddin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="64272" end="64277" title="Erbil" label="Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="64299" end="64314" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="64340" end="64345" title="Erbil" label="Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988240" start="64488" end="64504" title="Citadel of Cairo" label="Citadel of Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="64660" end="64667" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="64739" end="64754" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="64891" end="64907" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="64961" end="64982" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="65105" end="65114" title="Crusaders" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="65185" end="65192" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="65354" end="65372" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q358209" start="65395" end="65411" title="Eagle of Saladin" label="Eagle of Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138583" start="65517" end="65537" title="Coat of arms of the United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186593" start="65539" end="65543" title="Coat of arms of Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65545" end="65550" title="Coat of arms of Libya#Libya under Gaddafi" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q642877" start="65556" end="65574" title="Coat of arms of Palestine" label="State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318966" start="65580" end="65585" title="Emblem of Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002418" start="65595" end="65609" title="Shia Islam in Egypt" label="Egyptian Shias"/>
<link wikidata="Q44385" start="65908" end="65934" title="Walther von der Vogelweide" label="Walther von der Vogelweide"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="65957" end="65973" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q689252" start="66099" end="66114" title="Jans der Enikel" label="Jans der Enikel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="66265" end="66282" title="The Divine Comedy" label="The Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="66302" end="66307" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q270710" start="66362" end="66367" title="limbo" label="limbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16438" start="66429" end="66442" title="The Decameron" label="The Decameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="66507" end="66518" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="66585" end="66592" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q286611" start="66611" end="66626" title="Nathan the Wise" label="Nathan the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="66771" end="66783" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q952340" start="66803" end="66815" title="The Talisman (Scott novel)" label="The Talisman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67098" end="67113" title="Albert Champdor" label="Albert Champdor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="67439" end="67453" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="67639" end="67646" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817642" start="68316" end="68342" title="World History Encyclopedia" label="World History Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q952340" start="68872" end="68884" title="The Talisman (Scott novel)" label="The Talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="68894" end="68906" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364144" start="69037" end="69069" title="Crusades trilogy" label="The &amp;quot;Crusades&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315773" start="69085" end="69096" title="Jan Guillou" label="Jan Guillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="69194" end="69202" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512406" start="69316" end="69335" title="The Book of Saladin" label="The Book of Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314787" start="69352" end="69361" title="Tariq Ali" label="Tariq Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="69478" end="69484" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="69485" end="69495" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557611" start="69564" end="69579" title="Ghulam Mohammed (composer)" label="Ghulam Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295944" start="69595" end="69604" title="Rattan Bai" label="Ratan Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922565" start="69616" end="69627" title="Mazhar Khan (actor, born 1905)" label="Mazhar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="69631" end="69638" title="Richard I" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="69655" end="69663" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q285133" start="69683" end="69692" title="Al-Adil I" label="Saifuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16750607" start="69694" end="69699" title="Yakub (actor)" label="Yakub"/>
<link wikidata="Q169329" start="69703" end="69709" title="Conrad of Montferrat" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248337" start="69711" end="69720" title="Ishwarlal" label="Ishwarlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913574" start="69748" end="69756" title="Humphrey IV of Toron" label="Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="69771" end="69780" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q251692" start="69821" end="69843" title="Saladin the Victorious" label="Saladin the Victorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600111" start="69859" end="69867" title="Cinema of Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="69868" end="69882" title="War drama" label="war drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166105" start="69884" end="69896" title="Ahmed Mazhar" label="Ahmed Mazhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403450" start="69909" end="69923" title="Salah Zulfikar" label="Salah Zulfikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="69961" end="69968" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="69978" end="69988" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893310" start="70021" end="70032" title="Bernard Kay" label="Bernard Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415039" start="70058" end="70069" title="The Crusade (Doctor Who)" label="The Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q499644" start="70085" end="70098" title="Julian Glover" label="Julian Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="70102" end="70123" title="Richard I" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="70151" end="70167" title="William Hartnell" label="William Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471880" start="70169" end="70184" title="William Russell (English actor)" label="William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q671093" start="70186" end="70201" title="Jacqueline Hill" label="Jacqueline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471011" start="70206" end="70226" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989412" start="70230" end="70246" title="The First Doctor" label="The First Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658096" start="70248" end="70262" title="Ian Chesterton" label="Ian Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493244" start="70264" end="70278" title="Barbara Wright (Doctor Who)" label="Barbara Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556957" start="70283" end="70288" title="Vicki (Doctor Who)" label="Vicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="70312" end="70329" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q546669" start="70372" end="70387" title="Ghassan Massoud" label="Ghassan Massoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430677" start="70397" end="70427" title="King Richard and the Crusaders" label="King Richard and the Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="70470" end="70482" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12220155" start="70492" end="70515" title="Salah Al-deen Al-Ayyobi (TV series)" label="Salah ad-Deen Al-Ayyobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110174294" start="70653" end="70683" title="Kudüs Fatihi Selahaddin Eyyubi" label="Kudüs Fatihi Selahaddin Eyyubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583277" start="70750" end="70760" title="Uğur Güneş (actor)" label="Uğur Güneş"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181904" start="70813" end="70825" title="Milind Soman" label="Milind Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868663" start="70956" end="70968" title="Civilization (series)" label="Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="71031" end="71039" title="Ayyubids" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418673" start="71098" end="71114" title="Gods &amp;amp; Kings" label="Gods &amp;amp; Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385" start="71135" end="71149" title="Civilization V" label="Civilization V"/>
<link wikidata="Q34852" start="71281" end="71316" title="Age of Empires II" label="Age of Empires II: The Age of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604501" start="71403" end="71420" title="Statue of Saladin" label="Statue of Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206246" start="71516" end="71535" title="Citadel of Damascus" label="Citadel of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678596" start="71543" end="71567" title="Ancient City of Damascus" label="Ancient City of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="71605" end="71623" title=":Category:Battles of Saladin" label="Battles of Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563085" start="71626" end="71648" title="List of Ayyubid rulers" label="List of Ayyubid rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576257" start="71651" end="71690" title="List of Kurdish dynasties and countries" label="List of Kurdish dynasties and countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q388979" start="71693" end="71712" title="Sharafkhan Bidlisi" label="Sharaf Khan Bidlisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900760" start="71721" end="71774" title="Libellus de expugnatione Terrae Sanctae per Saladinum" label="Libellus de expugnatione Terrae Sanctae per Saladinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="71789" end="71806" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430677" start="71821" end="71851" title="King Richard and the Crusaders" label="King Richard and the Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q251692" start="71866" end="71888" title="Saladin the Victorious" label="Saladin the Victorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q12220155" start="71903" end="71927" title="Salah al-Din (TV series)" label="Salah ad-Din (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12235706" start="71936" end="71950" title="Kufranjah City" label="Kufranjah City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507766" start="71959" end="71983" title="Arn – The Knight Templar" label="Arn – The Knight Templar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26984" wikidata="Q7235" url="?curid=26984" title="Sophocles">
<text>Sophocles ( 497/496 – winter 406/405 BC) was an ancient Greek tragedian known as one of three from whom at least one play has survived in full. His first plays were written later than, or contemporary with, those of Aeschylus and earlier than, or contemporary with, those of Euripides. Sophocles wrote more than 120 plays, but only seven have survived in a complete form: &quot;Ajax&quot;, &quot;Antigone&quot;, &quot;Women of Trachis&quot;, &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;, &quot;Electra&quot;, &quot;Philoctetes&quot;, and &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;. For almost fifty years, Sophocles was the most celebrated playwright in the dramatic competitions of the city-state of Athens, which took place during the religious festivals of the Lenaea and the Dionysia. He competed in thirty competitions, won twenty-four, and was never judged lower than second place. Aeschylus won thirteen competitions and was sometimes defeated by Sophocles; Euripides won four.

The most famous tragedies of Sophocles feature Oedipus and Antigone: they are generally known as the Theban plays, though each was part of a different tetralogy (the other members of which are now lost). Sophocles influenced the development of drama, most importantly by adding a third actor (attributed to Sophocles by Aristotle; to Aeschylus by Themistius), thereby reducing the importance of the chorus in the presentation of the plot. He also developed his characters to a greater extent than earlier playwrights.

==Life==
Sophocles, the son of Sophillus, was a wealthy member of the rural &quot;deme&quot; (small community) of Hippeius Colonus in Attica, which was to become a setting for one of his plays; and he was probably born there, a few years before the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC: the exact year is unclear, but 497/6 is most likely. He was born into a wealthy family (his father was an armour manufacturer) and was highly educated. His first artistic triumph was in 468 BC, when he took first prize in the Dionysia, beating the reigning master of Athenian drama, Aeschylus. According to Plutarch, the victory came under unusual circumstances: instead of following the usual custom of choosing judges by lot, the archon asked Cimon, and the other &quot;strategoi&quot; present, to decide the victor of the contest. Plutarch further contends that, following this loss, Aeschylus soon left for Sicily. Though Plutarch says that this was Sophocles&#x27; first production, it is now thought that his first production was probably in 470 BC. &quot;Triptolemus&quot; was perhaps one of the plays that Sophocles presented at this festival.

In 480 BC, Sophocles was chosen to lead the paean (a choral chant to a god), celebrating the Greek victory over the Persians at the Battle of Salamis. Early in his career, the politician Cimon might have been one of his patrons, but if he was, there was no ill will borne by Pericles, Cimon&#x27;s rival, when Cimon was ostracized in 461 BC. In 443/2, Sophocles served as one of the &quot;Hellenotamiai&quot;, or treasurers of Athena, helping to manage the finances of the city during the political ascendancy of Pericles. In 441 BC, according to the &quot;Vita Sophoclis&quot;, he was elected one of the ten generals, executive officials at Athens, as a junior colleague of Pericles; and he served in the Athenian campaign against Samos. He was supposed to have been elected to this position due to his production of &quot;Antigone&quot;, but this is &quot;most improbable&quot;.

In 420 BC, he was chosen to receive the image of Asclepius in his own house when the cult was being introduced to Athens and lacked a proper place (τέμενος). For this, the Athenians gave him the posthumous epithet &quot;Dexion&quot; (receiver). But &quot;some doubt attaches to this story&quot;. He was also elected, in 411 BC, one of the commissioners (&quot;probouloi&quot;) who responded to the catastrophic destruction of the Athenian expeditionary force in Sicily during the Peloponnesian War.

Sophocles died at the age of 90 or 91 in the winter of 406/5 BC, having seen, within his lifetime, both the Greek triumph in the Persian Wars and the bloodletting of the Peloponnesian War. As with many famous men in classical antiquity, his death inspired a number of apocryphal stories. One claimed that he died from the strain of trying to recite a long sentence from his &quot;Antigone&quot; without pausing to take a breath. Another account suggests he choked while eating grapes at the Anthesteria festival in Athens. A third holds that he died of happiness after winning his final victory at the City Dionysia. A few months later, a comic poet, in a play titled &quot;The Muses&quot;, wrote this eulogy: &quot;Blessed is Sophocles, who had a long life, was a man both happy and talented, and the writer of many good tragedies; and he ended his life well without suffering any misfortune.&quot; According to some accounts, however, his own sons tried to have him declared incompetent near the end of his life, and he refuted their charge in court by reading from his new &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;. One of his sons, Iophon, and a grandson, also named Sophocles (son of Ariston), also became playwrights.
A very ancient source, Athenaeus&#x27;s work &quot;Sophists at Dinner&quot;, contains references to Sophocles&#x27; sexuality. In that work, a character named Myrtilus claims that Sophocles &quot;was partial to boys, in the same way that Euripides was partial to women&quot; (&quot;φιλομεῖραξ δὲ ἦν ὁ Σοφοκλῆς, ὡς Εὐριπίδης φιλογύνης&quot;), and relates an anecdote, attributed to Ion of Chios, of Sophocles flirting with a serving-boy at a symposium: He also says that Hieronymus of Rhodes, in his &quot;Historical Notes&quot;, claims that Sophocles once led a boy outside the city walls for sex; and that the boy snatched Sophocles&#x27; cloak (χλανίς, &quot;khlanis&quot;), leaving his own child-sized robe (&quot;παιδικὸν ἱμάτιον&quot;) for Sophocles. Moreover, when Euripides heard about this (it was much discussed), he mocked the disdainful treatment, saying that he had himself had sex with the boy, &quot;but had not given him anything more than his usual fee&quot; (&quot;ἀλλὰ μηδὲν προσθεῖναι&quot;), or, &quot;but that nothing had been taken off&quot; (&quot;ἀλλὰ μηδὲν προεθῆναι&quot;). In response, Sophocles composed this elegy: 

==Works and legacy==

Sophocles is known for innovations in dramatic structure; deeper development of characters than earlier playwrights; and, if it was not Aeschylus, the addition of a third actor, which further reduced the role of the chorus, and increased opportunities for development and conflict. Aeschylus, who dominated Athenian playwriting during Sophocles&#x27; early career, adopted the third actor into his own work. Besides the third actor, Aristotle credits Sophocles with the introduction of &quot;skenographia&quot;, or scenery-painting; but this too is attributed elsewhere to someone else (by Vitruvius, to Agatharchus of Samos). After Aeschylus died, in 456 BC, Sophocles became the pre-eminent playwright in Athens, winning competitions at eighteen Dionysia, and six Lenaia festivals. His reputation was such that foreign rulers invited him to attend their courts; but, unlike Aeschylus, who died in Sicily, or Euripides, who spent time in Macedon, Sophocles never accepted any of these invitations. Aristotle, in his &quot;Poetics&quot; (), used Sophocles&#x27; &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot; as an example of the highest achievement in tragedy.

Only two of the seven surviving plays can be dated securely: &quot;Philoctetes&quot; to 409 BC, and &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot; to 401 BC (staged after his death, by his grandson). Of the others, &quot;Electra&quot; shows stylistic similarities to these two, suggesting that it was probably written in the later part of his career; &quot;Ajax&quot;, &quot;Antigone&quot;, and &quot;The Trachiniae&quot;, are generally thought early, again based on stylistic elements; and &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot; is put in a middle period. Most of Sophocles&#x27; plays show an undercurrent of early fatalism, and the beginnings of Socratic logic as a mainstay for the long tradition of Greek tragedy.

===Theban plays===
The Theban plays comprise three plays: &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot; (also called &quot;Oedipus Tyrannus&quot; or &quot;Oedipus the King&quot;), &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, and &quot;Antigone&quot;. All three concern the fate of Thebes during and after the reign of King Oedipus. They have often been published under a single cover; but Sophocles wrote them for separate festival competitions, many years apart. The Theban plays are not a proper trilogy (i.e. three plays presented as a continuous narrative), nor an intentional series; they contain inconsistencies. Sophocles also wrote other plays pertaining to Thebes, such as the &quot;Epigoni&quot;, but only fragments have survived.

====Subjects====
The three plays involve the tale of Oedipus, who kills his father and marries his mother, not knowing they are his parents. His family is cursed for three generations.

In &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;, Oedipus is the protagonist. His infanticide is planned by his parents, Laius and Jocasta, to prevent him fulfilling a prophecy; but the servant entrusted with the infanticide passes the infant on, through a series of intermediaries, to a childless couple, who adopt him, not knowing his history. Oedipus eventually learns of the Delphic Oracle&#x27;s prophecy of him, that he would kill his father, and marry his mother; he attempts to flee his fate without harming those he knows as his parents (at this point, he does not know that he is adopted). Oedipus meets a man at a crossroads accompanied by servants; Oedipus and the man fight, and Oedipus kills the man (who was his father, Laius, although neither knew at the time). He becomes the ruler of Thebes after solving the riddle of the Sphinx and in the process, marries the widowed queen, his mother Jocasta. Thus the stage is set for horror. When the truth comes out, following from another true but confusing prophecy from Delphi, Jocasta commits suicide, Oedipus blinds himself and leaves Thebes. At the end of the play, order is restored. This restoration is seen when Creon, brother of Jocasta, becomes king, and also when Oedipus, before going off to exile, asks Creon to take care of his children. Oedipus&#x27;s children will always bear the weight of shame and humiliation because of their father&#x27;s actions.

In &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, the banished Oedipus and his daughter Antigone arrive at the town of Colonus, where they encounter Theseus, King of Athens. Oedipus dies and strife begins between his sons Polyneices and Eteocles. They fight, and simultaneously run each other through.

In &quot;Antigone&quot;, the protagonist is Oedipus&#x27; daughter, Antigone. She is faced with the choice of allowing her brother Polyneices&#x27; body to remain unburied, outside the city walls, exposed to the ravages of wild animals, or to bury him and face death. The king of the land, Creon, has forbidden the burial of Polyneices for he was a traitor to the city. Antigone decides to bury his body and face the consequences of her actions. Creon sentences her to death. Eventually, Creon is persuaded to free Antigone from her punishment, but his decision comes too late and Antigone commits suicide. Her suicide triggers the suicide of two others close to King Creon: his son, Haemon, who was to wed Antigone, and his wife, Eurydice, who commits suicide after losing her only surviving son.

====Composition and inconsistencies====
The plays were written across thirty-six years of Sophocles&#x27; career and were not composed in chronological order, but instead were written in the order &quot;Antigone&quot;, &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;, and &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;. Nor were they composed as a &quot;trilogy&quot; – a group of plays to be performed together, but are the remaining parts of three different groups of plays. As a result, there are some inconsistencies: notably, Creon is the undisputed king at the end of &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot; and, in consultation with Apollo, single-handedly makes the decision to expel Oedipus from Thebes. Creon is also instructed to look after Oedipus&#x27; daughters Antigone and Ismene at the end of &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;. By contrast, in the other plays there is some struggle with Oedipus&#x27; sons Eteocles and Polynices in regard to the succession. In &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, Sophocles attempts to work these inconsistencies into a coherent whole: Ismene explains that, in light of their tainted family lineage, her brothers were at first willing to cede the throne to Creon. Nevertheless, they eventually decided to take charge of the monarchy, with each brother disputing the other&#x27;s right to succeed. In addition to being in a clearly more powerful position in &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, Eteocles and Polynices are also culpable: they consent (l. 429, Theodoridis, tr.) to their father&#x27;s going to exile, which is one of his bitterest charges against them.

===Other plays===
In addition to the three Theban plays, there are four surviving plays by Sophocles: &quot;Ajax&quot;, &quot;Women of Trachis&quot;, &quot;Electra&quot;, and &quot;Philoctetes&quot;, the last of which won first prize in 409 BC.

&quot;Ajax&quot; focuses on the proud hero of the Trojan War, Telamonian Ajax, who is driven to treachery and eventually suicide. Ajax becomes gravely upset when Achilles’ armor is presented to Odysseus instead of himself. Despite their enmity toward him, Odysseus persuades the kings Menelaus and Agamemnon to grant Ajax a proper burial.

&quot;The Women of Trachis&quot; (named for the Trachinian women who make up the chorus) dramatizes Deianeira&#x27;s accidentally killing Heracles after he had completed his famous twelve labors. Tricked into thinking it is a love charm, Deianeira applies poison to an article of Heracles&#x27; clothing; this poisoned robe causes Heracles to die an excruciating death. Upon learning the truth, Deianeira commits suicide.

&quot;Electra&quot; corresponds roughly to the plot of Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;Libation Bearers&quot;. It details how Electra and Orestes avenge their father Agamemnon&#x27;s murder by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus.

&quot;Philoctetes&quot; retells the story of Philoctetes, an archer who had been abandoned on Lemnos by the rest of the Greek fleet while on the way to Troy. After learning that they cannot win the Trojan War without Philoctetes&#x27; bow, the Greeks send Odysseus and Neoptolemus to retrieve him; due to the Greeks&#x27; earlier treachery, however, Philoctetes refuses to rejoin the army. It is only Heracles&#x27; deus ex machina appearance that persuades Philoctetes to go to Troy.

=== Fragmentary plays ===
Although more than 120 titles of plays associated with Sophocles are known and presented below, little is known of the precise dating of most of them. &quot;Philoctetes&quot; is known to have been written in 409 BC, and &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot; is known to have only been performed in 401 BC, posthumously, at the initiation of Sophocles&#x27; grandson. The convention on writing plays for the Greek festivals was to submit them in tetralogies of three tragedies along with one satyr play. Along with the unknown dating of the vast majority of more than 120 plays, it is also largely unknown how the plays were grouped. It is, however, known that the three plays referred to in the modern era as the &quot;Theban plays&quot; were never performed together in Sophocles&#x27; own lifetime, and are therefore not a trilogy (which they are sometimes erroneously seen as).

Fragments of &quot;Ichneutae&quot; (&quot;Tracking Satyrs&quot;) were discovered in Egypt in 1907. These amount to about half of the play, making it the best preserved satyr play after Euripides&#x27; &quot;Cyclops&quot;, which survives in its entirety. Fragments of the &quot;Epigoni&quot; were discovered in April 2005 by classicists at Oxford University with the help of infrared technology previously used for satellite imaging. The tragedy tells the story of the second siege of Thebes. A number of other Sophoclean works have survived only in fragments, including:

===Sophocles&#x27; view of his own work===
There is a passage of Plutarch&#x27;s tract &quot;De Profectibus in Virtute 7 &quot; in which Sophocles discusses his own growth as a writer. A likely source of this material for Plutarch was the &quot;Epidemiae&quot; of Ion of Chios, a book that recorded many conversations of Sophocles; but a Hellenistic dialogue about tragedy, in which Sophocles appeared as a character, is also plausible. The former is a likely candidate to have contained Sophocles&#x27; discourse on his own development because Ion was a friend of Sophocles, and the book is known to have been used by Plutarch. Though some interpretations of Plutarch&#x27;s words suggest that Sophocles says that he imitated Aeschylus, the translation does not fit grammatically, nor does the interpretation that Sophocles said that he was making fun of Aeschylus&#x27; works. C. M. Bowra argues for the following translation of the line:
&quot;After practising to the full the bigness of Aeschylus, then the painful ingenuity of my own invention, now in the third stage I am changing to the kind of diction which is most expressive of character and best.&quot;

Here Sophocles says that he has completed a stage of Aeschylus&#x27; work, meaning that he went through a phase of imitating Aeschylus&#x27; style but is finished with that. Sophocles&#x27; opinion of Aeschylus was mixed. He certainly respected him enough to imitate his work early on in his career, but he had reservations about Aeschylus&#x27; style, and thus did not keep his imitation up. Sophocles&#x27; first stage, in which he imitated Aeschylus, is marked by &quot;Aeschylean pomp in the language&quot;. Sophocles&#x27; second stage was entirely his own. He introduced new ways of evoking feeling out of an audience, as in his &quot;Ajax&quot;, when Ajax is mocked by Athene, then the stage is emptied so that he may commit suicide alone. Sophocles mentions a third stage, distinct from the other two, in his discussion of his development. The third stage pays more heed to diction. His characters spoke in a way that was more natural to them and more expressive of their individual character feelings.

==Locations named after==
* Sophocles (crater), a crater on Mercury.

== See also ==
* Theatre of ancient Greece

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Beer, Josh (2004). &quot;Sophocles and the Tragedy of Athenian Democracy&quot;. Greenwood Publishing. 
* 
* Freeman, Charles. (1999). &quot;The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World&quot;. New York: Viking Press. 
* Hubbard, Thomas K. (2003). &quot;Homosexuality in Greece and Rome: A Sourcebook of Basic Documents&quot;.
* Johnson, Marguerite, &amp; Terry Ryan (2005). &quot;Sexuality in Greek and Roman Society and Literature: A Sourcebook&quot;. Routledge. 
* Lloyd-Jones, Hugh, &amp; Wilson, Nigel Guy (ed.) (1990). &quot;Sophoclis: Fabulae&quot;. Oxford Classical Texts.
* Lloyd-Jones, Hugh (ed.) (1994). &quot;Sophocles: Ajax. Electra. Oedipus Tyrannus&quot;. Edited and translated by Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Loeb Classical Library No. 20.
* Lloyd-Jones, Hugh (ed.) (1994). &quot;Sophocles: Antigone. The Women of Trachis. Philoctetes. Oedipus at Colonus&quot;. Edited and translated by Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Loeb Classical Library No. 21.
* Lloyd-Jones, Hugh (ed.) (1996). &quot;Sophocles: Fragments&quot;. Edited and translated by Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Loeb Classical Library No. 483.
* Lucas, Donald William (1964). &quot;The Greek Tragic Poets&quot;. W.W. Norton &amp; Co.
* Plato. &quot;Plato in Twelve Volumes&quot;, Vols 5 &amp; 6 translated by Paul Shorey. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1969.
* Schultz, Ferdinand (1835). &quot;De vita Sophoclis poetae commentatio&quot;. Phil. Diss., Berlin.
* Scullion, Scott (2002). &quot;Tragic dates&quot;, &quot;Classical Quarterly&quot;, new sequence 52, pp. 81–101.
* 
* Sommerstein, Alan Herbert (2002). &quot;Greek Drama and Dramatists&quot;. Routledge. 
* Sommerstein, Alan Herbert (2007). &quot;General Introduction&quot;, pp. xi–xxix in Sommerstein, A. H., Fitzpatrick, D.. and Tallboy, T. &quot;Sophocles: Selected Fragmentary Plays: Volume 1&quot;. Aris and Phillips. 
* Sophocles. &quot;Sophocles I: Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone&quot;. 2nd ed. Grene, David, and Lattimore, Richard, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1991.
* Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. &quot;Macropaedia Knowledge In Depth&quot;. &quot;The New Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Volume 20. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 2005. 344–46.

==External links==

* 
* 
* Works by Sophocles at the Perseus Digital Library (Greek and English)
* SORGLL: Sophocles, Electra 1126–1170; read by Rachel Kitzinger </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="0" end="9" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34620" start="48" end="71" title="Greek tragedy" label="ancient Greek tragedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="216" end="225" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="275" end="284" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="378" end="382" title="Ajax (play)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="396" end="404" title="Antigone (Sophocles play)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="418" end="434" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="448" end="459" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="473" end="480" title="Electra (Sophocles play)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415903" start="494" end="505" title="Philoctetes (Sophocles)" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="523" end="541" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="654" end="664" title="Polis" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="668" end="674" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600879" start="731" end="737" title="Lenaea" label="Lenaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="746" end="754" title="City Dionysia" label="Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="1000" end="1007" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131351" start="1012" end="1020" title="Antigone" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="1054" end="1066" title="Three Theban plays" label="Theban plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="1104" end="1113" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="1197" end="1202" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="1352" end="1358" title="Greek chorus" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="1386" end="1390" title="Plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073730" start="1400" end="1424" title="Character arc" label="developed his characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q672490" start="1554" end="1558" title="deme" label="deme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235930" start="1586" end="1602" title="Colonus (Attica)" label="Hippeius Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="1606" end="1612" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q31900" start="1721" end="1739" title="Battle of Marathon" label="Battle of Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="1977" end="1985" title="Dionysia" label="Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="2034" end="2043" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="2058" end="2066" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="2183" end="2189" title="archon" label="archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q218102" start="2196" end="2201" title="Cimon" label="Cimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="2223" end="2232" title="strategoi" label="strategoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600094" start="2648" end="2653" title="paean" label="paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2720" end="2728" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178850" start="2736" end="2753" title="Battle of Salamis" label="Battle of Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218102" start="2791" end="2796" title="Cimon" label="Cimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="2879" end="2887" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q278721" start="2993" end="3006" title="Hellenotamiai" label="Hellenotamiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="3336" end="3341" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="3535" end="3544" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110028" start="3846" end="3855" title="probouloi" label="probouloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3948" end="3954" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="3966" end="3983" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="4115" end="4127" title="Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q339689" start="4477" end="4488" title="Anthesteria" label="Anthesteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907964" start="5111" end="5117" title="Iophon" label="Iophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906545" start="5164" end="5171" title="Ariston (son of Sophocles)" label="Ariston"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="5222" end="5231" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244416" start="5250" end="5268" title="Deipnosophistae" label="Sophists at Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q162163" start="5580" end="5592" title="Ion of Chios" label="Ion of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="5640" end="5649" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036270" start="5669" end="5689" title="Hieronymus of Rhodes" label="Hieronymus of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q781731" start="5925" end="5932" title="himation" label="ἱμάτιον"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="6405" end="6423" title="dramatic structure" label="dramatic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="6583" end="6589" title="Greek chorus" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="6674" end="6682" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174063" start="6971" end="6991" title="Agatharchus" label="Agatharchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="7115" end="7123" title="Dionysia" label="Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600879" start="7133" end="7139" title="Lenaia" label="Lenaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7266" end="7272" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="7306" end="7313" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7366" end="7375" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="7390" end="7397" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="7435" end="7446" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="7497" end="7504" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415903" start="7574" end="7585" title="Philoctetes (Sophocles)" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="7613" end="7631" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="7712" end="7719" title="Electra (Sophocles play)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="7848" end="7852" title="Ajax (Sophocles)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="7866" end="7874" title="Antigone (Sophocles)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="7892" end="7906" title="The Trachiniae" label="The Trachiniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="7988" end="7999" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q29253" start="8093" end="8101" title="fatalism" label="fatalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="8125" end="8133" title="Socrates" label="Socratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="8260" end="8271" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="8360" end="8378" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="8396" end="8404" title="Antigone (Sophocles)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="8442" end="8448" title="Ancient Thebes (Boeotia)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="8484" end="8491" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="8584" end="8605" title="Dionysia" label="festival competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="8659" end="8666" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772085" start="8853" end="8860" title="Epigoni (play)" label="Epigoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="8956" end="8963" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="9098" end="9109" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="9132" end="9143" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="9446" end="9460" title="Delphic Oracle" label="Delphic Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="9894" end="9914" title="riddle of the Sphinx" label="riddle of the Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="10505" end="10523" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235930" start="10600" end="10607" title="Hippeios Colonus" label="Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="10630" end="10637" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="10647" end="10653" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q334817" start="10703" end="10713" title="Polyneices" label="Polyneices"/>
<link wikidata="Q506550" start="10718" end="10726" title="Eteocles" label="Eteocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="10793" end="10801" title="Antigone (Sophocles)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="11786" end="11794" title="Antigone (Sophocles)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="11808" end="11819" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="11837" end="11855" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q732066" start="12074" end="12079" title="Creon of Thebes" label="Creon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131351" start="12303" end="12311" title="Antigone" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q753902" start="12316" end="12322" title="Ismene" label="Ismene"/>
<link wikidata="Q506550" start="12441" end="12449" title="Eteocles" label="Eteocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q334817" start="12454" end="12463" title="Polynices" label="Polynices"/>
<link wikidata="Q412341" start="13235" end="13239" title="Ajax (Sophocles)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="13253" end="13269" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="13283" end="13290" title="Electra (Sophocles)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415903" start="13308" end="13319" title="Philoctetes (Sophocles play)" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="13435" end="13450" title="Ajax the Great" label="Telamonian Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="13535" end="13543" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="13567" end="13575" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="13658" end="13666" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="13671" end="13680" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="13719" end="13739" title="Women of Trachis" label="The Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272000" start="13813" end="13822" title="Deianeira" label="Deianeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="13851" end="13859" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="14213" end="14229" title="Libation Bearers" label="Libation Bearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131651" start="14252" end="14259" title="Electra" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="14264" end="14271" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="14292" end="14301" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="14319" end="14331" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q212091" start="14336" end="14345" title="Aegisthus" label="Aegisthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212827" start="14393" end="14404" title="Philoctetes" label="Philoctetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="14442" end="14448" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="14500" end="14504" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="14546" end="14556" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="14604" end="14612" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="14617" end="14628" title="Neoptolemus" label="Neoptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="14764" end="14779" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976779" start="15260" end="15275" title="Greek festivals" label="Greek festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050848" start="15344" end="15354" title="satyr play" label="satyr play"/>
<link wikidata="Q733158" start="15754" end="15763" title="Ichneutae" label="Ichneutae"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15819" end="15824" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050848" start="15903" end="15913" title="satyr play" label="satyr play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206121" start="15942" end="15949" title="Cyclops (play)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772085" start="16012" end="16019" title="Epigoni (play)" label="Epigoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="16074" end="16091" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="16109" end="16117" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="16149" end="16158" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="16219" end="16225" title="Thebes (Greece)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="16372" end="16380" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q443786" start="17186" end="17197" title="Maurice Bowra" label="C. M. Bowra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15300425" start="18512" end="18530" title="Sophocles (crater)" label="Sophocles (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="18544" end="18551" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="18571" end="18596" title="Theatre of ancient Greece" label="Theatre of ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q658748" start="19206" end="19228" title="Oxford Classical Texts" label="Oxford Classical Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="19363" end="19385" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="19559" end="19581" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="19701" end="19723" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976497" start="20147" end="20166" title="Classical Quarterly" label="Classical Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q639661" start="20928" end="20951" title="Perseus Digital Library" label="Perseus Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26985" wikidata="Q179615" url="?curid=26985" title="Salinity">
<text>Salinity () is the saltiness or amount of salt dissolved in a body of water, called saline water (see also soil salinity). It is usually measured in g/L or g/kg (grams of salt per liter/kilogram of water; the latter is dimensionless and equal to ‰). 

Salinity is an important factor in determining many aspects of the chemistry of natural waters and of biological processes within it, and is a thermodynamic state variable that, along with temperature and pressure, governs physical characteristics like the density and heat capacity of the water.

A contour line of constant salinity is called an &quot;isohaline&quot;, or sometimes &quot;isohale&quot;.

==Definitions==
Salinity in rivers, lakes, and the ocean is conceptually simple, but technically challenging to define and measure precisely. Conceptually the salinity is the quantity of dissolved salt content of the water. Salts are compounds like sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium nitrate, and sodium bicarbonate which dissolve into ions. The concentration of dissolved chloride ions is sometimes referred to as chlorinity. Operationally, dissolved matter is defined as that which can pass through a very fine filter (historically a filter with a pore size of 0.45 μm, but later usually 0.2 μm). Salinity can be expressed in the form of a mass fraction, i.e. the mass of the dissolved material in a unit mass of solution.

Seawater typically has a mass salinity of around 35 g/kg, although lower values are typical near coasts where rivers enter the ocean. Rivers and lakes can have a wide range of salinities, from less than 0.01 g/kg to a few g/kg, although there are many places where higher salinities are found. The Dead Sea has a salinity of more than 200 g/kg. Precipitation typically has a TDS of 20 mg/kg or less.

Whatever pore size is used in the definition, the resulting salinity value of a given sample of natural water will not vary by more than a few percent (%). Physical oceanographers working in the abyssal ocean, however, are often concerned with precision and intercomparability of measurements by different researchers, at different times, to almost five significant digits. A bottled seawater product known as IAPSO Standard Seawater is used by oceanographers to standardize their measurements with enough precision to meet this requirement.

===Composition===
Measurement and definition difficulties arise because natural waters contain a complex mixture of many different elements from different sources (not all from dissolved salts) in different molecular forms. The chemical properties of some of these forms depend on temperature and pressure. Many of these forms are difficult to measure with high accuracy, and in any case complete chemical analysis is not practical when analyzing multiple samples. Different practical definitions of salinity result from different attempts to account for these problems, to different levels of precision, while still remaining reasonably easy to use.

For practical reasons salinity is usually related to the sum of masses of a subset of these dissolved chemical constituents (so-called &quot;solution salinity&quot;), rather than to the unknown mass of salts that gave rise to this composition (an exception is when artificial seawater is created). For many purposes this sum can be limited to a set of eight major ions in natural waters, although for seawater at highest precision an additional seven minor ions are also included. The major ions dominate the inorganic composition of most (but by no means all) natural waters. Exceptions include some pit lakes and waters from some hydrothermal springs.

The concentrations of dissolved gases like oxygen and nitrogen are not usually included in descriptions of salinity. However, carbon dioxide gas, which when dissolved is partially converted into carbonates and bicarbonates, is often included. Silicon in the form of silicic acid, which usually appears as a neutral molecule in the pH range of most natural waters, may also be included for some purposes (e.g., when salinity/density relationships are being investigated).

===Seawater===

The term &quot;salinity&quot; is, for oceanographers, usually associated with one of a set of specific measurement techniques. As the dominant techniques evolve, so do different descriptions of salinity. Salinities were largely measured using titration-based techniques before the 1980s. Titration with silver nitrate could be used to determine the concentration of halide ions (mainly chlorine and bromine) to give a chlorinity. The chlorinity was then multiplied by a factor to account for all other constituents. The resulting &#x27;Knudsen salinities&#x27; are expressed in units of parts per thousand (ppt or ‰).

The use of electrical conductivity measurements to estimate the ionic content of seawater led to the development of the scale called the &quot;practical salinity scale 1978&quot; (PSS-78). Salinities measured using PSS-78 do not have units. The suffix psu or PSU (denoting &quot;practical salinity unit&quot;) is sometimes added to PSS-78 measurement values. The addition of PSU as a unit after the value is &quot;formally incorrect and strongly discouraged&quot;.

In 2010 a new standard for the properties of seawater called the &quot;thermodynamic equation of seawater 2010&quot; (TEOS-10) was introduced, advocating absolute salinity as a replacement for practical salinity, and conservative temperature as a replacement for potential temperature. This standard includes a new scale called the &quot;reference composition salinity scale&quot;. Absolute salinities on this scale are expressed as a mass fraction, in grams per kilogram of solution. Salinities on this scale are determined by combining electrical conductivity measurements with other information that can account for regional changes in the composition of seawater. They can also be determined by making direct density measurements.

A sample of seawater from most locations with a chlorinity of 19.37 ppt will have a Knudsen salinity of 35.00 ppt, a PSS-78 practical salinity of about 35.0, and a TEOS-10 absolute salinity of about 35.2 g/kg. The electrical conductivity of this water at a temperature of 15 °C is 42.9 mS/cm.

On the global scale, it is extremely likely that human-caused climate change has contributed to observed surface and subsurface salinity changes since the 1950s, and projections of surface salinity changes throughout the 21st century indicate that fresh ocean regions will continue to get fresher and salty regions will continue to get saltier.

Salinity is serving as a tracer of different masses. Surface water is pulled in to replace the sinking water, which in turn eventually becomes cold and salty enough to sink. Salinity distribution contributes to shape the oceanic circulation.

===Lakes and rivers===

Limnologists and chemists often define salinity in terms of mass of salt per unit volume, expressed in units of mg/L or g/L. It is implied, although often not stated, that this value applies accurately only at some reference temperature because solution volume varies with temperature. Values presented in this way are typically accurate to the order of 1%. Limnologists also use electrical conductivity, or &quot;reference conductivity&quot;, as a proxy for salinity. This measurement may be corrected for temperature effects, and is usually expressed in units of μS/cm.

A river or lake water with a salinity of around 70 mg/L will typically have a specific conductivity at 25 °C of between 80 and 130 μS/cm. The actual ratio depends on the ions present. The actual conductivity usually changes by about 2% per degree Celsius, so the measured conductivity at 5 °C might only be in the range of 50–80 μS/cm.

Direct density measurements are also used to estimate salinities, particularly in highly saline lakes. Sometimes density at a specific temperature is used as a proxy for salinity. At other times an empirical salinity/density relationship developed for a particular body of water is used to estimate the salinity of samples from a measured density.
==Classification of water bodies based upon salinity==
Marine waters are those of the ocean, another term for which is &quot;euhaline seas&quot;. The salinity of euhaline seas is 30 to 35 ‰. &quot;Brackish seas&quot; or waters have salinity in the range of 0.5 to 29 ‰ and &quot;metahaline seas&quot; from 36 to 40 ‰. These waters are all regarded as &quot;thalassic&quot; because their salinity is derived from the ocean and defined as &quot;homoiohaline&quot; if salinity does not vary much over time (essentially constant). The table on the right, modified from Por (1972), follows the &quot;Venice system&quot; (1959).

In contrast to homoiohaline environments are certain &quot;poikilohaline&quot; environments (which may also be &quot;thalassic&quot;) in which the salinity variation is biologically significant. &quot;Poikilohaline&quot; water salinities may range anywhere from 0.5 to greater than 300 ‰. The important characteristic is that these waters tend to vary in salinity over some biologically meaningful range seasonally or on some other roughly comparable time scale. Put simply, these are bodies of water with quite variable salinity.

Highly saline water, from which salts crystallize (or are about to), is referred to as brine.

==Environmental considerations==
Salinity is an ecological factor of considerable importance, influencing the types of organisms that live in a body of water. As well, salinity influences the kinds of plants that will grow either in a water body, or on land fed by a water (or by a groundwater). A plant adapted to saline conditions is called a halophyte. A halophyte which is tolerant to residual sodium carbonate salinity are called glasswort or saltwort or barilla plants. Organisms (mostly bacteria) that can live in very salty conditions are classified as extremophiles, or halophiles specifically. An organism that can withstand a wide range of salinities is euryhaline.

Salts are expensive to remove from water, and salt content is an important factor in water use, factoring into potability and suitability for irrigation. Increases in salinity have been observed in lakes and rivers in the United States, due to common road salt and other salt de-icers in runoff.

The degree of salinity in oceans is a driver of the world&#x27;s ocean circulation, where density changes due to both salinity changes and temperature changes at the surface of the ocean produce changes in buoyancy, which cause the sinking and rising of water masses. Changes in the salinity of the oceans are thought to contribute to global changes in carbon dioxide as more saline waters are less soluble to carbon dioxide. In addition, during glacial periods, the hydrography is such that a possible cause of reduced circulation is the production of stratified oceans. In such cases, it is more difficult to subduct water through the thermohaline circulation. 

Not only is salinity a driver of ocean circulation, but changes in ocean circulation also affect salinity, particularly in the subpolar North Atlantic where from 1990 to 2010 increased contributions of Greenland meltwater were counteracted by increased northward transport of salty Atlantic waters. However, North Atlantic waters have become fresher since the mid-2010s due to increased Greenland meltwater flux.

==See also==
*Desalination for economic purposes
**Desalination of water
**Desalination of soil: soil salinity control
**Sodium adsorption ratio
* Measuring salinity
**Salinometer
* Salinity by biologic context
** In organisms generally, with particular emphasis on human health
*** Electrolytes
*** Fluid balance
*** Hypernatremia
*** Hyponatremia
*** Salt poisoning
** In plants
*** &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; responses to salinity
** In fish
***Stenohaline fish
***Euryhaline fish
*Salinity by geologic context
**Fresh water
**Seawater
**Soil salinity
**Thermohaline circulation
**Paleosalinity
**CORA dataset data on salinity of global oceans
*General cases of solute concentration
** Osmotic concentration
** Tonicity

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* (dead link)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="0" end="8" title="Salinity" label="Salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="42" end="46" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="70" end="75" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="84" end="96" title="saline water" label="saline water"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="107" end="120" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="246" end="247" title="per mille" label="‰"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="319" end="328" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="354" end="364" title="biological" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q230937" start="395" end="423" title="state function" label="thermodynamic state variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="441" end="452" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="457" end="465" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="509" end="516" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="521" end="534" title="heat capacity" label="heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653802" start="552" end="564" title="contour line" label="contour line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="906" end="921" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="923" end="940" title="magnesium sulfate" label="magnesium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="942" end="959" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="965" end="983" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="1310" end="1323" title="Mass fraction (chemistry)" label="mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="1692" end="1700" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466917" start="1769" end="1772" title="Total dissolved solids" label="TDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229" start="1938" end="1945" title="percent" label="percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q242857" start="1990" end="2003" title="Abyssal zone" label="abyssal ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="2149" end="2167" title="Significant figures" label="significant digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117711" start="3255" end="3274" title="artificial seawater" label="artificial seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q334743" start="3591" end="3599" title="Cenote" label="pit lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="3622" end="3641" title="hydrothermal spring" label="hydrothermal spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3688" end="3694" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="3699" end="3707" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3771" end="3785" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="3840" end="3850" title="carbonates" label="carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="3855" end="3867" title="bicarbonates" label="bicarbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="3888" end="3895" title="Silicon" label="Silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457481" start="3911" end="3923" title="silicic acid" label="silicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="3976" end="3978" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="4376" end="4385" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="4436" end="4450" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="4499" end="4505" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="4519" end="4527" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="4532" end="4539" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="4551" end="4561" title="chlorinity" label="chlorinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="4720" end="4738" title="parts per thousand" label="parts per thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="4747" end="4748" title="Per mille" label="‰"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="4763" end="4786" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107040817" start="5336" end="5343" title="TEOS-10" label="TEOS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674727" start="5435" end="5459" title="conservative temperature" label="conservative temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q760765" start="5481" end="5502" title="potential temperature" label="potential temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q165838" start="6861" end="6872" title="Limnologist" label="Limnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="7241" end="7264" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="7426" end="7431" title="Siemens (unit)" label="μS/cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="7860" end="7871" title="saline lake" label="saline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="9362" end="9367" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="9571" end="9576" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="9652" end="9663" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q332788" start="9715" end="9724" title="halophyte" label="halophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011912" start="9759" end="9784" title="residual sodium carbonate index" label="residual sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975220" start="9805" end="9814" title="glasswort" label="glasswort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406232" start="9818" end="9826" title="saltwort" label="saltwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506735" start="9830" end="9837" title="barilla" label="barilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="9931" end="9943" title="extremophile" label="extremophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q946633" start="9949" end="9958" title="halophile" label="halophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630188" start="10035" end="10045" title="euryhaline" label="euryhaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="10159" end="10169" title="drinking water" label="potability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="10190" end="10200" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q760081" start="10299" end="10308" title="road salt" label="road salt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10313" end="10332" title="De-ice#Chemical de-icers" label="other salt de-icers"/>
<link wikidata="Q463223" start="10397" end="10427" title="Thermohaline circulation" label="world&amp;#x27;s ocean circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127246" start="10613" end="10650" title="Paleosalinity" label="Changes in the salinity of the oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="10812" end="10823" title="hydrography" label="hydrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="11475" end="11487" title="Desalination" label="Desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q661665" start="11521" end="11542" title="soil salinity control" label="soil salinity control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553296" start="11545" end="11568" title="Sodium adsorption ratio" label="Sodium adsorption ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q904064" start="11592" end="11603" title="Salinometer" label="Salinometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="11707" end="11718" title="Electrolyte" label="Electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q728393" start="11724" end="11737" title="Fluid balance" label="Fluid balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132653" start="11742" end="11755" title="Hypernatremia" label="Hypernatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q824292" start="11760" end="11772" title="Hyponatremia" label="Hyponatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11666058" start="11777" end="11791" title="Salt poisoning" label="Salt poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604122" start="11809" end="11863" title="Arabidopsis thaliana responses to salinity" label="&amp;quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&amp;quot; responses to salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853549" start="11878" end="11894" title="Stenohaline" label="Stenohaline fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630188" start="11898" end="11913" title="Euryhaline" label="Euryhaline fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="11946" end="11957" title="Fresh water" label="Fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="11960" end="11968" title="Seawater" label="Seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="11971" end="11984" title="Soil salinity" label="Soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q463223" start="11987" end="12011" title="Thermohaline circulation" label="Thermohaline circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127246" start="12014" end="12027" title="Paleosalinity" label="Paleosalinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931863" start="12030" end="12042" title="CORA dataset" label="CORA dataset"/>
<link wikidata="Q643555" start="12119" end="12140" title="Osmotic concentration" label="Osmotic concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q925744" start="12144" end="12152" title="Tonicity" label="Tonicity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26987" wikidata="Q21855" url="?curid=26987" title="Saxifragales">
<text>Saxifragales (colloquial/plural: &quot;the&quot; saxifrages) is an order of angiosperms, or flowering plants, containing 15 botanical families and around 100 genera, with nearly 2,500 species. Of the 15 families, many are small, with eight of them being monotypic (having only a single genus). The largest family is the Crassulaceae (stonecrops), a diverse group of mostly succulent plants, with about 35 genera. Saxifragales are found worldwide, primarily in temperate to subtropical zones, rarely being encountered growing wild in the tropics; however, many species are now cultivated throughout the world as knowledge of plant husbandry has improved. They can be found in a wide variety of environments, from deserts to fully aquatic habitats, with species adapted to alpine, forested or fully-aquatic habitats. Many are epiphytic or lithophytic, growing on exposed cliff faces, on trees or on rocks, and not requiring a highly organic or nutrient-dense substrate to thrive. 

Globally, the saxifrages have a wide variety of uses by humans, ranging from textiles and timber to foodstuffs. Several families—such as the aforementioned Crassulaceae—and genera are of significant commercial importance in some countries and economies, being cultivated on a large scale for sale as ornamental plants. Apart from ornamentals, another highly-prized group are the Grossulariaceae (currants and gooseberries), particularly blackcurrants, redcurrants and white currants. 

Overall, the order is extremely diverse, encompassing numerous trees, shrubs, perennial herbs and succulent plants, as well as aquatic and semi-aquatic species. The order&#x27;s high degree of diversity, in terms of vegetative and reproductive traits (and sheer amount of species), can make it challenging to find any common or unifying features amongst the respective genera.

In the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification system, the Saxifragales are placed within the major division of flowering plants referred to as eudicots, specifically the core eudicots. This subgroup consists of the Dilleniaceae, superasterids and superrosids. The superrosids, in turn, have two components, rosids and Saxifragales. The Saxifragales order has undergone considerable revision since its original classification, which had been based purely on plant characteristics. The modern classification is based on genetic studies, using molecular phylogenetics. There is an extensive fossil record from the Turonian-Campanian phase of the late Cretaceous, dating to about 90 million years ago (Myr). However, molecular studies may suggest an older origin, from the early Cretaceous (102–108 Myr), with rapid and early diversification to more modern forms.

== Description ==

The order Saxifragales is extremely morphologically diverse (hyper-diverse). It includes trees (e.g. witch hazel, witch alder in Hamamelidaceae), fruit bearing shrubs (e.g. currants, gooseberries in Grossulariaceae), lianas, annual and perennial herbs, rock garden plants (e.g. saxifrage in Saxifragaceae), ornamental garden plants (e.g. peonies in Paeoniaceae), succulents (e.g. stonecrop in Crassulaceae) and aquatics (e.g. watermilfoil in Haloragaceae). The flowers demonstrate major variations in sepal, petal, stamen, and carpel number, as well as ovary position (&quot;see&quot; Biogeography and evolution).
This degree of diversity makes defining synapomorphy (derived common characteristics) for the group extremely difficult, the order being defined on the basis of molecular affinity rather than morphology. However, some characteristics that are prevalent (common traits) represent potential or putative synapomorphies based on ancestral states. These include flowers that are usually radially symmetric and petals that are free. The gynoecium (female reproductive part) generally consists of two carpels (ovary, style and stigma) that are free, at least toward the apex (partially fused bicarpellate gynoecium) and possess a hypanthium (cup shaped basal floral tube). In the androecium (male reproductive part), the stamen anthers are generally basifixed (attached at its base to the filament), sometimes dorsifixed (attached at centre) (&quot;see Figure 2&quot;). Other commonly occurring features are fruit that is generally follicular (formed from a single carpel), seeds with abundant endosperm surrounding the embryo and leaves with glandular teeth at their margins (glandular dentate, &quot;see image&quot;). Within the Saxifragales, while the families of the woody clade are primarily woody, the primarily herbaceous families of Crassulaceae and Saxifragaceae exhibit woody features as a secondary transition.

== Taxonomy ==

Saxifragales is a relatively small angiosperm order, having only 15 families, about 100 genera and about 2,470 species.

=== History ===

Saxifragales was first described in 1820 by Berchtold and Presl as a group of plants, Saxifrageae, with five genera, including &quot;Saxifraga&quot;, lending their names as the botanical authority (Bercht. &amp; J.Presl). At times, that authority has also been given to Dumortier, due to a later publication (1829). Dumortier first used the word Saxifragaceae. By the time of John Lindley&#x27;s &quot;The Vegetable Kingdom&quot; (1853), the term Saxifragales was in use, which Lindley called an Alliance, containing five families. Later, the Saxifragales were placed in the angiosperm class Dicotyledons, also called Magnoliopsida.

=== Phylogeny ===

The order Saxifragales has undergone considerable revision in both placement and composition, since the use of molecular phylogenetics, and the use of the modern Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification. They are identified as a strongly monophyletic group.

In the initial APG publication (1998), the Saxifragales were identified within the core eudicots clade but its relationship to other clades was uncertain. The core eudicots consist of the order Gunnerales and a large clade of Pentapetalae (so named for having a synapomorphy of pentamerous (5 part) perianths), the latter representing about 70% of all angiosperms, with eight major lineages. Later (2003), the order was described as &quot;one of the major surprises of molecular phylogenetic analyses of the angiosperms&quot;, having elements previously placed in three or four separate subclasses based on morphology. This was eventually resolved in the third APG system (2009), placing Saxifragales as a sister group to the rosids (Rosidae), within the Pentapetalae clade. This large combination has subsequently been given the name superrosids (Superrosidae), representing part of an early diversification of the angiosperms. Among the rosids, they share a number of similarities with the Rosales, particularly Rosaceae, including a hypanthium, five part flowers and free floral parts. As circumscribed, Saxifragales account for 1.3% of eudicot diversity.


=== Biogeography and evolution ===

Diversification among Saxifragales was rapid, with the extensive fossil record indicating that the order was more diverse and more widespread than an examination of the extant members suggests, with considerable phenotypic diversity occurring early. The earliest fossil evidence is found in the Turonian-Campanian (late Cretaceous), suggesting a minimum age of 89.5 Myr. However, molecular divergence time estimation suggest an earlier time of 102–108 Myr, into the early Cretaceous, for the crown and stem groups respectively. Within the order Saxifragales, the molecular data imply a very rapid initial diversification time of about 6–8 Myr, between 112 and 120 Myr, with major lineages appearing within 3–6 Myr.

The ancestral state appears to be woody, as in Peridiscaceae and the woody clade, but is also ancestral to Grossulariaceae. A number of independent transitions to a herbaceous habit occurred in the ancestors of Crassulaceae, Saxifragaceae and the base of the Haloragaceae-Penthoraceae clade (the other two families in Haloragaceae &quot;s.l.&quot; remaining woody), while other taxa reverted to a woody habit, especially Crassulaceae. Most of Saxifragales have a superior ovary, but some families show frequent transition with inferior or subinferior position, particularly Saxifragaceae and to a lesser extent Hamamelidaceae. Almost all Grossulariaceae have an inferior ovary. The ancestral carpel number is two, with transition to higher numbers, such as four in Haloragaceae &quot;s.l.&quot; and Peridiscaceae with five in Penthoraceae. The ancestral carpel number for Crassulaceae is five, decreasing to four in &quot;Kalanchoe&quot;, where it is synapomorphic for the genus, though the most frequent transition in this family is 6–10, but only where stamen number is increased above five. Some Macaronesian taxa (Aeonieae) have 8–12, with up to 32 carpels for &quot;Aeonium&quot;.

The ancestral petal number is five, with three major transitions; 5 to 0, 5 to 4, 5 to 6–10. Increased petal number is seen in Paeoniaceae and Crassulaceae, particularly where stamen number is also increased. Cercidiphyllum + Daphniphyllum, Chrysosplenium and &quot;Altingia&quot; are examples of the complete loss of petals. The ancestral stamen:petal ratio is 1, with transitions characterising several clades, e.g. Paeonicaceae+woody clade &gt;2, Crassulaceae 2 (but &quot;Crassula&quot; 1). Overall there has been a decrease over evolution, but independent of a decrease in petal number, so that it is the stamen number that has decreased. The ancestral habitat appears to be forests, followed by early diversification into desert and aquatic habitats, with shrubland the most recent colonization.

Species diversification was rapid following a transition from a warmer, wetter Earth in the Eocene (56–40 Myr) to early Miocene (23–16 Myr), to the cooler drier conditions of the mid-Miocene (16–12 Myr). However, this appears to not have coincided with ecological and phenotypic evolution, which are themselves correlated. There is a clear lag, whereby increase in species diversification was followed later by increases in niche and phenotypic lability.

=== Subdivision ===

The first APG classification (1998) placed 13 families within the order Saxifragales: 

* Altingiaceae 
* Cercidiphyllaceae 
* Crassulaceae 
* Daphniphyllaceae
* Grossulariaceae
* Haloragaceae
* Hamamelidaceae
* Iteaceae
* Paeoniaceae
* Penthoraceae
* Pterostemonaceae
* Saxifragaceae
* Tetracarpaeaceae

This was subsequently revised to 15, in the fourth version (2016). The Saxifragales families have been grouped into a number of informally named suprafamilial subclades, with the exception of the basal split of Peridiscaceae, which thus forms a sister group with the rest of Saxifragales. The two major ones are (Paeoniaceae + the woody clade of primarily woody families) and the &quot;core&quot; Saxifragales (i.e. the primarily herbaceous families), with the latter subdivided into two further subclades, (Haloragaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; + Crassulaceae) and the Saxifragaceae alliance.

In the clade Haloragaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; &quot;(s.l.)&quot; + Crassulaceae the genera constituting Haloragaceae &quot;s.l.&quot; are all small, and APG II (2003) proposed merging them into a single larger Haloragaceae &quot;s.l.&quot;, but transferred &quot;Aphanopetalum&quot; from Cunoniaceae to this group. The Saxifragaceae alliance represents Saxifragaceae together with a number of woody members of the traditional Saxifragaceae &quot;sensu&quot; Engler (1930). Within this, APG II (2003) proposed placing the two species of &quot;Pterostemon&quot; that constitute Pterostemonaceae within Iteaceae, and all subsequent versions have maintained this practice. Thus Saxifragales &quot;sensu&quot; APG II consisted of only 10 families. The third version (2009) added Peridiscaceae (from Malpighiales), as sister to all other families, but re-expanded Haloragaceae to provide for a narrower circumscription, Haloragaceae &quot;sensu stricto&quot; (&quot;s.s.&quot;), to give a total of 14 families. APG IV (2016) added the parasitic family Cynomoriaceae to provide a total of 15 families, although its placement within the order remained unclear.

Of the 15 families included in APG IV, the basal divergence Peridiscaceae underwent radical shifting and recircumscription from 2003 to 2009. Originally, it consisted of two closely related genera, &quot;Peridiscus&quot; and &quot;Whittonia&quot;. The APG II system placed the family in Malpighiales, based on a DNA sequence for the &quot;rbcL&quot; gene from &quot;Whittonia&quot;. This sequence turned out to be not from &quot;Whittonia&quot;, but from other plants whose DNA had contaminated the sample. After placement in Saxifragales, it was expanded to include &quot;Soyauxia&quot; in 2007, and &quot;Medusandra&quot; in 2009.

In the first of the subclades of the remaining Saxifragales, Paeoniaceae possesses many unique features and its taxonomic position was controversial for a long time, and &quot;Paeonia&quot; was placed in Ranunculales, close to &quot;Glaucidium&quot;, prior to transfer to Saxifragales as sister to the woody clade.

In the woody clade, the genus &quot;Liquidambar&quot; was included in Hamamelidaceae until molecular phylogenetic studies showed that its inclusion might make Hamamelidaceae paraphyletic, and was segregated as a separate monotypic family, Altingiaceae in 2008. Cercidiphyllaceae was for a long time associated with Hamamelidaceae and Trochodendraceae and was often thought to be closer to the latter, which is now in the basal eudicot order Trochodendrales. &quot;Daphniphyllum&quot; was always thought to have an anomalous combination of characters and was placed in several different orders before molecular phylogenetic analysis showed it to belong to Saxifragales.

In the core Saxifragales, Crassulaceae and Tetracarpaeaceae have been associated with Saxifragaceae, while &quot;Penthorum&quot; has been associated both with Crassulaceae and Saxifragaceae, before being placed here. &quot;Aphanopetalum&quot; was often placed in Cunoniaceae, a family in Oxalidales, even though there were good reasons to put it in Saxifragales, and it was subsequently transferred. Haloragaceae was included in Myrtales, before being placed in Saxifragales.

The other &quot;core&quot; group, the Saxifragaceae alliance comprises four families: Pterostemonaceae, Iteaceae, Grossulariaceae, and Saxifragaceae, which have long been known to be related to each other, but the circumscription of Saxifragaceae has been much reduced and Pterostemonaceae submerged as &quot;Pterostemon&quot; in Iteaceae.

Most of the families are monogeneric. &quot;Choristylis&quot; is now considered a synonym of &quot;Itea&quot;, but the addition of &quot;Pterostemon&quot;, gives Iteaceae two genera. &quot;Liquidambar&quot; and &quot;Semiliquidambar&quot; are also submerged into &quot;Altingia&quot;, making Altingiaceae monogeneric. About 95% of the species are in five families: Crassulaceae (1400), Saxifragaceae (500), Grossulariaceae (150–200), Haloragaceae (150), and Hamamelidaceae (100).

The relationships of the Saxifragales families to each other is shown in the following cladogram. The phylogeny in this cladogram still has some uncertainty as to the exact relationships, and the phylogenetic tree is subject to further revision. Cynomoriaceae, previously placed in Santales or Rosales is included in Saxifragales, but unplaced within it. Li et al. (2019) have slightly different relationships, and also place Cynomoriaceae as the first branch in the Crassulaceae+Haloragaceae &quot;s.l.&quot; tree, i.e. as sister to those two families. The number of genera in each family is shown in parentheses:


=== Families ===











== Distribution and habitat ==

Saxifragales are found worldwide, though primarily in temperate zones and rarely in the tropics. They occupy a wide variety of habitats from arid desert (Crassulaceae) to aquatic conditions (Haloragaceae), with 6 families, including North American species, that are obligate aquatic (fully dependent on an aquatic environment), and including forests, grasslands and tundra. Saxifragales exceeds all other comparably sized clades in terms of diversity of habitats. Most of the diversity occurs in temperate (including montane and arid) conditions that expanded globally during cooling and drying trends in the last 15 My.

The most common habitats are forests and cliffs, with about 300 species occupying each, but with forests being the most diverse phenotypically, where nearly all families are represented. In contrast, desert and tundra, with only two families each, contain only about 10% of species. About 90% of species can be assigned to a single habitat.

== Conservation ==

&quot;Whittonia&quot; (Peridiscaceae) is thought to be extinct. the IUCN lists 9 critically endangered, 12 endangered, 19 vulnerable and 7 near threatened species. Among the most threatened Saxifragales are &quot;Aichryson dumosum&quot; and &quot;Monanthes wildpretii&quot; (Crassulaceae), &quot;Haloragis stokesii&quot; and &quot;Myriophyllum axilliflorum&quot; (Haloragaceae), &quot;Ribes malvifolium&quot; and &quot;R. sardoum&quot; (Grossulariaceae), &quot;Saxifraga artvinensis&quot; (Saxifragaceae) and &quot;Molinadendron hondurense&quot; (Hamamelidaceae).

== Cultivation ==

A number of Saxifragales genera are commercially cultivated. &quot;Paeonia&quot; are cultivated both as ornamental shrubs (generally sold as root stock) and for cut flowers, with the Netherlands representing the largest production, other more minor producers are Israel, New Zealand, Chile and the United States. &quot;Liquidambar&quot; is used for hardwood, with the American Sweetgum (&quot;Liquidambar styraciflua&quot;) being among the most important sources of commercial hardwood in the Southeast United States, with one of its uses being veneer for plywood. &quot;Hamamelis&quot; is cultivated in New England for distilleries extracting witch-hazel, widely used in skincare, and is the largest source of this medicament in the world. Among the Crassulaceae, economic importance is limited to horticulture, with many species and cultivars important as ornamentals, including &quot;Crassula ovata&quot; (jade plant) and &quot;Jovibarba&quot; (hen and chicken). &quot;Hylotelphium&quot;, &quot;Phedimus&quot;, &quot;Sedum&quot; and &quot;Sempervivum&quot; are cultivated for rock gardens and for &quot;green roofs&quot;. In particular, cultivars of the Madagascan &quot;Kalanchoe blossfeldiana&quot;, e.g. &#x27;Florists kalanchoe&#x27; have achieved commercial success throughout the world, being popular Christmas decorative plants. The Haloragaceae aquatic genus &quot;Myriophyllum&quot; and the closely related &quot;Proserpinaca&quot; are cultivated for the commercial aquarium trade. &quot;Myriophyllum&quot; is also economically important for purification of water and as feed for pigs, ducks, and fish, and polishing wood. 

A number of &quot;Ribes&quot; (Grossulariaceae) are in commercial production, concentrated in Europe and the USSR from species native to those areas. &quot;R. nigrum&quot; (blackcurrant) was first cultivated in monastery gardens in Russia in the 11th century, and currant cultivation more generally later in Western Europe, &quot;R. uva-crispa&quot; (gooseberry) production began around 1700. The first colonists in North America began cultivating currants in the late 1700s. &quot;R. nigrum&quot; is the most important commercial currant crop, being produced in more than 23 countries, with the major centres being Russia (more than 63 thousand hectares), Poland, Germany, Scandinavia and the UK. An important source of Vitamin C, black currants are used in the manufacture of jam, fruit jelly, compote, syrup, juice and other drinks, including the cordial Ribena and the liqueur Cassis. Other commercial crops include &quot;R. rubrum&quot; (red currant). World &quot;Ribes&quot; crop production was over 750,000 tons in 2002, of which about 150,000 tons were gooseberries, and the largest group blackcurrants.

== Uses ==

Plants in the order Saxifragales have found a wide variety of uses, including traditional medicines, ornamental, household, aquarium, pond and garden plants, spices, foodstuffs (fruit and greens), dyestuffs, smoking, resin, timber, and roof coverings.

== See also ==
* List of Saxifragales, Vitales and Zygophyllales families

== Notes ==
== References == 
== Bibliography ==
=== Books ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Chapters
* 
* &quot;(full text at&quot; ResearchGate)
* 
* 
* 

;Historical 
* 

=== Articles ===
* 

;Angiosperms
* 
* 

;Eudicots
* 
* 

;Saxifragales
* 
* 
* 
* 

==== APG ====
* 
* 

==== Saxifragales families ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==== Paleontology ====
* 
* 

=== Websites ===
* 
* (&quot;see also&quot; Angiosperm Phylogeny Website)
* 
* , see also IUCN Red List
* , in Flora of China online vol. 13
* 

;Images

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="0" end="12" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="14" end="24" title="Colloquialism" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="33" end="59" title="Saxifragales" label="&amp;quot;the&amp;quot; saxifrages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="67" end="72" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="76" end="86" title="flowering plant" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="134" end="142" title="Families (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="158" end="164" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="184" end="191" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="254" end="263" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="320" end="332" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="373" end="389" title="Succulent plant" label="succulent plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="460" end="469" title="Temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="473" end="484" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="537" end="544" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="576" end="586" title="Agriculture" label="cultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="712" end="719" title="Desert" label="deserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="729" end="736" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="737" end="745" title="Habitat" label="habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582662" start="771" end="777" title="Alpine plant" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="797" end="804" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="824" end="833" title="Epiphyte" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321691" start="837" end="848" title="Lithophyte" label="lithophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="1057" end="1065" title="Textile" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1070" end="1076" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1280" end="1297" title="ornamental plants" label="ornamental plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="1359" end="1374" title="Grossulariaceae" label="Grossulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="1376" end="1384" title="Ribes" label="currants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17638951" start="1389" end="1401" title="Gooseberry" label="gooseberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q146604" start="1417" end="1430" title="blackcurrant" label="blackcurrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q146661" start="1432" end="1443" title="Redcurrant" label="redcurrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q621670" start="1448" end="1462" title="White currant" label="white currants"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="1498" end="1505" title="biodiversity" label="diverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="1529" end="1534" title="trees" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="1536" end="1542" title="shrubs" label="shrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="1544" end="1559" title="perennial herbs" label="perennial herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="1564" end="1580" title="Succulent plant" label="succulent plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="1593" end="1600" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="1605" end="1617" title="Semiaquatic" label="semi-aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="1851" end="1877" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1946" end="1954" title="clade" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="1990" end="1997" title="eudicot" label="eudicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="2017" end="2030" title="core eudicots" label="core eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q756019" start="2062" end="2074" title="Dilleniaceae" label="Dilleniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23927181" start="2076" end="2089" title="superasterids" label="superasterids"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905211" start="2094" end="2105" title="superrosids" label="superrosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="2154" end="2160" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="2257" end="2271" title="Systematics" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="2304" end="2325" title="plant morphology" label="plant characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2388" end="2410" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2435" end="2441" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q691429" start="2458" end="2466" title="Turonian" label="Turonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="2467" end="2476" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="2495" end="2505" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="2545" end="2548" title="Myr" label="Myr"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="2560" end="2577" title="divergence time estimation" label="molecular studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="2731" end="2736" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="2763" end="2778" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="2779" end="2786" title="biodiversity" label="diverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="2816" end="2821" title="trees" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q148463" start="2828" end="2839" title="witch hazel" label="witch hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400384" start="2841" end="2852" title="witch alder" label="witch alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q148479" start="2856" end="2870" title="Hamamelidaceae" label="Hamamelidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="2887" end="2893" title="shrubs" label="shrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="2900" end="2908" title="Ribes" label="currants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17638951" start="2910" end="2922" title="gooseberries" label="gooseberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="2926" end="2941" title="Grossulariaceae" label="Grossulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="2944" end="2950" title="lianas" label="lianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="2952" end="2958" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="2963" end="2978" title="perennial herbs" label="perennial herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141231" start="2980" end="2991" title="rock garden" label="rock garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156146" start="3005" end="3014" title="saxifrage" label="saxifrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543932" start="3018" end="3031" title="Saxifragaceae" label="Saxifragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="3034" end="3058" title="ornamental garden plants" label="ornamental garden plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q147105" start="3065" end="3072" title="peonies" label="peonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q147105" start="3076" end="3087" title="Paeoniaceae" label="Paeoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="3090" end="3100" title="succulents" label="succulents"/>
<link wikidata="Q156851" start="3107" end="3116" title="stonecrop" label="stonecrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="3120" end="3132" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="3138" end="3146" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q157868" start="3153" end="3165" title="watermilfoil" label="watermilfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q157237" start="3169" end="3181" title="Haloragaceae" label="Haloragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3188" end="3195" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3228" end="3233" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="3235" end="3240" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3242" end="3248" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3254" end="3260" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="3280" end="3285" title="Ovary (botany)" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3312" end="3338" title="#Biogeography and evolution" label="Biogeography and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="3381" end="3393" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3698" end="3705" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q598159" start="3723" end="3741" title="radially symmetric" label="radially symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="3746" end="3752" title="petals" label="petals"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3772" end="3781" title="gynoecium" label="gynoecium"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3835" end="3842" title="carpels" label="carpels"/>
<link wikidata="Q887231" start="3964" end="3974" title="hypanthium" label="hypanthium"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="4014" end="4024" title="androecium" label="androecium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="4242" end="4247" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q147807" start="4266" end="4276" title="Follicle (fruit)" label="follicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="4308" end="4313" title="seeds" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="4328" end="4337" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4354" end="4360" title="Embryo#Plant embryos" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="4365" end="4371" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4387" end="4409" title="Leaf#Edge (margin)" label="teeth at their margins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4440" end="4445" title="#Pmex" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="4552" end="4562" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="4708" end="4718" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="4719" end="4724" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="4741" end="4749" title="Families (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4761" end="4767" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="4784" end="4791" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q940150" start="4855" end="4874" title="Berchtold and Presl" label="Berchtold and Presl"/>
<link wikidata="Q156146" start="4944" end="4953" title="Saxifraga" label="Saxifraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q669585" start="4988" end="5007" title="botanical authority" label="botanical authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q316571" start="5081" end="5090" title="Barthélemy Charles Joseph Dumortier" label="Dumortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q378629" start="5187" end="5199" title="John Lindley" label="John Lindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="5386" end="5396" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="5397" end="5402" title="Class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="5403" end="5415" title="Dicotyledons" label="Dicotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307404" start="5429" end="5442" title="Magnoliopsida" label="Magnoliopsida"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="5468" end="5473" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="5575" end="5598" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="5626" end="5652" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="5709" end="5721" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="5813" end="5826" title="core eudicots" label="core eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="5827" end="5832" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21846" start="5924" end="5934" title="Gunnerales" label="Gunnerales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071470" start="5956" end="5968" title="Pentapetalae" label="Pentapetalae"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="5992" end="6004" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395661" start="6008" end="6019" title="pentamerous" label="pentamerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6436" end="6448" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="6456" end="6462" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905211" start="6565" end="6576" title="superrosids" label="superrosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="6646" end="6657" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q21895" start="6722" end="6729" title="Rosales" label="Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="6744" end="6752" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="6927" end="6942" title="Genetic divergence" label="Diversification"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6992" end="6998" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7041" end="7048" title="Biodiversity" label="diverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="7058" end="7068" title="Cosmopolitan distribution" label="widespread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="7096" end="7102" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="7139" end="7149" title="phenotypic" label="phenotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q691429" start="7222" end="7230" title="Turonian" label="Turonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="7231" end="7240" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="7293" end="7296" title="Myr" label="Myr"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="7317" end="7343" title="divergence time estimation" label="divergence time estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="7419" end="7424" title="Crown group" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="7429" end="7439" title="stem group" label="stem group"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="8115" end="8120" title="Ovary (botany)" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="8335" end="8341" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312063" start="8565" end="8574" title="Kalanchoe" label="Kalanchoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="8698" end="8704" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105472" start="8742" end="8754" title="Macaronesian" label="Macaronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152874" start="8814" end="8821" title="Aeonium" label="Aeonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="9096" end="9104" title="Altingia" label="Altingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158253" start="9306" end="9314" title="Crassula" label="Crassula"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="9725" end="9731" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="9753" end="9760" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131360" start="10200" end="10212" title="Altingiaceae" label="Altingiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858028" start="10216" end="10233" title="Cercidiphyllaceae" label="Cercidiphyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="10237" end="10249" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41436" start="10253" end="10269" title="Daphniphyllaceae" label="Daphniphyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="10272" end="10287" title="Grossulariaceae" label="Grossulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157237" start="10290" end="10302" title="Haloragaceae" label="Haloragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148479" start="10305" end="10319" title="Hamamelidaceae" label="Hamamelidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190937" start="10322" end="10330" title="Iteaceae" label="Iteaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q147105" start="10333" end="10344" title="Paeoniaceae" label="Paeoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q141556" start="10347" end="10359" title="Penthoraceae" label="Penthoraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q311008" start="10362" end="10378" title="Pterostemonaceae" label="Pterostemonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543932" start="10381" end="10394" title="Saxifragaceae" label="Saxifragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140353" start="10397" end="10413" title="Tetracarpaeaceae" label="Tetracarpaeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="10611" end="10622" title="basal split" label="basal split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="10660" end="10672" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41434" start="11274" end="11287" title="Aphanopetalum" label="Aphanopetalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="11299" end="11310" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q311008" start="11553" end="11564" title="Pterostemon" label="Pterostemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190937" start="11611" end="11619" title="Iteaceae" label="Iteaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132930" start="11785" end="11798" title="Peridiscaceae" label="Peridiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="11805" end="11817" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="12417" end="12423" title="APG II" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="12452" end="12464" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="12477" end="12489" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q422516" start="12498" end="12514" title="RuBisCO" label="&amp;quot;rbcL&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="12515" end="12519" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12639" end="12642" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572008" start="12738" end="12746" title="Soyauxia" label="Soyauxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135179" start="12772" end="12782" title="Medusandra" label="Medusandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q773887" start="12887" end="12893" title="autapomorphy" label="unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q147105" start="12975" end="12982" title="Peony" label="Paeonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21021" start="13003" end="13015" title="Ranunculales" label="Ranunculales"/>
<link wikidata="Q135626" start="13032" end="13042" title="Glaucidium (plant)" label="Glaucidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="13151" end="13162" title="Liquidambar" label="Liquidambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="13206" end="13228" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="13289" end="13301" title="Paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131414" start="13449" end="13465" title="Trochodendraceae" label="Trochodendraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="13542" end="13549" title="eudicot" label="eudicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131414" start="13556" end="13571" title="Trochodendrales" label="Trochodendrales"/>
<link wikidata="Q41434" start="14008" end="14021" title="Aphanopetalum" label="Aphanopetalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="14048" end="14059" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="14073" end="14083" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21866" start="14214" end="14222" title="Myrtales" label="Myrtales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="14476" end="14491" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q311008" start="14571" end="14582" title="Pterostemon" label="Pterostemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="14628" end="14639" title="monogeneric" label="monogeneric"/>
<link wikidata="Q150306" start="14696" end="14712" title="Itea (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Itea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311008" start="14740" end="14751" title="Pterostemon" label="Pterostemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="14792" end="14803" title="Liquidambar" label="Liquidambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="14820" end="14835" title="Semiliquidambar" label="Semiliquidambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="14872" end="14880" title="Altingia" label="Altingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="14968" end="14980" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543932" start="14989" end="15002" title="Saxifragaceae" label="Saxifragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="15010" end="15025" title="Grossulariaceae" label="Grossulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157237" start="15037" end="15049" title="Haloragaceae" label="Haloragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q148479" start="15061" end="15075" title="Hamamelidaceae" label="Hamamelidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="15171" end="15180" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="15186" end="15195" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q139233" start="15330" end="15343" title="Cynomoriaceae" label="Cynomoriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21851" start="15366" end="15374" title="Santales" label="Santales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21895" start="15378" end="15385" title="Rosales" label="Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="16813" end="16817" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="16826" end="16847" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="16852" end="16862" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="16867" end="16877" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="16884" end="16899" title="near threatened" label="near threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q310636" start="16958" end="16975" title="Aichryson" label="Aichryson dumosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q140427" start="16992" end="17012" title="Monanthes" label="Monanthes wildpretii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617536" start="17041" end="17059" title="Haloragis" label="Haloragis stokesii"/>
<link wikidata="Q157868" start="17076" end="17101" title="Myriophyllum" label="Myriophyllum axilliflorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="17130" end="17147" title="Ribes" label="Ribes malvifolium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934259" start="17164" end="17174" title="Ribes sardoum" label="R. sardoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156146" start="17206" end="17227" title="Saxifraga" label="Saxifraga artvinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487723" start="17260" end="17284" title="Molinadendron hondurense" label="Molinadendron hondurense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17216" start="17470" end="17480" title="root stock" label="root stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576780" start="17490" end="17501" title="cut flowers" label="cut flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="17806" end="17814" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="17874" end="17880" title="Veneer (wood)" label="veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="17885" end="17892" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="18128" end="18140" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q157299" start="18216" end="18230" title="Crassula ovata" label="Crassula ovata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141231" start="18408" end="18420" title="rock gardens" label="rock gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741" start="18435" end="18446" title="green roofs" label="green roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132145" start="18503" end="18526" title="Kalanchoe blossfeldiana" label="Kalanchoe blossfeldiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="18807" end="18815" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q146604" start="19122" end="19131" title="Ribes nigrum" label="R. nigrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776417" start="19177" end="19194" title="monastic garden" label="monastery gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41503" start="19296" end="19309" title="Ribes uva-crispa" label="R. uva-crispa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="19612" end="19620" title="hectares" label="hectares"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="19687" end="19696" title="Vitamin C" label="Vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190923" start="19816" end="19823" title="Cordial (drink)" label="cordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092323" start="19824" end="19830" title="Ribena" label="Ribena"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="19839" end="19846" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q968019" start="19847" end="19853" title="Crème de cassis" label="Cassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q146661" start="19892" end="19901" title="Ribes rubrum" label="R. rubrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q116291197" start="20361" end="20417" title="List of Saxifragales, Vitales and Zygophyllales families" label="List of Saxifragales, Vitales and Zygophyllales families"/>
<link wikidata="Q754454" start="20548" end="20560" title="ResearchGate" label="ResearchGate"/>
<link wikidata="Q600295" start="20826" end="20854" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="20872" end="20885" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460442" start="20893" end="20914" title="Flora of China (series)" label="Flora of China online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26988" wikidata="Q1102062" url="?curid=26988" title="CLIÉ">
<text>CLIÉ is a series of personal digital assistants (PDAs) running the operating system (OS) &quot;Palm OS&quot;, developed and marketed by Sony from 2000 to 2005. The devices introduced many new features to the PDA market, such as a jog dial (or jog wheel) interface, high-resolution displays, and Sony technologies like Memory Stick slots and ATRAC3 audio playback. Most models were designed and manufactured in Japan.

The CLIÉ handhelds were distinguished from other Palm OS models by their emphasis on multimedia abilities, including photo, video, and audio playback, long before any other Palm OS PDAs had such abilities. Later models have been credited with spurring competition in the previously stagnant Palm market, closing many of the gaps that existed between Palm OS PDAs and those using Microsoft Windows Mobile OS, more so for multimedia, but also with Sony&#x27;s proprietary application launcher interface.

== Name ==
CLIÉ stands for: creativity, lifestyle, innovation, emotion, and formerly communication, link, information and entertainment. The name was initially an attempt at a new coinage term, though it means &quot;tool&quot; in the Jèrriais language.

==Closure of handheld line==
In the summer of 2004, Sony announced that new CLIÉs would, from then on, be manufactured and available only in Japan, and in the spring of 2005, Sony announced the end of its CLIÉ line of products. The last models to be released worldwide were the PEG-TJ27, PEG-TJ37, and PEG-TH55. The last model released in Japan was the PEG-VZ90. Soon after the closure of the CLIÉ line, Sony stopped providing original installation drivers, including Sony&#x27;s version of Palm Desktop for the CLIÉ, which are necessary for Hotsyncing with the PC and otherwise taking advantage of the handhelds&#x27; many features for which a PC may be needed. Several CLIÉ fans took it upon themselves to offer these drivers freely for download at .

==Models==
CLIÉ handhelds were released in series, usually with a few models released in each series. In later years, multiple series would be in production at the same time.

===Motorola Dragonball CPU: Palm OS 3.5, 4.x===
* S series (2000–2002)
* T series (2001–2003)
* N series (2001–2002)
* NR series (2002)
* SL/SJ series (2002–2003)

===ARM compatible CPU: Palm OS 5.0, 5.2===
* NX series (2002–2004)
* NZ series (2003–2004)
* TG series (2003–2004)
* UX series (2003–2004)
* TJ series (2003–2004)
* TH series (2004)
* VZ series (2004–2005) (Japan only)

==Macintosh support==
Officially, the CLIÉ line did not support the Macintosh, and Sony never provided any software with the handhelds for Macintosh operating systems. However, as a Palm OS device, every CLIÉ handheld was inherently capable of HotSync operations with a Mac OS computer. This allowed for synchronizing the basic personal information manager (PIM) functions, and for installing new software, though this ability was unusable because the Mac HotSync software would not recognize the handheld. PalmSource, however, silently added the ability to recognize older CLIÉ devices when providing new versions of its Palm Desktop software for Mac. This was necessary for those who could synchronize only via USB.

The CLIÉ user community soon discovered that these &quot;updates&quot; were simply a matter of adding a few lines to the USB-detection property-list file. Since then, detailed instructions have been posted online for those who want to synchronize their CLIÉ handhelds. No modifications are required for Bluetooth synchronizing, but Wi-Fi synchronizing is impossible because the Mac OS HotSync software does not support network synchronizing. Some workarounds for the multimedia features also exist. For those who desire stronger Mac OS/CLIÉ integration, the product Missing Sync made by the company Mark/Space is also available. This does make unencrypted Wi-Fi synchronizing possible but a bug in the CLIÉ network stack reverses IP addresses which means that the Macintosh involved needs a palindromic IP address such as 10.0.0.10.

==See also==
*Graffiti (Palm OS)
*Palm OS
*PalmSource, Inc.
*Personal digital assistant
*Walkman
*Mylo (Sony)
*Sony Xperia
*Sony Magic Link

==References==
==External links==
* Sony repair/parts replacement website - Buy replacement parts for current unsupported Sony CLIÉS.″″
* One Source, formerly CLIÉ Source, is an enthusiast site which changed its name when Sony ended the CLIÉ line. It is still the more popular site that still covers the Sony CLIÉ line of products through its forums.
* SonyClie.org - Downloadable PC-Clie drivers which are no longer provided by Sony.
* Openomics - Step-by-step instructions to add Apple iSync support for a Sony CLIÉ TH55</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1102062" start="0" end="4" title="CLIÉ" label="CLIÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="20" end="46" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="67" end="83" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="95" end="102" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="136" end="140" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q21116813" start="230" end="238" title="jog dial" label="jog dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="318" end="330" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q300036" start="341" end="347" title="ATRAC3" label="ATRAC3"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="410" end="415" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="797" end="806" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="807" end="821" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="1155" end="1163" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="1227" end="1231" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562446" start="1528" end="1536" title="PEG-VZ90" label="PEG-VZ90"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562433" start="2224" end="2233" title="Sony CLIÉ NR Series" label="NR series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562435" start="2314" end="2323" title="Sony CLIÉ NX Series" label="NX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q74440263" start="2338" end="2347" title="Sony CLIÉ NZ Series" label="NZ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q74439873" start="2362" end="2371" title="Sony CLIÉ PEG-TG50" label="TG series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562444" start="2386" end="2395" title="Sony CLIÉ UX Series" label="UX series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562441" start="2410" end="2419" title="Sony CLIÉ TJ Series" label="TJ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562440" start="2434" end="2443" title="Sony CLIÉ PEG-TH55" label="TH series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562446" start="2453" end="2462" title="Sony CLIÉ PEG-VZ90" label="VZ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="2557" end="2566" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="2628" end="2655" title="Macintosh operating systems" label="Macintosh operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2733" end="2740" title="Palm OS#HotSync" label="HotSync"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568118" start="2817" end="2845" title="personal information manager" label="personal information manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197301" start="2996" end="3006" title="PalmSource" label="PalmSource"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="3202" end="3205" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="3511" end="3520" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="3540" end="3545" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="3864" end="3869" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541559" start="4056" end="4074" title="Graffiti (Palm OS)" label="Graffiti (Palm OS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="4076" end="4083" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197301" start="4085" end="4101" title="PalmSource, Inc." label="PalmSource, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="4103" end="4129" title="Personal digital assistant" label="Personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="4131" end="4138" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266448" start="4140" end="4151" title="Mylo (Sony)" label="Mylo (Sony)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141217" start="4153" end="4164" title="Sony Xperia" label="Sony Xperia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730754" start="4171" end="4181" title="Magic Link" label="Magic Link"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26989" wikidata="Q41187" url="?curid=26989" title="Sony">
<text>(formerly and ) is a Japanese multinational conglomerate headquartered at Sony City in Minato, Tokyo, Japan. The Sony Group comprises entities such as Sony Corporation, Sony Semiconductor Solutions, Sony Entertainment (including Sony Pictures and Sony Music Group), Sony Interactive Entertainment, Sony Financial Group, and others.

Sony was established in 1946 as Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo by Masaru Ibuka and Akio Morita. This electronics company became known early on for creating products such as the transistor radio TR-55 and the home video tape recorder CV-2000, playing a noteworthy part in Japan&#x27;s post-war recovery. Ibuka retired from Sony in the 1970s with Morita then serving as chairman until 1994. During this period, Sony was one of the most recognized brands in the industry worldwide; the company was credited for a number of innovations, notably the Trinitron color TV, the Walkman portable audio player, and co-inventing the compact disc. It embarked on more diverse business ventures, acquiring the American CBS Records in 1988 and then Columbia Pictures in 1989, and later entering the home video game console market with PlayStation, the first of the eponymous brand. In Japan, Sony expanded into the financial sector. In 2021, Sony transformed into a holding company, handing over the name Sony Corporation to its subsidiary as the electronics company.

Sony, with its 55 percent market share in the image sensor market, is the largest manufacturer of image sensors, the second largest camera manufacturer, and is among the semiconductor sales leaders. It is the world&#x27;s largest player in the premium TV market for a television of at least with a price higher than $2,500 as well as second largest TV brand by market share and, as of 2020, the third largest television manufacturer in the world by annual sales figures.

Although not being a part of any traditional &quot;keiretsu&quot;, Sony has a weak tie to the Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group (SMFG), which traces its roots to the Mitsui &quot;zaibatsu&quot;. This connection dates back to the 1950s when it was the only bank the company dealt with. Sony is listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (in which it is a constituent of the Nikkei 225 and TOPIX Core30 indeces) with an additional listing in the form of American depositary receipts listed in the New York Stock Exchange (traded since 1961, making it one of the oldest Japanese companies to be listed on an American exchange), and was ranked 88th on the 2021 &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500 list. In 2023, the company was ranked 57th in the &quot;Forbes&quot; Global 2000.

==History==
===Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo===

Sony began in the wake of World War II. In 1946, Masaru Ibuka started an electronics shop in Shirokiya, a department store building in the Nihonbashi area of Tokyo. The company started with a capital of ¥190,000 and a total of eight employees. On 7 May 1946, Ibuka was joined by Akio Morita to establish a company called . The company built Japan&#x27;s first tape recorder, called the Type-G. In 1958, the company changed its name to &quot;Sony&quot;.

===Name===
&quot;Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo&quot; founders Morita and Ibuka realized that to achieve success and grow, their business had to expand to the global market, which required labeling their products with a short and easy brand name. While looking for a romanized name, they at first strongly considered using their initials, TTK. The primary reason they did not is that the railway company Tokyo Kyuko was known as TTK. The company occasionally used the syllabic acronym &quot;Totsuko&quot; in Japan, but during his visit to the United States, Morita discovered that Americans had trouble pronouncing that name. Another early name that was tried out for a while was &quot;Tokyo Teletech&quot; until Akio Morita discovered that there was an American company already using Teletech as a brand name.

The name &quot;Sony&quot; was chosen for the brand as a mix of two words: one was the Latin word &quot;&quot;&quot;, which is the root of sonic and sound, and the other was &quot;&quot;&quot;, a common slang term used in 1950s America to call a young boy. In 1950s Japan, &quot;sonny boys&quot; was a loan word in Japanese, which connoted smart and presentable young men, which Akio Morita and Masaru Ibuka considered themselves to be.

The first Sony-branded product, the TR-55 transistor radio, appeared in 1955, but the company name did not change to Sony until January 1958.

At the time of the change, it was extremely unusual for a Japanese company to use Roman letters to spell its name instead of writing it in kanji. The move was not without opposition: TTK&#x27;s principal bank at the time, Mitsui, had strong feelings about the name. They pushed for a name such as Sony Electronic Industries, or Sony Teletech. Akio Morita was firm, however, as he did not want the company name tied to any particular industry. Eventually, both Ibuka and Mitsui Bank&#x27;s chairman gave their approval.

===Globalization===
According to Schiffer, Sony&#x27;s TR-63 radio &quot;cracked open the U.S. market and launched the new industry of consumer microelectronics.&quot; By the mid-1950s, American teens had begun buying portable transistor radios in huge numbers, helping to propel the fledgling industry from an estimated 100,000 units in 1955 to 5 million units by the end of 1968.

Sony co-founder Akio Morita founded Sony Corporation of America in 1960. In the process, he was struck by the mobility of employees between American companies, which was unheard of in Japan at that time. When he returned to Japan, he encouraged experienced, middle-aged employees of other companies to reevaluate their careers and consider joining Sony. The company filled many positions in this manner, and inspired other Japanese companies to do the same. Moreover, Sony played a major role in the development of Japan as a powerful exporter during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, supplying the U.S. Military with bomb parts used in the Vietnam War. It also helped to significantly improve American perceptions of &quot;made in Japan&quot; products. Known for its production quality, Sony was able to charge above-market prices for its consumer electronics and resisted lowering prices.

In 1971, Masaru Ibuka handed the position of president over to his co-founder Akio Morita. Sony began a life insurance company in 1979, one of its many peripheral businesses. Amid a global recession in the early 1980s, electronics sales dropped and the company was forced to cut prices. Sony&#x27;s profits fell sharply. &quot;It&#x27;s over for Sony&quot;, one analyst concluded. &quot;The company&#x27;s best days are behind it.&quot;

Around that time, Norio Ohga took up the role of president. He encouraged the development of the compact disc (CD) in the 1970s and 1980s, and of the PlayStation in the early 1990s. Ohga went on to purchase CBS Records in 1988 and Columbia Pictures in 1989, greatly expanding Sony&#x27;s media presence. Ohga would succeed Morita as chief executive officer in 1989.

Under the vision of co-founder Akio Morita and his successors, the company had aggressively expanded into new businesses. Part of its motivation for doing so was the pursuit of &quot;convergence&quot;, linking film, music and digital electronics via the Internet. This expansion proved unrewarding and unprofitable, threatening Sony&#x27;s ability to charge a premium on its products as well as its brand name. In 2005, Howard Stringer replaced Nobuyuki Idei as chief executive officer, marking the first time that a foreigner had run a major Japanese electronics firm. Stringer helped to reinvigorate the company&#x27;s struggling media businesses, encouraging blockbusters such as &quot;Spider-Man&quot; while cutting 9,000 jobs. He hoped to sell off peripheral business and focus the company again on electronics. Furthermore, he aimed to increase cooperation between business units, which he described as &quot;silos&quot; operating in isolation from one another. In a bid to provide a unified brand for its global operations, Sony introduced a slogan known as &quot;make.believe&quot; in 2009.

Despite some successes, the company faced continued struggles in the mid- to late-2000s. In 2012, Kazuo Hirai was promoted to president and CEO, replacing Stringer. Shortly thereafter, Hirai outlined his company-wide initiative, named &quot;One Sony&quot; to revive Sony from years of financial losses and bureaucratic management structure, which proved difficult for former CEO Stringer to accomplish, partly due to differences in business culture and native languages between Stringer and some of Sony&#x27;s Japanese divisions and subsidiaries. Hirai outlined three major areas of focus for Sony&#x27;s electronics business, which include imaging technology, gaming and mobile technology, as well as a focus on reducing the major losses from the television business.

In February 2014, Sony announced the sale of its Vaio PC division to a new corporation owned by investment fund Japan Industrial Partners and spinning its TV division into its own corporation as to make it more nimble to turn the unit around from past losses totaling $7.8 billion over a decade. Later that month, they announced that they would be closing 20 stores. In April, the company announced that they would be selling 9.5 million shares in Square Enix (roughly 8.2 percent of the game company&#x27;s total shares) in a deal worth approximately $48 million. In May 2014 the company announced it was forming two joint ventures with Shanghai Oriental Pearl Group to manufacture and market Sony&#x27;s PlayStation game consoles and associated software in China.

In 2015, Sony purchased Toshiba&#x27;s image sensor business.

It was reported in December 2016 by multiple news outlets that Sony was considering restructuring its U.S. operations by merging its TV &amp; film business, Sony Pictures Entertainment, with its gaming business, Sony Interactive Entertainment. According to the reports, such a restructuring would have placed Sony Pictures under Sony Interactive&#x27;s CEO, Andrew House, though House would not have taken over day-to-day operations of the film studio. According to one report, Sony was set to make a final decision on the possibility of the merger of the TV, film, &amp; gaming businesses by the end of its fiscal year in March of the following year (2017).

In 2017, Sony sold its lithium-ion battery business to Murata Manufacturing.

In 2019, Sony merged its mobile, TV and camera businesses.

On 1 April 2020, Sony Electronics Corporation was established as an intermediate holding company to own and oversee its electronics and IT solutions businesses.

On 19 May 2020, the company announced that it would change its name to Sony Group Corporation as of 1 April 2021. Subsequently, Sony Electronics Corporation would be renamed to Sony Corporation. On the same day the company announced that it would turn Sony Financial Holdings (currently Sony Financial Group), of which Sony already owns 65.06% of shares, to a wholly owned subsidiary through a takeover bid.

On 1 April 2021, Sony Corporation was renamed Sony Group Corporation. On the same day, Sony Mobile Communications Inc. absorbed Sony Electronics Corporation, Sony Imaging Products &amp; Solutions Inc., and Sony Home Entertainment &amp; Sound Products Inc. and changed its trade name to Sony Corporation.

==Formats and technologies==
Sony has historically been notable for creating its own in-house standards for new recording and storage technologies, instead of adopting those of other manufacturers and standards bodies, while its success in the early years owes to a smooth capitalization on the Digital Compact Cassette standard introduced by Philips, with which Sony went on to enjoy a decades-long technological relationship in various areas. Sony (either alone or with partners) has introduced several of the most popular recording formats, including the 3.5-inch floppy disk, compact disc and Blu-ray disc.

===Video recording===
Sony introduced U-matic, the world&#x27;s first videocassette format, in 1971, but the standard was unpopular for domestic use due to the high price. The company subsequently launched the Betamax format in 1975. Sony was involved in the videotape format war of the early 1980s, when they were marketing the Betamax system for video cassette recorders against the VHS format developed by JVC. In the end, VHS gained critical mass in the marketbase and became the worldwide standard for consumer VCRs.

Betamax is, for all practical purposes, an obsolete format. Sony&#x27;s professional-oriented component video format called Betacam, which was derived from Betamax, was used until 2016 when Sony announced it was stopping production of all remaining 1/2-inch video tape recorders and players, including the Digital Betacam format.

In 1985, Sony launched their Handycam products and the Video8 format. Video8 and the follow-on hi-band Hi8 format became popular in the consumer camcorder market. In 1987 Sony launched the 4 mm DAT or Digital Audio Tape as a new digital audio tape standard.

=== Visual display ===
Sony held a patent for its proprietary Trinitron until 1996.

Sony introduced the Triluminos Display, the company&#x27;s proprietary color reproduction enhancing technology, in 2004, featured in the world&#x27;s first LED-backlit LCD televisions. It was widely used in other Sony&#x27;s products as well, including computer monitors, laptops, and smartphones. In 2013, Sony released a new line of televisions with an improved version of the technology, which incorporated quantum dots in the backlight system. It was the first commercial use of quantum dots.

In 2012, the company revealed a prototype of an ultrafine RGB LED display, which it calls the Crystal LED Display.

===Audio recording===
Sony used the Compact Cassette format in many of its tape recorders and players, including the Walkman, the world&#x27;s first portable music player. Sony introduced the MiniDisc format in 1992 as an alternative to Philips DCC or Digital Compact Cassette and as a successor to the Compact Cassette. Since the introduction of MiniDisc, Sony has attempted to promote its own audio compression technologies under the ATRAC brand, against the more widely used MP3. Until late 2004, Sony&#x27;s Network Walkman line of digital portable music players did not support the MP3 standard natively.

In 2004, Sony built upon the MiniDisc format by releasing Hi-MD. Hi-MD allows the playback and recording of audio on newly introduced 1 GB Hi-MD discs in addition to playback and recording on regular MiniDiscs. In addition to saving audio on the discs, Hi-MD allows the storage of computer files such as documents, videos and photos.

===Audio encoding===
In 1993, Sony challenged the industry standard Dolby Digital 5.1 surround sound format with a newer and more advanced proprietary motion picture digital audio format called SDDS (Sony Dynamic Digital Sound). This format employed eight channels (7.1) of audio opposed to just six used in Dolby Digital 5.1 at the time. Ultimately, SDDS has been vastly overshadowed by the preferred DTS (Digital Theatre System) and Dolby Digital standards in the motion picture industry. SDDS was solely developed for use in the theatre circuit; Sony never intended to develop a home theatre version of SDDS.

Sony and Philips jointly developed the Sony-Philips digital interface format (S/PDIF) and the high-fidelity audio system SACD. The latter became entrenched in a format war with DVD-Audio. Still, neither gained a major foothold with the general public. CDs had been preferred by consumers because of the ubiquitous presence of CD drives in consumer devices until the early 2000s when the iPod and streaming services became available.

In 2015, Sony introduced LDAC, a proprietary audio coding technology which allows streaming high-resolution audio over Bluetooth connections at up to 990 kbit/s at 32 bit/96 kHz. Sony also contributed it as part of the Android Open Source Project starting from Android 8.0 &quot;Oreo&quot;, enabling every OEM to integrate this standard into their own Android devices freely. However the &quot;decoder&quot; library is proprietary, so receiving devices require licenses. On 17 September 2019, the Japan Audio Society (JAS) certified LDAC with their Hi-Res Audio Wireless certification. Currently the only codecs with the Hi-Res Audio Wireless certification are LDAC and LHDC, another competing standard.

===Optical storage===

Sony demonstrated an optical digital audio disc in 1977 and soon joined hands with Philips, another major contender for the storage technology, to establish a worldwide standard. In 1983, the two company jointly announced the Compact Disc (CD). In 1984, Sony launched the Discman series, an expansion of the Walkman brand to portable CD players. Sony began to improve performance and capacity of the novel format. It launched write-once optical discs (WO) and magneto-optical discs which were around 125MB size for the specific use of archival data storage, in 1986 and 1988 respectively.

In the early 1990s, two high-density optical storage standards were being developed: one was the MultiMedia Compact Disc (MMCD), backed by Philips and Sony, and the other was the Super Density Disc (SD), supported by Toshiba and many others. Philips and Sony abandoned their MMCD format and agreed upon Toshiba&#x27;s SD format with only one modification. The unified disc format was called DVD and was introduced in 1997.

Sony was one of the leading developers of the Blu-ray optical disc format, the newest standard for disc-based content delivery. The first Blu-ray players became commercially available in 2006. The format emerged as the standard for HD media over the competing format, Toshiba&#x27;s HD DVD, after a two-year-long high-definition optical disc format war.

Sony&#x27;s laser communication devices for small satellites rely on the technologies developed for the company&#x27;s optical disc products.

===Disk storage===
In 1983, Sony introduced 90 mm micro diskettes, better known as floppy disks, which it had developed at a time when there were 4&quot; floppy disks, and many variations from different companies, to replace the then on-going 5.25&quot; floppy disks. Sony had great success and the format became dominant. 3.5&quot; floppy disks gradually became obsolete as they were replaced by current media formats. Sony held more than a 70 percent share of the market when it decided to pull the plug on the format in 2010.

Sony still develops magnetic tape storage technologies along with IBM, and are one of only two manufacturers of Linear Tape-Open (LTO) cartridges.

===Flash memory===
In 1998, Sony launched the Memory Stick format, the flash memory cards for use in Sony lines of digital cameras and portable music players. It has seen little support outside of Sony&#x27;s own products, with Secure Digital cards (SD) commanding considerably greater popularity. Sony has made updates to the Memory Stick format with Memory Stick Duo and Memory Stick Micro. The company has also released USB flash drive products, branded under the Micro Vault line.

===Communication===
Sony introduced FeliCa, a contactless IC card technology primarily used in contactless payment, as a result of the company&#x27;s joint development and commercialization of Near-Field Communication (NFC) with Philips. The standard is largely offered in two forms, either chips embedded in smartphones or plastic cards with chips embedded in them. Sony plans to implement this technology in train systems across Asia.

In 2019, Sony launched the ELTRES, the company&#x27;s proprietary low-power wide-area wireless communication (LPWAN) standard.

===Video gaming===
Until 1991, Sony had little direct involvement with the video game industry. The company supplied components for other consoles, such as the sound chip for the Super Famicom from Nintendo, and operated a video game studio, Sony Imagesoft. As part of a joint project between Nintendo and Sony that began as early as 1988, the two companies worked to create a CD-ROM version of the Super Famicom, though Nintendo denied the existence of the Sony deal as late as March 1991. At the Consumer Electronics Show in June 1991, Sony revealed a Super Famicom with a built-in CD-ROM drive, named the &quot;Play Station&quot; (also known as SNES-CD). However, a day after the announcement at CES, Nintendo announced that it would be breaking its partnership with Sony, opting to go with Philips instead but using the same technology. The deal was broken by Nintendo after they were unable to come to an agreement on how revenue would be split between the two companies. The breaking of the partnership infuriated Sony President Norio Ohga, who responded by appointing Kutaragi with the responsibility of developing the PlayStation project to rival Nintendo.

At that time, negotiations were still on-going between Nintendo and Sony, with Nintendo offering Sony a &quot;non-gaming role&quot; regarding their new partnership with Philips. This proposal was swiftly rejected by Kutaragi who was facing increasing criticism over his work with regard to entering the video game industry from within Sony. Negotiations officially ended in May 1992 and in order to decide the fate of the PlayStation project, a meeting was held in June 1992, consisting of Sony President Ohga, PlayStation Head Kutaragi and several senior members of Sony&#x27;s board. At the meeting, Kutaragi unveiled a proprietary CD-ROM-based system he had been working on which involved playing video games with 3D graphics to the board. Eventually, Sony President Ohga decided to retain the project after being reminded by Kutaragi of the humiliation he suffered from Nintendo. Nevertheless, due to strong opposition from a majority present at the meeting as well as widespread internal opposition to the project by the older generation of Sony executives, Kutaragi and his team had to be shifted from Sony&#x27;s headquarters to Sony Music, a completely separate financial entity owned by Sony, so as to retain the project and maintain relationships with Philips for the MMCD development project (which helped lead to the creation of the DVD)

===Continued research and development===
In 2021, the WIPO&#x27;s annual review of the World Intellectual Property Indicators report ranked Sony&#x27;s as ninth in the world for the number of patent applications published under the PCT System. 1,793 patent applications were published by Sony during 2020. This position is up from their previous ranking as 13th in 2019 with 1,566 applications.

==Business units==

Best known for its electronic products, Sony offers a wide variety of product lines in many areas. At its peak, it was dubbed as a &quot;corporate octopus&quot;, for its sprawling ventures from private insurance to chemicals to cosmetics to home shopping to a Tokyo-based French food joint, in addition its core businesses such as electronics and entertainment. Even after it has unwound many business units including Sony Chemicals and Vaio PC, Sony still runs diverse businesses.

As of 2020, Sony is organized into the following business segments: Game &amp; Network Services (G&amp;NS), Music, Pictures, Electronics Products &amp; Solutions (EP&amp;S), Imaging &amp; Sensing Solutions (I&amp;SS), Financial Services, and Others. Usually, each business segment has a handful of corresponding intermediate holding companies under which all the related businesses are folded into, such as Columbia Records being part of Sony Music Group, a subsidiary and, at the same time, a holding company for Sony&#x27;s music businesses, along with SMEJ.

===Electronics products &amp; solutions===
Sony Corporation (Sony Electronics Corporation until 1 April 2021) is the electronics business unit of the Sony Group. It primarily conducts research and development (R&amp;D), planning, designing, manufacturing and marketing for electronics products. Sony Global Manufacturing &amp; Operations Corporation (SGMO) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sony Corporation and responsible for managing manufacturing operations both in Japan and overseas, through its own factories as well as third party contract manufacturers.

====Audio====
In 1979, Sony released the world&#x27;s first portable music player, the Walkman, bundled with the MDL-3L2 headphones. This line fostered a fundamental change in music listening habits by allowing people to carry music with them and listen to music through lightweight headphones. Originally used to refer to portable audio cassette players, the Walkman brand has been widely adopted by the company to encompass its portable digital audio and video players as well as a line of former Sony Ericsson mobile phones. In the case of optical disc players, the Discman brand was used until the late 1990s. In 1999 Sony&#x27;s first portable digital audio players were introduced; one was a player using Memory Stick flash storage created by the Walkman division, and the other was a smaller pen-sized player with embedded flash storage created by the Vaio division; both accompanied with Sony&#x27;s OpenMG copyright protection technology and PC software for music transfer. Sony continue to develop Walkman digital audio players.

Sony is a major audio products manufacturer and one of the active noise control technology leaders.

Sony&#x27;s high-end microphones and headphones for professional use are produced at Sony/Taiyo Corporation, a designated special subsidiary at which 67% of employees have a disability, in Ōita Prefecture, Japan.

====Car audio====
Sony partnered with Ford, Toyota and also the Volkswagen Group to provide Sony OEM branded audio for their vehicles. A specialist Sony Xplod audio system was fitted to the Ford GTX1 supercar.
Sony currently produces aftermarket car audio with their Mobile ES series.

====Video====

Sony produced the TV8-301, the world&#x27;s first all-transistor television, in 1959. In 1968, the company introduced the Trinitron brand name for its lines of aperture grille cathode-ray tube televisions and afterwards computer monitors. Sony stopped production of Trinitron for most markets, but continued producing sets for markets such as Pakistan, Bangladesh and China. Sony discontinued its series of Trinitron computer monitors in 2005. The company discontinued the last Trinitron-based television set in the U.S. in early 2007. The end of Trinitron marked the end of Sony&#x27;s analog television sets and monitors.

Sony used the LCD WEGA name for its LCD TVs until summer 2005. The company then introduced the BRAVIA name. BRAVIA is an in-house brand owned by Sony which produces high-definition LCD televisions, projection TVs and front projectors, home cinemas and the BRAVIA home theatre range. All Sony high-definition flat-panel LCD televisions in North America have carried the logo for BRAVIA since 2005. In 2006, Sony lost its decades-long No.1 market share in the global television market. In November 2007, the Sony XEL-1, the first OLED television, was released and manufactured for two years. Later in 2013, Sony demonstrated the first 4K OLED television. As of 2012, Sony was the third-largest maker of televisions in the world and the business unit had been unprofitable for eight consecutive years.

From 2011, Sony started restructuring of its loss-making television business, mainly by downsizing business units and outsourcing the manufacturing of display panels to the companies like Sharp Corporation, LG Display, and Samsung Electronics. In December 2011, Sony agreed to sell all stake in an LCD joint venture with Samsung Electronics (S-LCD) for about $940 million. On 28 March 2012, Sony and Sharp announced that they have agreed to further amend the joint venture agreement originally executed by the parties in July 2009, as amended in April 2011, for the establishment and operation of Sharp Display Products Corporation (&quot;SDP&quot;), a joint venture to produce and sell large-sized LCD panels and modules. The agreement was eventually terminated as Sony parted ways. Sony&#x27;s small-sized LCD business subsidiary and medium-to-large-sized OLED display business unit were spun off and became part of Japan Display and JOLED, respectively.

In 2017, Sony launched OLED televisions under the BRAVIA brand.

Also, Sony has sold a range of tapes, discs, recorders and players for videocassette, DVD, and Blu-ray formats for decades.

====Photography and videography====
Sony offers a wide range of digital cameras. Its point-and-shoot models are branded Cyber-shot, while DSLRs and mirrorless models are branded Alpha, though Sony no longer makes DSLRs. It also produces action cameras and camcorders, with the company&#x27;s cinema-grade products being sold under the CineAlta name.

Sony demonstrated a prototype of the Sony Mavica in 1981 and released it for the consumer market in 1988. The first Cyber-shot was introduced in 1996. Sony&#x27;s market share of the digital camera market fell from a high of 20% to 9% by 2005.

Sony entered the market for digital single-lens reflex cameras in 2006 when it acquired the camera business of Konica Minolta. Sony rebranded the company&#x27;s line of cameras as its Alpha line. Sony is the world&#x27;s third largest manufacturer of the cameras, behind Canon and Nikon respectively.

In 2010, Sony introduced their first mirrorless interchangeable-lens cameras, which were the NEX-3 and the NEX-5. They also started a new lens mount system, which was the E-mount. There were quite a few NEX models out there, when Sony decided to melt the NEX series into the Alpha series. The first Alpha MILC was the α3000, which was introduced in August 2013. It was followed by the Full-Frame α7 and α7R in October, then the successors of the NEX-5, the NEX-6 and NEX-7, the α5000 and the α6000 in 2014. The α6000 became the most popular MILC ever and Sony became the largest MILC manufacturer.

====Computing====

Sony produced computers ( personal computer, MSX home computers and NEWS workstations) during the 1980s. The company withdrew from the computer business around 1990. Sony entered again into the global computer market under the new VAIO brand, began in 1996. Short for &quot;Video Audio Integrated Operation&quot;, the line was the first computer brand to highlight visual-audio features.

Sony faced considerable controversy when some of its laptop batteries exploded and caught fire in 2006, resulting in the largest computer-related recall to that point in history.

In a bid to join the tablet computer market, the company launched its Sony Tablet line of Android tablets in 2011. Since 2012, Sony&#x27;s Android products have been marketed under the Xperia brand used for its smartphones.

On 4 February 2014, Sony announced that it would sell its VAIO PC business due to poor sales and Japanese company Japan Industrial Partners (JIP) will purchase the VAIO brand, with the deal finalized by the end of March 2014. As of 2018, Sony maintained a 5% stake in the new, independent company.

In 1990s, Sony was contracted to manufacture laptop computers for Apple and Dell. The Raspberry Pi Foundation delegates the manufacture of its single-board computers to Sony. Most Raspberry Pi computers are made at Sony UK Technology Centre in Pencoed, Wales, UK.

====Healthcare and biotechnology====
Sony has targeted medical, healthcare and biotechnology business as a growth sector in the future. The company acquired iCyt Mission Technology, Inc. (renamed Sony Biotechnology Inc. in 2012), a manufacturer of flow cytometers, in 2010 and Micronics, Inc., a developer of microfluidics-based diagnostic tools, in 2011.

In 2012, Sony announced that it would acquire all shares of So-net Entertainment Corporation, the largest shareholder of M3, Inc., an operator of portal sites (m3.com, MR-kun, MDLinx and MEDI:GATE) for healthcare professionals.

On 28 September 2012, Olympus and Sony announced that the two companies will establish a joint venture to develop new surgical endoscopes with 4K resolution (or higher) and 3D capability. Sony Olympus Medical Solutions Inc. (Sony 51%, Olympus 49%) was established on 16 April 2013.

On 28 February 2014, Sony, M3 and Illumina established a joint venture called P5, Inc. to provide a genome analysis service for research institutions and enterprises in Japan.

====Mobility====

In 2000, Sony was a marginal player in the mobile phone market with a share of less than 1 percent. In 2001, Sony entered into a joint venture with Swedish telecommunications company Ericsson, forming Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications. Initial sales were rocky, and the company posted losses in 2001 and 2002. However, Sony Ericsson reached a profit in 2003. The company distinguished itself with multimedia-capable mobile phones, which included features such as cameras. These were unusual at the time. Despite their innovations, Sony Ericsson faced intense competition from Apple&#x27;s iPhone, which was released in 2007. From 2008 to 2010, amid a global recession, Sony Ericsson slashed its workforce by several thousand. In 2009, Sony Ericsson was the fourth-largest mobile phone manufacturer in the world (after Nokia, Samsung and LG). By 2010, its market share had fallen to sixth place. Sony acquired Ericsson&#x27;s share of the venture in 2012 for over US$1 billion. Sony Mobile focuses exclusively on the smartphone market under the Xperia brand.

In 2013, Sony contributed to around two percent of the mobile phone market with 37 million mobile phones sold. Sony Mobile&#x27;s sales reached a peak in 2014 with 40 million handsets, the volume has since decreased. Sony shipped 13.5 million phones in 2017, 6.5 million in 2018, and 2.9 million handsets in FY 2020.

====Robotics====
Since the late 1990s, Sony has released numerous consumer robots, including dog-shaped robots called AIBO, a music playing robot called Rolly, and a humanoid robot called QRIO. Despite being a pioneer in the field, Sony had ceased robotics-related operations for 10 years due to financial difficulties, until it decided to revive them in 2016.

In 2015, Sony partnered with an autonomous driving startup ZMP INC. to establish an aerial surveillance and reconnaissance drone manufacturer named Aerosense. At the CES 2021, Sony unveiled a drone with the brand Airpeak, the smallest of its kind that can incorporate a Sony Alpha camera according to the company, entering the drone business on its own for the first time.

===Imaging &amp; sensing solutions===
Sony traces its roots in the semiconductor business back to 1954, when it became the first Japanese company to commercialize the transistor, invented and licensed by Bell Labs, whilst some of the biggest and well-established names in Japan at the time like Toshiba and Mitsubishi Electric initially stuck with vacuum tubes they had been thriving on; despite being an expert on the vacuum tube himself, Ibuka saw potential of the novel technology and had Morita negotiate the terms for licensing, making Sony into one of the earliest and the youngest licensees of the transistor, together with Texas Instruments. In 1957, Sony employee Leo Esaki and his colleagues invented a tunnel diode (usually referred to as Esaki diode) by which they discovered the quantum tunneling effect in solids, for which Esaki received the Nobel prize in Physics in 1973. Sony has commanded a dominant share in the charge-coupled device market.

As of 2020, Sony is the world&#x27;s largest manufacturer of CMOS image sensors as its chips are widely used in digital cameras, tablet computers, smartphones, drones and more recently, self-driving systems in automobiles.

As of 2020, the company, through its chip business arm Sony Semiconductor Solutions, designs, manufactures, and sells a wide range of semiconductors and electronic components, including image sensors (HAD CCD, Exmor), image processors (BIONZ), laser diodes, system LSIs, mixed-signal LSIs, emerging memory storage, emerging displays (microLED, microOLED, and holographic display), multi-functional microcomputer (&quot;SPRESENSE&quot;), etc.

In 2020, Sony has launched the first intelligent vision sensors with AI edge computing capabilies.

===Game &amp; network services===

Sony Interactive Entertainment (formerly Sony Computer Entertainment) is best known for producing the popular line of PlayStation consoles. The line grew out of a failed partnership with Nintendo. Originally, Nintendo requested Sony to develop an add-on for its Super Nintendo Entertainment System that would play CD-ROMs. In 1991 Sony announced the add-on, as well as a dedicated console known as the &quot;Play Station&quot;. However, a disagreement over software licensing for the console caused the partnership to fall through. Sony then continued the project independently.

Launched in 1994, the first PlayStation gained 61% of global console sales and broke Nintendo&#x27;s long-standing lead in the market. Sony followed up with the PlayStation 2 in 2000, which was even more successful. The console has become the most successful of all time, selling over 150 million units . Sony released the PlayStation 3, a high-definition console, in 2006. It was the first console to use the Blu-ray format, and was considerably more expensive than the competitors Xbox 360 and Wii due to the Cell processor.

Early on, poor sales performance resulted in significant losses for the company, pushing it to sell the console at a loss. The PlayStation 3 sold generally more poorly than its competitors in the early years of its release but managed to overtake the Xbox 360 in global sales later on. It later introduced the PlayStation Move, an accessory that allows players to control video games using motion gestures.

Sony extended the brand to the portable games market in 2004 with the PlayStation Portable (PSP). The console has sold reasonably, but has taken a second place to a rival handheld, the Nintendo DS. Sony developed the Universal Media Disc (UMD) optical disc medium for use on the PlayStation Portable. Early on, the format was used for movies, but it has since lost major studio support. Sony released a disc-less version of its PlayStation Portable, the PSP Go, in 2009. The company went on to release its second portable video game system, PlayStation Vita, in 2011 and 2012. Sony launched its fourth console, the PlayStation 4, on 15 November 2013, which as of 31 December 2017 has sold 73.6 million units globally.

On 18 March 2014, at GDC, president of SCE Worldwide Studios Shuhei Yoshida announced their new virtual reality technology dubbed Project Morpheus, and later named PlayStation VR, for PlayStation 4. The headset brought VR gaming and non-gaming software to the company&#x27;s console. According to a report released by Houston-based patent consulting firm LexInnova in May 2015, Sony is leading the virtual reality patent race. According to the firm&#x27;s analysis of nearly 12,000 patents or patent applications, Sony has 366 virtual reality patents or patent applications. PlayStation VR was released worldwide on 13 October 2016.

On 31 March 2019, the successor to the PlayStation 4 was announced and on 12 November 2020, the PlayStation 5 was released in North America, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. The console was launched in Indonesia on 22 January 2021. Upon completion of the fiscal quarter, Sony sold 4.5 million PlayStation 5 consoles, keeping pace with the best-selling console of all time, the PlayStation 2.

===Pictures and music===
Sony Entertainment has two divisions: Sony Pictures Entertainment, Sony Music Group (Sony Music Entertainment, Sony Music Publishing). Sony USA previously owned and operated Sony Trans Com: a technology business that provided in-flight entertainment programming as well as video and audio playback equipment for the airline industry. Sony had purchased the business from Sundstrand Corp. in 1989 and subsequently sold it to Rockwell Collins in 2000.

In 2012, Sony rolled most of its consumer content services (including video, music and gaming) into the Sony Entertainment Network, the predecessor of PlayStation Network.

====Sony Pictures Entertainment====

Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc. (SPE) is the television and film production/distribution unit of Sony. With 12.5% box office market share in 2011, the company was ranked third among movie studios. Its group sales in 2010 were US$7.2 billion. The company has produced many notable movie franchises, including &quot;Spider-Man&quot;, &quot;The Karate Kid&quot; and &quot;Men in Black&quot;. It has also produced the popular television game shows &quot;Jeopardy!&quot; and &quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;.

Sony entered the television and film production market when it acquired Columbia Pictures Entertainment in 1989 for $3.4 billion. Columbia lives on in the Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group, a division of SPE which in turn owns Columbia Pictures and TriStar Pictures among other film production and distribution companies such as Screen Gems, Sony Pictures Classics, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. SPE&#x27;s television division is known as Sony Pictures Television.

For the first several years of its existence, Sony Pictures Entertainment performed poorly, leading many to suspect the company would sell off the division. In 2006, Sony started using ARccOS Protection on some of their film DVDs, but later issued a recall.

In late 2014, Sony Pictures became the target of a hack attack from a clandestine group called Guardians of Peace, weeks before releasing the anti-North Korean comedy film &quot;The Interview&quot;.

In February 2024, Sony entered into an agreement with Disney under which Sony Pictures Home Entertainment Corporation of Japan will handle the release of Disney products on DVD and Blu-ray on a licensing model, as well as production on physical media. Sony will market, sell and distribute new Disney releases and catalog films on DVD, Blu-ray and 4K Ultra DVD through Canadian and U.S. retailers and distributors.

====Sony Music Group and SMEJ====

Sony Music Entertainment (also known as SME or Sony Music) is the largest global recorded music company of the &quot;big three&quot; record companies and is controlled by Sony Corporation of America, the United States subsidiary of Sony.

In one of its largest-ever acquisitions, Sony purchased CBS Record Group in 1988 for US$2 billion. In the process, Sony partnered and gained the rights to the ATV catalogue of Michael Jackson, considered by the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; to be the most successful entertainer of all time. The acquisition of CBS Records provided the foundation for the formation of Sony Music Entertainment, which Sony established in 1991.

In 1968, Sony and CBS Records had formed a 50:50 joint-venture CBS/Sony Records, later renamed CBS/Sony Group, in Japan. When CBS Records was acquired, a 50% stake in CBS/Sony Group owned by CBS was also transferred to Sony. In March 1988, four wholly owned subsidiaries were folded into CBS/Sony Group and the company was renamed as Sony Music Entertainment Japan (SMEJ). It operates independently of Sony Music as it is directly owned by Japanese Sony.

In 2004, Sony entered into a joint venture with Bertelsmann AG, merging Sony Music Entertainment with Bertelsmann Music Group to create Sony BMG. In 2005, Sony BMG faced a copy protection scandal, because its music CDs had installed malware on users&#x27; computers that was posing a security risk to affected customers. In 2007, the company acquired Famous Music for US$370 million, gaining the rights to the catalogues of Eminem and Akon, among others. Sony bought out Bertelsmann&#x27;s share in Sony BMG and formed a new Sony Music Entertainment in 2008. Since then, the company has undergone management changes.

Sony purchased digital music recognition company Gracenote for US$260 million in 2008. Tribune Media Company acquired Gracenote from Sony in 2014 for $170 million.

Besides its record label, Sony operates other music businesses. In 1995, Sony merged its publisher with Michael Jackson&#x27;s ATV Music Publishing, forming Sony/ATV Music Publishing. At the time, the publishing company was the second largest of its kind in the world. The company owns the publishing rights to over 4 million compositions, including The Beatles&#x27; Lennon–McCartney catalogue, Bob Dylan, Eminem, Lady Gaga, Sam Smith, Ed Sheeran, and Taylor Swift.

In 2012, Sony/ATV acquired a majority stake in EMI Music Publishing, becoming the world&#x27;s largest music publishing company. In 2018, Sony bought the rest of the shares in the publisher, making it a wholly owned subsidiary. Since 2016, Sony owns all of Sony/ATV.

==== Anime ====

Sony&#x27;s entering into the Japanese animation, or anime, business happened in 1995 when its Sony Music Entertainment Japan (SMEJ) division established Aniplex as its subsidiary managing creative productions, which founded A-1 Pictures, the first anime studio of Sony, ten years later. Since then, through group-wide and international ventures, Sony has solidified its position in the industry, elevating the business to what is called the &quot;fourth pillar of its entertainment portfolio&quot; according to &quot;The Nikkei&quot;.

The anime business operations of Sony are scattered around the group, mainly in its Pictures and Music units, as follows: SMEJ&#x27;s notable related businesses include Aniplex and its subsidiaries CloverWorks and A-1 Pictures; Aniplex and U.S.-headquartered Sony Pictures co-own U.S.-based anime distribution company Crunchyroll, which since 2022, has become the successor company to Funimation, which it acquired in 2017 and included subsidiaries such as Wakanim (absorbing into Crunchyroll itself) and Madman Anime (to be rebranded as Crunchyroll Pty. Ltd.)

In December 2020, Funimation announced that it would buy AT&amp;T&#x27;s animation business Crunchyroll for $1.175 billion, which would help the company to compete more globally with entertainment giants such as Netflix. This acquisition was completed in August 2021.

===Financial services===
Sony Financial Group is a holding company for Sony&#x27;s financial services business which includes Sony Life (in Japan and the Philippines), Sony Assurance, Sony Bank, etc. The unit proved to be the most profitable of Sony&#x27;s businesses in FY 2005, earning $1.7 billion in profit. Sony Financial&#x27;s low fees have aided the unit&#x27;s popularity while threatening Sony&#x27;s premium brand name.

=== Others ===

====Electric vehicles and batteries====
A company behind the commercialization of lithium-ion battery, Sony had been exploring the possibility to manufacture the batteries for electric vehicles. In 2014, Sony participated within NRG Energy eVgo Ready for Electric Vehicle (REV) program, for EV charging parking lots. However, the company then decided to sell its lithium-ion battery business to Murata Manufacturing in 2016.

In 2015, Sony invested $842,000 in ZMP INC., drawing speculations that it is contemplating developing self-driving cars. In January 2020, Sony unveiled a concept electric car at the Consumer Electronics Show, named Vision-S, designed in collaboration with components manufacturer Magna International. At the occasion, Sony also stated its goal of developing technology for the automotive sector, especially concerning autonomous driving, sensors, and in-car entertainment.

In 2022, Sony Group and Honda launched a joint venture for their electric vehicle partnership, Sony Honda Mobility (SHM), which would deliver its first electric vehicles by 2026 and sell them online, starting in the United States and Japan. The joint venture announced their new &quot;Afeela&quot; brand and its first prototype model at the CES 2023.

==Corporate information==

===Institutional ownership===
Sony is a &quot;kabushiki gaisha&quot; registered to the Tokyo Stock Exchange in Japan and the New York Stock Exchange for overseas trading. , the largest shareholders of Sony are as follows:

* The Master Trust Bank of Japan–nominated investment trusts (main account; 17.95%)
* Citibank (as depositary bank for American depositary receipt holders; 8.91%)
* Japan Trustee Services Bank–nominated investment trusts
** Main trust account (6.1%)
** Trust account 7 (2.4%)
** Trust account 5 (2.1%)
* JPMorgan Chase Bank (3.2%)

===Business trends===
The key trends for Sony are (as of the financial year ending March 31):

As of January 2024, Sony, one of the largest Japanese companies by market capitalization and operating profit, was valued at over $112 billion. At the same period, it was also recognized as the most cash-rich Japanese company, with its net cash reserves of ¥1.8 trillion.
The company was immensely profitable throughout the 1990s and early 2000s in part because of the success of its new PlayStation line. The company encountered financial difficulty in the mid- to late-2000s due to several factors: the Great Recession, increased competition for PlayStation, and the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. The company faced three consecutive years of losses leading up to 2011. While noting the negative effects of intervening circumstances such as natural disasters and fluctuating currency exchange rates, the &quot;Financial Times&quot; criticized the company for its &quot;lack of resilience&quot; and &quot;inability to gauge the economy,&quot; voicing skepticism about Sony&#x27;s revitalization efforts, given a lack of tangible results.

In September 2000 Sony had a market capitalization of $100 billion; but by December 2011 it had plunged to $18 billion, reflecting falling prospects for Sony but also reflecting grossly inflated share prices of the &#x27;dot-com bubble&#x27; years. Net worth, as measured by stockholder equity, has steadily grown from $17.9 billion in March 2002 to $35.6 billion through December 2011. Earnings yield (inverse of the price to earnings ratio) has never been more than 5% and usually much less; thus Sony has always traded in over-priced ranges with the exception of the 2009 market bottom.

On 9 December 2008, Sony announced that it would be cutting 8,000 jobs, dropping 8,000 contractors and reducing its global manufacturing sites by 10% to save $1.1 billion per year.

In April 2012, Sony announced that it would reduce its workforce by 10,000 (6% of its employee base) as part of CEO Kaz Hirai&#x27;s effort to get the company back into the black. This came after a loss of 520 billion yen (roughly US$6.36 billion) for fiscal 2012, the worst since the company was founded. Accumulation loss for the past four years was 919.32 billion-yen. Sony planned to increase its marketing expenses by 30% in 2012. 1,000 of the jobs cut come from the company&#x27;s mobile phone unit&#x27;s workforce. 700 jobs will be cut in the 2012–2013 fiscal year and the remaining 300 in the following fiscal year. Sony had revenues of ¥6.493 trillion in 2012 and maintained large reserves of cash, with ¥895 billion on hand as of 2012. In May 2012, Sony&#x27;s market capitalization was valued at about $15 billion.

In January 2013, Sony announced it was selling its US headquarters building for $1.1 billion to a consortium led by real estate developer The Chetrit Group.

On 28 January 2014, Moody&#x27;s Investors Services dropped Sony&#x27;s credit rating to Ba1—&quot;judged to have speculative elements and a significant credit risk&quot;—saying that the company&#x27;s &quot;profitability is likely to remain weak and volatile.&quot;

On 6 February 2014, Sony announced it would trim as many as 5,000 jobs as it attempts to sell its PC business and focus on mobile and tablets.

In 2014, Sony South Africa closed its TV, Hi-Fi and camera divisions with the purpose of reconsidering its local distribution model and, in 2017, it returned facilitated by Premium Brand Distributors (Pty) Ltd.

In November 2018, Sony posted its earning report for the second quarter showing it has lost about US$480 million in the mobile phone division, prompting another round of downsizing in the unit, including the closure of a manufacturing plant and halving of its workforce.

===Community engagement===
* EYE SEE projectSony Corporation is actively involved in the EYE SEE project conducted by UNICEF. EYE SEE digital photography workshops have been run for children in Argentina, Tunisia, Mali, South Africa, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Rwanda, Liberia and Pakistan.
* South Africa Mobile Library ProjectSony assists The South Africa Primary Education Support Initiative (SAPESI) through financial donations and children book donations to the South Africa Mobile Library Project.
* The Sony Canada Charitable FoundationThe Sony Canada Charitable Foundation (SCCF) is a non-profit organization which supports three key charities; the Make-A-Wish Canada, the United Way of Canada and the EarthDay and ECOKIDS program.
* Sony Foundation and You CanAfter the 2011 Queensland floods and Victorian bushfires, Sony Music released benefit albums with money raised going to the Sony Foundation. You Can is the youth cancer program of Sony Foundation.
* Open Planet Ideas Crowdsourcing ProjectSony launched its Open Planet Ideas Crowdsourcing Project, in partnership with the World Wildlife Fund and the design group, IDEO.
* Street Football Stadium ProjectOn the occasion of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, Sony partnered with and launched the Street Football Stadium Project to support football-based educational programmes in local communities across Latin America and Brazil. More than 25 Street Stadiums were developed since the project&#x27;s inception.
* The Sony Global Relief Fund for COVID-19During the COVID-19 pandemic, Sony launched a relief fund in line with other media and tech companies to aid individuals working in the medical, education, and entertainment sectors.

==Criticism==
Over the years, Sony has faced a number of allegations and criticism pertaining to their corporate behavior, often leading to legal proceedings and customer dissatisfaction.

In August 2000, then Sony Pictures Entertainment U.S. senior vice president Steve Heckler was quoted saying &quot;The industry will take whatever steps it needs to protect itself and protect its revenue streams ...&quot;. Sony then worked on a DRM system that works like a rootkit in order to enforce its copyright claims upon users of music CDs.

With respect to Sony&#x27;s gaming consoles, subsequent updates are released to the said consoles, many of which strip the user of some of the originally advertised features in order to save the company some licensing fees or protect itself from the modding community. 
On April 1, 2010, Sony released a patch for the PS3 that would remove OtherOS from being installed onto the system after hackers were looking for ways to exploit OtherOS in order to run homebrew software. Then on January 12, 2011, Sony filled lawsuits against &quot;geohot&quot; and &quot;fail0verflow&quot; for their efforts on exploiting the PS3.
In December 2023, Sony announced that it will remove the Discovery app and its content, even if previously paid for, from its gaming consoles.

===Environmental record===
In November 2011, Sony was ranked ninth (jointly with Panasonic) in Greenpeace&#x27;s Guide to Greener Electronics. This chart grades major electronics companies on their environmental work. The company scored 3.6/10, incurring a penalty point for comments it has made in opposition to energy efficiency standards in California. It also risks a further penalty point in future editions for being a member of trade associations that have commented against energy efficiency standards. Together with Philips, Sony receives the highest score for energy policy advocacy after calling on the EU to adopt an unconditional 30% reduction target for greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. Meanwhile, it receives full marks for the efficiency of its products. In June 2007, Sony ranked 14th on the Greenpeace guide. Sony fell from its earlier 11th-place ranking due to Greenpeace&#x27;s claims that Sony had double standards in their waste policies.

 Greenpeace&#x27;s 2017 Guide to Greener Electronics rated Sony approximately in the middle among electronics manufacturers with a grade of D+.

Since 1976, Sony has had an Environmental Conference. Sony&#x27;s policies address their effects on global warming, the environment, and resources. They are taking steps to reduce the amount of greenhouse gases that they put out as well as regulating the products they get from their suppliers in a process that they call &quot;green procurement&quot;. Sony has said that they have signed on to have about 75 percent of their Sony Building running on geothermal power. The &quot;Sony Take Back Recycling Program&quot; allow consumers to recycle the electronics products that they buy from Sony by taking them to eCycle (Recycling) drop-off points around the U.S. The company has also developed a biobattery that runs on sugars and carbohydrates that works similarly to the way living creatures work. This is the most powerful small biobattery to date.

In 2000, Sony faced criticism for a document entitled &quot;NGO Strategy&quot; that was leaked to the press. The document involved the company&#x27;s surveillance of environmental activists in an attempt to plan how to counter their movements. It specifically mentioned environmental groups that were trying to pass laws that held electronics-producing companies responsible for the cleanup of the toxic chemicals contained in their merchandise.

===Cartel===
In 2007 an investigation launched in 2002 by the European Commission culminated in Sony, Fuji and Maxell receiving a total of 110 million US dollar fine for fixing professional videotape prices between the years 1999 and 2002 through regular meetings and other illegal contracts; at the time the three corporations shared a combined 85% control of the market. Sony&#x27;s part of the fine was raised by a third for trying to obstruct the investigation by refusing to answer inquiries made by the EU officials and shredding of evidence during the multiple law-enforcement raids. During the year 2001 prior to the investigation Sony sold professional videotapes for a total of €115 million inside the EU.

==See also==

* List of acquisitions by Sony
* List of assets owned by Sony
* List of companies of Japan
* List of libraries owned by Sony
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Made in Japan&quot; by Akio Morita and Sony, HarperCollins (1994)
* &quot;Sony: The Private Life&quot; by John Nathan, Houghton Mifflin (1999)
* &quot;The Japan Project: Made in Japan&quot; – a documentary about Sony&#x27;s early history in the U.S. by Terry Sanders.
* &quot;The Portable Radio in American Life&quot; by Michael Brian Schiffer (The University of Arizona Press, 1991).
* &quot;Sony Radio, Sony Transistor Radio 35th Anniversary 1955–1990&quot; – information booklet (1990)

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="30" end="43" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="44" end="56" title="conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315183" start="74" end="83" title="Sony City" label="Sony City"/>
<link wikidata="Q190088" start="87" end="100" title="Minato, Tokyo" label="Minato, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="151" end="167" title="Sony#Electronics products &amp;amp; solutions" label="Sony Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="197" title="#Imaging_&amp;amp;_sensing_solutions" label="Sony Semiconductor Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889189" start="199" end="217" title="Sony Entertainment" label="Sony Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="229" end="242" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q121433363" start="247" end="263" title="Sony Music Group" label="Sony Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="266" end="296" title="Sony Interactive Entertainment" label="Sony Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629382" start="298" end="318" title="Sony Financial Group" label="Sony Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q352496" start="388" end="400" title="Masaru Ibuka" label="Masaru Ibuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q310845" start="405" end="416" title="Akio Morita" label="Akio Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q737142" start="516" end="521" title="TR-55" label="TR-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014747" start="555" end="562" title="CV-2000" label="CV-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059474" start="606" end="623" title="Japanese economic miracle" label="post-war recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q337538" start="867" end="876" title="Trinitron" label="Trinitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="891" end="898" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="943" end="955" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009264" start="1027" end="1038" title="CBS Records International" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="1056" end="1073" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="1142" end="1153" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="1168" end="1187" title="PlayStation" label="the eponymous brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="1422" end="1434" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1771" end="1808" title="Television#Market share" label="third largest television manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q590428" start="1899" end="1907" title="keiretsu" label="keiretsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094989" start="1942" end="1973" title="Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group" label="Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="2012" end="2018" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q144281" start="2025" end="2033" title="zaibatsu" label="zaibatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="2153" end="2173" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Tokyo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q507338" start="2211" end="2221" title="Nikkei 225" label="Nikkei 225"/>
<link wikidata="Q238974" start="2226" end="2231" title="TOPIX" label="TOPIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q463881" start="2290" end="2318" title="American depositary receipts" label="American depositary receipts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="2333" end="2356" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="2495" end="2525" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="2576" end="2606" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q352496" start="2697" end="2709" title="Masaru Ibuka" label="Masaru Ibuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="2787" end="2797" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2806" end="2811" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310845" start="2927" end="2938" title="Akio Morita" label="Akio Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="3008" end="3021" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="3326" end="3331" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332242" start="3495" end="3506" title="Tokyu Corporation" label="Tokyo Kyuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q310845" start="3804" end="3815" title="Akio Morita" label="Akio Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3989" end="3994" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="4204" end="4213" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q310845" start="4281" end="4292" title="Akio Morita" label="Akio Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q352496" start="4297" end="4309" title="Masaru Ibuka" label="Masaru Ibuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q737142" start="4376" end="4381" title="TR-55" label="TR-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q506260" start="4382" end="4398" title="transistor radio" label="transistor radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q192509" start="4565" end="4578" title="Romanization of Japanese" label="Roman letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="4622" end="4627" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="4705" end="4711" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5979" end="5992" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6021" end="6032" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562492" start="6374" end="6398" title="Sony Life" label="a life insurance company"/>
<link wikidata="Q455603" start="6728" end="6738" title="Norio Ohga" label="Norio Ohga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="6860" end="6871" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="6917" end="6928" title="Columbia Records" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="6941" end="6958" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q983336" start="7497" end="7512" title="Howard Stringer" label="Howard Stringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q840998" start="7522" end="7535" title="Nobuyuki Idei" label="Nobuyuki Idei"/>
<link wikidata="Q484442" start="7766" end="7776" title="Spider-Man (2002 film)" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275691" start="8275" end="8286" title="Kazuo Hirai" label="Kazuo Hirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q849488" start="8997" end="9001" title="Vaio" label="Vaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220913" start="9060" end="9085" title="Japan Industrial Partners" label="Japan Industrial Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="9396" end="9407" title="Square Enix" label="Square Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q820777" start="9586" end="9615" title="Shanghai Oriental Pearl Group" label="Shanghai Oriental Pearl Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="9654" end="9665" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="10461" end="10480" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q613325" start="10493" end="10513" title="Murata Manufacturing" label="Murata Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629382" start="10990" end="11013" title="Sony Financial Holdings" label="Sony Financial Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q598944" start="11747" end="11771" title="Digital Compact Cassette" label="Digital Compact Cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="11795" end="11802" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="12019" end="12030" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="12032" end="12044" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12049" end="12056" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q278080" start="12102" end="12109" title="U-matic" label="U-matic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294186" start="12134" end="12147" title="videocassette" label="videocassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="12274" end="12281" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141924" start="12323" end="12343" title="videotape format war" label="videotape format war"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="12393" end="12400" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="12449" end="12452" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215901" start="12473" end="12476" title="JVC" label="JVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154483" start="12681" end="12696" title="component video" label="component video"/>
<link wikidata="Q830910" start="12711" end="12718" title="Betacam" label="Betacam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276754" start="12947" end="12955" title="Handycam" label="Handycam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155472" start="12973" end="12986" title="8 mm video format" label="Video8 format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155472" start="13021" end="13024" title="8 mm video format" label="Hi8"/>
<link wikidata="Q597615" start="13119" end="13137" title="Digital Audio Tape" label="Digital Audio Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q337538" start="13239" end="13248" title="Trinitron" label="Trinitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810597" start="13418" end="13433" title="LED-backlit LCD" label="LED-backlit LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="13672" end="13683" title="quantum dot" label="quantum dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="13822" end="13825" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201217" start="13854" end="13865" title="Crystal LED" label="Crystal LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="13993" end="14000" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="14068" end="14076" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="14113" end="14120" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q598944" start="14128" end="14152" title="Digital Compact Cassette" label="Digital Compact Cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q300036" start="14312" end="14317" title="Adaptive Transform Acoustic Coding" label="ATRAC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14388" end="14403" title="Walkman#Network Walkman" label="Network Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="14516" end="14524" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="14545" end="14550" title="HiMD" label="Hi-MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q622624" start="14890" end="14903" title="Dolby Digital" label="Dolby Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412237" start="15016" end="15020" title="Sony Dynamic Digital Sound" label="SDDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299010" start="15229" end="15251" title="DTS (sound system)" label="Digital Theatre System"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="15444" end="15451" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q214738" start="15513" end="15519" title="S/PDIF" label="S/PDIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="15556" end="15560" title="Super Audio CD" label="SACD"/>
<link wikidata="Q117678" start="15612" end="15621" title="DVD-Audio" label="DVD-Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835999" start="15894" end="15898" title="LDAC (codec)" label="LDAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="15902" end="15913" title="Proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481505" start="15914" end="15926" title="Audio codec" label="audio coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012351" start="15961" end="15982" title="high-resolution audio" label="high-resolution audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="15988" end="15997" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="16088" end="16115" title="Android Open Source Project" label="Android Open Source Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q29000531" start="16130" end="16141" title="Android 8.0" label="Android 8.0"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16148" end="16152" title="Android version history#Android 8.0 Oreo (API 26)" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="16288" end="16299" title="Proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q69384877" start="16539" end="16543" title="LHDC (codec)" label="LHDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="16823" end="16835" title="compact disc" label="Compact Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734531" start="16869" end="16876" title="Discman" label="Discman"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="17034" end="17046" title="optical disc" label="optical disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q125703231" start="17057" end="17078" title="Magneto-optical drive" label="magneto-optical discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="17404" end="17411" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="17578" end="17581" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="17657" end="17664" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="17894" end="17900" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736363" start="17924" end="17963" title="high-definition optical disc format war" label="high-definition optical disc format war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844817" start="17978" end="17997" title="Laser communication in space" label="laser communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580082" start="18010" end="18025" title="small satellite" label="small satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="18192" end="18203" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="18659" end="18672" title="Magnetic-tape data storage" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="18705" end="18708" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826441" start="18751" end="18767" title="Linear Tape-Open" label="Linear Tape-Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="18833" end="18845" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="18858" end="18870" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="19015" end="19034" title="Secure Digital card" label="Secure Digital card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19139" end="19155" title="Memory Stick#Memory Stick Duo and PRO Duo" label="Memory Stick Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="19160" end="19178" title="Memory Stick Micro" label="Memory Stick Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="19210" end="19225" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402951" start="19309" end="19315" title="FeliCa" label="FeliCa"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="19368" end="19387" title="contactless payment" label="contactless payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="19466" end="19490" title="near-field communication" label="Near-Field Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706829" start="19821" end="19826" title="LPWAN" label="LPWAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="20018" end="20031" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="20037" end="20045" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562488" start="20081" end="20095" title="Sony Imagesoft" label="Sony Imagesoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="20216" end="20222" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="20337" end="20362" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391836" start="20487" end="20494" title="SNES-CD" label="SNES-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="20633" end="20640" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q455603" start="20874" end="20884" title="Norio Ohga" label="Norio Ohga"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="22141" end="22151" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="22350" end="22353" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="22410" end="22414" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601059" start="22443" end="22481" title="World Intellectual Property Indicators" label="World Intellectual Property Indicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056771" start="22588" end="22598" title="Patent Cooperation Treaty" label="PCT System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881288" start="23190" end="23204" title="Sony Chemicals" label="Sony Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q849488" start="23209" end="23213" title="Vaio" label="Vaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="23662" end="23678" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q121433363" start="23693" end="23709" title="Sony Music Group" label="Sony Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q732503" start="23810" end="23814" title="Sony Music Entertainment Japan" label="SMEJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307914" start="24342" end="24376" title="electronics manufacturing services" label="third party contract manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="24466" end="24473" title="Walkman" label="Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="24500" end="24510" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="24717" end="24725" title="compact cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="24878" end="24891" title="Sony Mobile Communications" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734531" start="24948" end="24955" title="Discman" label="Discman"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="25090" end="25102" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q849488" start="25238" end="25242" title="Vaio" label="Vaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q464649" start="25287" end="25293" title="OpenMG" label="OpenMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="25395" end="25415" title="digital audio player" label="digital audio player"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="25478" end="25498" title="active noise control" label="active noise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="25709" end="25724" title="Ōita Prefecture" label="Ōita Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="25772" end="25776" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="25778" end="25784" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="25798" end="25814" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q750788" start="25924" end="25933" title="Ford GTX1" label="Ford GTX1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562520" start="26053" end="26060" title="TV8-301" label="TV8-301"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="26089" end="26099" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q337538" start="26157" end="26166" title="Trinitron" label="Trinitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756859" start="26195" end="26210" title="aperture grille" label="aperture grille"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="26211" end="26227" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="26255" end="26272" title="Visual display unit" label="computer monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q420389" start="26678" end="26682" title="WEGA" label="WEGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="26696" end="26699" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q796924" start="26755" end="26761" title="Bravia (brand)" label="BRAVIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053294" start="27166" end="27176" title="Sony XEL-1" label="Sony XEL-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="27188" end="27192" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="27648" end="27665" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483006" start="27667" end="27677" title="LG Display" label="LG Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="27683" end="27702" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q489661" start="27802" end="27807" title="S-LCD" label="S-LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562496" start="28256" end="28291" title="Sony Mobile Display" label="small-sized LCD business subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679402" start="28378" end="28391" title="Japan Display" label="Japan Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q22128226" start="28396" end="28401" title="JOLED" label="JOLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="28554" end="28567" title="Videotape" label="videocassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783103" start="28569" end="28572" title="DVD player" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="28578" end="28585" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052707" start="28728" end="28738" title="Cyber-shot" label="Cyber-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q196342" start="28746" end="28751" title="digital single-lens reflex camera" label="DSLRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209918" start="28756" end="28766" title="Mirrorless camera" label="mirrorless"/>
<link wikidata="Q209508" start="28786" end="28791" title="Sony Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q196342" start="28821" end="28826" title="digital single-lens reflex camera" label="DSLRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043865" start="28845" end="28859" title="Sony Action Cam" label="action cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562561" start="28864" end="28874" title="Sony camcorders" label="camcorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145694" start="28900" end="28912" title="Digital movie camera" label="cinema-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575486" start="28943" end="28951" title="CineAlta" label="CineAlta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164473" start="28996" end="29007" title="Sony Mavica" label="Sony Mavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q196342" start="29232" end="29265" title="digital single-lens reflex camera" label="digital single-lens reflex camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q118911" start="29315" end="29329" title="Konica Minolta" label="Konica Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209508" start="29388" end="29393" title="Sony Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="29475" end="29480" title="Canon (company)" label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218180" start="29485" end="29490" title="Nikon" label="Nikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209918" start="29543" end="29581" title="mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera" label="mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857" start="29599" end="29604" title="NEX-3" label="NEX-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857" start="29613" end="29618" title="Sony NEX-5" label="NEX-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q209536" start="29677" end="29685" title="Sony E-mount" label="E-mount."/>
<link wikidata="Q15729668" start="29824" end="29829" title="Sony α3000" label="α3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138399" start="29902" end="29904" title="Sony α7" label="α7"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138399" start="29909" end="29912" title="α7R" label="α7R"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857" start="29952" end="29957" title="Sony NEX-5" label="NEX-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490726" start="29963" end="29968" title="Sony NEX-6" label="NEX-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q115845" start="29973" end="29978" title="Sony NEX-7" label="NEX-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q20889278" start="29984" end="29989" title="Sony α5000" label="α5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726427" start="29998" end="30003" title="Sony α6000" label="α6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q209918" start="30047" end="30051" title="Mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera" label="MILC"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="30169" end="30172" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="30173" end="30186" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562505" start="30192" end="30196" title="Sony NEWS" label="NEWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="30197" end="30208" title="workstation" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849488" start="30355" end="30359" title="VAIO" label="VAIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="30714" end="30729" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q255246" start="30763" end="30774" title="Sony Tablet" label="Sony Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="30783" end="30790" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141217" start="30878" end="30884" title="Xperia" label="Xperia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295195" start="31303" end="31326" title="Raspberry Pi Foundation" label="Raspberry Pi Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="31360" end="31381" title="single-board computer" label="single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q245" start="31397" end="31409" title="Raspberry Pi" label="Raspberry Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567716" start="31461" end="31468" title="Pencoed" label="Pencoed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510185" start="31899" end="31905" title="So-net" label="So-net"/>
<link wikidata="Q688619" start="32090" end="32097" title="Olympus Corporation" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="32211" end="32224" title="4K resolution" label="4K resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068984" start="32385" end="32393" title="Illumina (company)" label="Illumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="32729" end="32737" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="33124" end="33129" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="33137" end="33143" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="33366" end="33371" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="33373" end="33380" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="33385" end="33387" title="LG Electronics" label="LG"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="33525" end="33536" title="Sony Mobile" label="Sony Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141217" start="33592" end="33598" title="Sony Xperia" label="Xperia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403438" start="34043" end="34047" title="AIBO" label="AIBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940395" start="34078" end="34083" title="Sony Rolly" label="Rolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="34091" end="34099" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134062" start="34113" end="34117" title="QRIO" label="QRIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q582579" start="34346" end="34354" title="ZMP INC." label="ZMP INC."/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="34410" end="34415" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="34479" end="34484" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209508" start="34557" end="34567" title="Sony α" label="Sony Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="34828" end="34838" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="34865" end="34874" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="34956" end="34963" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q53257" start="34968" end="34987" title="Mitsubishi Electric" label="Mitsubishi Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="35009" end="35020" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="35292" end="35309" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q179852" start="35334" end="35343" title="Leo Esaki" label="Leo Esaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q176235" start="35374" end="35386" title="tunnel diode" label="tunnel diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="35453" end="35470" title="Quantum tunnelling" label="quantum tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="35518" end="35540" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="35593" end="35614" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q210745" start="35685" end="35702" title="CMOS image sensor" label="CMOS image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="35982" end="35995" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207597" start="36049" end="36056" title="HAD CCD" label="HAD CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648474" start="36058" end="36063" title="Exmor" label="Exmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915201" start="36084" end="36089" title="BIONZ" label="BIONZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="36092" end="36103" title="laser diode" label="laser diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619904" start="36147" end="36161" title="Storage (memory)" label="memory storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041335" start="36182" end="36190" title="microLED" label="microLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557228" start="36207" end="36226" title="holographic display" label="holographic display"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="36246" end="36259" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428778" start="36328" end="36353" title="intelligent vision sensor" label="intelligent vision sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="36360" end="36362" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337692" start="36363" end="36377" title="edge computing" label="edge computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="36544" end="36555" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="36613" end="36621" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="36688" end="36723" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391836" start="36772" end="36782" title="SNES-CD" label="the add-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="37028" end="37045" title="PlayStation (console)" label="first PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="37167" end="37180" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119235" start="37249" end="37264" title="List of best-selling game consoles" label="most successful"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="37329" end="37342" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="37416" end="37423" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="37489" end="37497" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="37502" end="37505" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q863823" start="37517" end="37531" title="Cell (microprocessor)" label="Cell processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q695086" start="37651" end="37655" title="loss leader" label="loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758406" start="37844" end="37860" title="PlayStation Move" label="PlayStation Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="38012" end="38032" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="38127" end="38138" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q270309" start="38159" end="38179" title="Universal Media Disc" label="Universal Media Disc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38396" end="38402" title="PlayStation Portable#PSP Go (N1000)" label="PSP Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q188808" start="38483" end="38499" title="PlayStation Vita" label="PlayStation Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="38557" end="38570" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154933" start="38682" end="38685" title="Game Developers Conference" label="GDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q542018" start="38700" end="38721" title="SCE Worldwide Studios" label="SCE Worldwide Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413590" start="38722" end="38736" title="Shuhei Yoshida" label="Shuhei Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011703" start="38825" end="38839" title="PlayStation VR" label="PlayStation VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714598" start="39016" end="39025" title="LexInnova Technologies" label="LexInnova"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="39391" end="39404" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889189" start="39739" end="39757" title="Sony Entertainment" label="Sony Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="39777" end="39804" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="39824" end="39848" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q333040" start="39850" end="39871" title="Sony Music Publishing" label="Sony Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134268" start="39874" end="39882" title="Sony Corporation of America" label="Sony USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="40163" end="40179" title="Rockwell Collins" label="Rockwell Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490752" start="40294" end="40320" title="Sony Entertainment Network" label="Sony Entertainment Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="40341" end="40360" title="PlayStation Network" label="PlayStation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307877" start="40715" end="40725" title="Spider-Man in film" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586077" start="40739" end="40753" title="The Karate Kid, Part III" label="The Karate Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305670" start="40770" end="40782" title="Men in Black (film series)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="40851" end="40860" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567653" start="40877" end="40893" title="Wheel of Fortune (U.S. game show)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065128" start="41057" end="41091" title="Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group" label="Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="41130" end="41147" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q651454" start="41152" end="41168" title="TriStar Pictures" label="TriStar Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370297" start="41232" end="41243" title="Screen Gems" label="Screen Gems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320443" start="41245" end="41267" title="Sony Pictures Classics" label="Sony Pictures Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="41269" end="41301" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q652390" start="41346" end="41370" title="Sony Pictures Television" label="Sony Pictures Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q296957" start="41558" end="41575" title="ARccOS Protection" label="ARccOS Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642279" start="41660" end="41694" title="Sony Pictures hack" label="became the target of a hack attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="41792" end="41803" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524911" start="41810" end="41823" title="The Interview" label="The Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="41886" end="41892" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="41905" end="41937" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="42005" end="42008" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="42013" end="42020" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="42180" end="42192" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K Ultra DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="42364" end="42386" title="music industry" label="recorded music company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42394" end="42432" title="Music industry#Consolidation" label="&amp;quot;big three&amp;quot; record companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134268" start="42454" end="42481" title="Sony Corporation of America" label="Sony Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="42578" end="42594" title="Columbia Records" label="CBS Record Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="42739" end="42769" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q732503" start="43296" end="43326" title="Sony Music Entertainment Japan" label="Sony Music Entertainment Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156913" start="43466" end="43480" title="Bertelsmann AG" label="Bertelsmann AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="43520" end="43543" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="Bertelsmann Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="43554" end="43562" title="Sony BMG" label="Sony BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367562" start="43590" end="43613" title="Sony BMG CD copy protection scandal" label="copy protection scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645" start="43651" end="43658" title="rootkit" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q889881" start="43769" end="43781" title="Famous Music" label="Famous Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="43842" end="43848" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q32849" start="43853" end="43857" title="Akon" label="Akon"/>
<link wikidata="Q257467" start="44085" end="44094" title="Gracenote" label="Gracenote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140077" start="44123" end="44144" title="Tribune Media Company" label="Tribune Media Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="44305" end="44320" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333040" start="44328" end="44348" title="ATV Music Publishing" label="ATV Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="44551" end="44562" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="44569" end="44585" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="44597" end="44606" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="44608" end="44614" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="44616" end="44625" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123969" start="44627" end="44636" title="Sam Smith" label="Sam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="44638" end="44648" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="44654" end="44666" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218786" start="44716" end="44736" title="EMI Music Publishing" label="EMI Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="45007" end="45012" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q732503" start="45049" end="45079" title="Sony Music Entertainment Japan" label="Sony Music Entertainment Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q770328" start="45108" end="45115" title="Aniplex" label="Aniplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q277763" start="45179" end="45191" title="A-1 Pictures" label="A-1 Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077694" start="45472" end="45482" title="The Nikkei" label="The Nikkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q52700115" start="45689" end="45700" title="CloverWorks" label="CloverWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="45750" end="45763" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="45809" end="45820" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="45876" end="45886" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565221" start="45948" end="45955" title="Wakanim" label="Wakanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618413" start="46029" end="46050" title="Madman Anime" label="Crunchyroll Pty. Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="46110" end="46118" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="46145" end="46156" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562492" start="46448" end="46457" title="Sony Life" label="Sony Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562429" start="46506" end="46515" title="Sony Bank" label="Sony Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="46852" end="46871" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="46946" end="46962" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955139" start="46999" end="47009" title="NRG Energy" label="NRG Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61803820" start="47010" end="47014" title="eVgo" label="eVgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955139" start="47015" end="47041" title="Ready for Electric Vehicle" label="Ready for Electric Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140665" start="47061" end="47072" title="EV charging" label="EV charging"/>
<link wikidata="Q613325" start="47165" end="47185" title="Murata Manufacturing" label="Murata Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q582579" start="47231" end="47239" title="ZMP INC." label="ZMP INC."/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="47298" end="47314" title="self-driving car" label="self-driving car"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="47378" end="47403" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q81399450" start="47411" end="47419" title="Sony Vision-S" label="Vision-S"/>
<link wikidata="Q697311" start="47476" end="47495" title="Magna International" label="Magna International"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026417" start="47647" end="47667" title="in-car entertainment" label="in-car entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="47694" end="47699" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031063" start="47765" end="47784" title="Sony Honda Mobility" label="Sony Honda Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48011" end="48019" title="Consumer Electronics Show#2023" label="CES 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480166" start="48095" end="48111" title="kabushiki gaisha" label="kabushiki gaisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="48136" end="48156" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Tokyo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="48174" end="48197" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412772" start="48274" end="48304" title="The Master Trust Bank of Japan" label="The Master Trust Bank of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969721" start="48315" end="48331" title="investment trust" label="investment trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="48358" end="48366" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q463881" start="48391" end="48418" title="American depositary receipt" label="American depositary receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157881" start="48437" end="48464" title="Japan Trustee Services Bank" label="Japan Trustee Services Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="48576" end="48595" title="Chase Bank" label="JPMorgan Chase Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047513" start="48935" end="48952" title="Net cash flow" label="net cash reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="49087" end="49098" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="49204" end="49219" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="49268" end="49302" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="49516" end="49531" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="49965" end="49979" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275691" start="50633" end="50642" title="Kaz Hirai" label="Kaz Hirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="51523" end="51553" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="52517" end="52523" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="53173" end="53195" title="2010–11 Queensland floods" label="2011 Queensland floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="53200" end="53219" title="Black Saturday bushfires" label="Victorian bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="53484" end="53503" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q682435" start="53526" end="53530" title="IDEO" label="IDEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="53919" end="53936" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367562" start="54525" end="54561" title="Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal" label="DRM system that works like a rootkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="54947" end="54950" title="PS3" label="PS3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459928" start="54969" end="54976" title="OtherOS" label="OtherOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042740" start="55085" end="55102" title="PlayStation 3 homebrew" label="homebrew software"/>
<link wikidata="Q370733" start="55165" end="55171" title="geohot" label="geohot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="55487" end="55497" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="55917" end="55924" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="56202" end="56212" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477826" start="56926" end="56939" title="Sony Building (New York)" label="Sony Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="56951" end="56967" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243428" start="57112" end="57130" title="eCycle (Recycling)" label="eCycle (Recycling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914697" start="57332" end="57342" title="biobattery" label="biobattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="57862" end="57881" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="57902" end="57906" title="Fujifilm" label="Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913796" start="57911" end="57917" title="Maxell" label="Maxell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604912" start="58533" end="58561" title="List of acquisitions by Sony" label="List of acquisitions by Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065505" start="58564" end="58592" title="List of assets owned by Sony" label="List of assets owned by Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780872" start="58595" end="58621" title="List of companies of Japan" label="List of companies of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q112242263" start="58624" end="58655" title="List of libraries owned by Sony" label="List of libraries owned by Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726741" start="58709" end="58722" title="Made in Japan (biography)" label="Made in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="58754" end="58767" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250167" start="58815" end="58826" title="John Nathan" label="John Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="58828" end="58844" title="Houghton Mifflin Harcourt" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405762" start="58962" end="58975" title="Terry Sanders" label="Terry Sanders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26990" wikidata="Q161272" url="?curid=26990" title="Social psychology">
<text>Social psychology 
is the methodical study of how thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. Social psychologists typically explain human behavior as a result of the relationship between mental states and social situations, studying the social conditions under which thoughts, feelings, and behaviors occur, and how these variables influence social interactions.

== History ==
===19th century===

In the 19th century, social psychology began to emerge from the larger field of psychology. At the time, many psychologists were concerned with developing concrete explanations for the different aspects of human nature. They attempted to discover concrete cause-and-effect relationships that explained social interactions. In order to do so, they applied the scientific method to human behavior. One of the first published studies in the field was Norman Triplett&#x27;s 1898 experiment on the phenomenon of social facilitation. These psychological experiments later went on to form the foundation of much of 20th century social psychological findings.

===20th century ===
According to Wolfgang Stroebe, modern social psychology began in 1924 with the publication of a classic textbook by Floyd Allport, which defined the field as the experimental study of social behavior.

An early, influential research program in social psychology was established by Kurt Lewin and his students. During World War II, social psychologists were mostly concerned with studies of persuasion and propaganda for the U.S. military (see also psychological warfare). Following the war, researchers became interested in a variety of social problems, including issues of gender and racial prejudice. Social stigma, which refers to the disapproval or discrimination against individuals based on perceived differences, became increasingly prevalent as societies sought to redefine norms and group boundaries after the war. 

During the years immediately following World War II, there were frequent collaborations between psychologists and sociologists. The two disciplines, however, have become increasingly specialized and isolated from each other in recent years, with sociologists generally focusing on high-level, large-scale examinations of society, and psychologists generally focusing on more small-scale studies of individual human behaviors.

During the 1960s, there was growing interest in topics such as cognitive dissonance, bystander intervention, and aggression. These developments were part of a trend of increasingly sophisticated laboratory experiments using college students as participants and analysis of variance designs.

In the 1970s, a number of conceptual challenges to social psychology emerged over issues such as ethical concerns about laboratory experimentation, whether attitudes could accurately predict behavior, and to what extent science could be done in a cultural context. It was also in this period where situationism, the theory that human behavior changes based on situational factors, emerged and challenged the relevance of self and personality in psychology. 

By the 1980s and 1990s, social psychology had developed a number of solutions to these issues with regard to theory and methodology.

=== 21st century ===
At present, ethical standards regulate research, and pluralistic and multicultural perspectives to the social sciences have emerged. Most modern researchers in the 21st century are interested in phenomena such as attribution, social cognition, and self-concept. During the COVID-19 pandemic, social psychologists examined the effects of social isolation, fear, and misinformation on collective behavior. Research also focused on how pandemic-related stress affected mental health and social cohesion. Social psychologists are, in addition, concerned with applied psychology, contributing towards applications of social psychology in health, education, law, and the workplace.

== Core theories and concepts ==
=== Attitudes ===

In social psychology, an attitude is a learned, global evaluation that influences thought and action. Attitudes are basic expressions of approval and disapproval or likes and dislikes. For example, enjoying chocolate ice cream or endorsing the values of a particular political party are examples of attitudes. Because people are influenced by multiple factors in any given situation, general attitudes are not always good predictors of specific behavior. For example, a person may generally value the environment but may not recycle a plastic bottle because of specific factors on a given day.

One of the most influential 20th century attitude theories was Cognitive dissonance theory. According to this theory, attitudes must be logically consistent with each other. Noticing incongruence among one’s attitudes leads to an uncomfortable state of tension, which may motivate a change in attitudes or behavior. 

Research on attitudes has examined the distinction between traditional, self-reported attitudes and implicit, unconscious attitudes. Experiments using the Implicit Association Test (IAT), for instance, have found that people often demonstrate implicit bias against other races, even when their explicit responses profess impartiality. Likewise, one study found that in interracial interactions, explicit attitudes correlate with verbal behavior, while implicit attitudes correlate with nonverbal behavior.

Attitudes are also involved in several other areas of the discipline, such as conformity, interpersonal attraction, social perception, and prejudice.

=== Persuasion ===

Persuasion is an active method of influencing that attempts to guide people toward the adoption of an attitude, idea, or behavior by rational or emotive means. Persuasion relies on appeals rather than strong pressure or coercion. The process of persuasion has been found to be influenced by numerous variables that generally fall into one of five major categories:
#Communication: includes credibility, expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness.
#Message: includes varying degrees of reason, emotion (e.g., fear), one-sided or two-sided arguments, and other types of informational content.
#Audience: includes a variety of demographics, personality traits, and preferences.
# Medium: includes printed word, radio, television, the internet, or face-to-face interactions.
#Context: includes environment, group dynamics, and preliminary information.

Dual-process theories of persuasion (such as the elaboration likelihood model) maintain that persuasion is mediated by two separate routes: central and peripheral. The central route of persuasion is influenced by facts and results in longer-lasting change, but requires motivation to process. The peripheral route is influenced by superficial factors (e.g. smiling, clothing) and results in shorter-lasting change, but does not require as much motivation to process.

=== Social cognition ===

Social cognition studies how people perceive, recognize, and remember information about others. Much research rests on the assertion that people think about other people differently than they do non-social, or non-human, targets. This assertion is supported by the social-cognitive deficits exhibited by people with Williams syndrome and autism.

====Attribution====

A major research topic in social cognition is attribution. Attributions are explanations of behavior, either one&#x27;s own behavior or the behavior of others.

One element of attribution ascribes the cause of behavior to internal and external factors. An internal, or dispositional, attribution reasons that a behavior is caused by inner traits such as personality, disposition, character, and ability. An external, or situational, attribution reasons that a behavior is caused by situational elements such as the weather.A second element of attribution ascribes the cause of behavior to stable and unstable factors (i.e., whether the behavior will be repeated or changed under similar circumstances). Individuals also attribute causes of behavior to controllable and uncontrollable factors (i.e., how much control one has over the situation at hand).

Numerous biases in the attribution process have been discovered. For instance, the fundamental attribution error is the bias towards making dispositional attributions for other people&#x27;s behavior.The actor-observer bias is an extension of the theory, positing that tendency exists to make dispositional attributions for other people&#x27;s behavior and situational attributions for one&#x27;s own. The self-serving bias is the tendency to attribute dispositional causes for successes, and situational causes for failure, particularly when self-esteem is threatened. This leads to assuming one&#x27;s successes are from innate traits, and one&#x27;s failures are due to situations.

====Heuristics====

Heuristics are cognitive shortcuts which are used to make decisions in lieu of conscious reasoning. The availability heuristic occurs when people estimate the probability of an outcome based on how easy that outcome is to imagine. As such, vivid or highly memorable possibilities will be perceived as more likely than those that are harder to picture or difficult to understand. The representativeness heuristic is a shortcut people use to categorize something based on how similar it is to a prototype they know of. Several other biases have been found by social cognition researchers. The hindsight bias is a false memory of having predicted events, or an exaggeration of actual predictions, after becoming aware of the outcome. The confirmation bias is a type of bias leading to the tendency to search for or interpret information in a way that confirms one&#x27;s preconceptions.

==== Schemas ====

Schemas are generalized mental representations that organize knowledge and guide information processing. They organize social information and experiences. Schemas often operate automatically and unconsciously. This leads to biases in perception and memory. Schemas may induce expectations that lead us to see something that is not there. One experiment found that people are more likely to misperceive a weapon in the hands of a black man than a white man. This type of schema is a stereotype, a generalized set of beliefs about a particular group of people (when incorrect, an ultimate attribution error). Stereotypes are often related to negative or preferential attitudes and behavior. Schemas for behaviors (e.g., going to a restaurant, doing laundry) are known as &quot;scripts&quot;.

=== Self-concept ===
Self-concept is the whole sum of beliefs that people have about themselves. The self-concept is made up of cognitive aspects called self-schemas—beliefs that people have about themselves and that guide the processing of self-referential information. For example, an athlete at a university would have multiple selves that would process different information pertinent to each self: the student would be oneself, who would process information pertinent to a student (taking notes in class, completing a homework assignment, etc.); the athlete would be the self who processes information about things related to being an athlete. These selves are part of one&#x27;s identity and the self-referential information is that which relies on the appropriate self to process and react to it.

There are many theories on the perception of our own behavior. Leon Festinger&#x27;s 1954 &quot;social comparison theory&quot; posits that people evaluate their own abilities and opinions by comparing themselves to others when they are uncertain of their own ability or opinions. Daryl Bem&#x27;s 1972 &quot;self-perception theory&quot; claims that when internal cues are difficult to interpret, people gain self-insight by observing their own behavior.

=== Social influence ===

Social influence is an overarching term that denotes the persuasive effects people have on each other. It is seen as a fundamental concept in social psychology. The study of it overlaps considerably with research on attitudes and persuasion. The three main areas of social influence include conformity, compliance, and obedience. Social influence is also closely related to the study of group dynamics, as most effects of influence are strongest when they take place in social groups.

The first major area of social influence is conformity. Conformity is defined as the tendency to act or think like other members of a group. The identity of members within a group (i.e., status), similarity, expertise, as well as cohesion, prior commitment, and accountability to the group help to determine the level of conformity of an individual. Conformity is often driven by two types of social influences: informational social influence, which involves conforming to gain accurate information, and normative social influence, which involves conforming to be accepted or liked by the group. Individual variations among group members play a key role in the dynamic of how willing people will be to conform. Conformity is usually viewed as a negative tendency in American culture, but a certain amount of conformity is adaptive in some situations, as is nonconformity in other situations.

The second major area of social influence research is compliance, which refers to any change in behavior that is due to a request or suggestion from another person. Two common compliance strategies are &#x27;foot-in-the-door,&#x27; which involves getting a person to agree to a small request to increase the likelihood of agreeing to a larger one, and &#x27;door-in-the-face,&#x27; which involves making a large request that is likely to be refused to make a subsequent smaller request more likely to be accepted. The foot-in-the-door technique is a compliance method in which the persuader requests a small favor and then follows up with a larger favor (e.g., asking for the time and then asking for ten dollars). A related trick is the bait and switch, which is a disingenuous sales strategy that involves enticing potential customers with advertisements of low-priced items which turn out to be unavailable in order to sell a more expensive item.

The third major form of social influence is obedience; this is a change in behavior that is the result of a direct order or command from another person. Obedience as a form of compliance was dramatically highlighted by the Milgram study, wherein people were ready to administer shocks to a person in distress on a researcher&#x27;s command.

An unusual kind of social influence is the self-fulfilling prophecy. This is a prediction that, by being made, causes itself to become true. For example, in the financial field, if it is widely believed that a crash is imminent, investors may lose confidence, sell most of their stock, and thus cause a crash. Similarly, people may expect hostility in others and induce this hostility by their own behavior.

Psychologists have spent decades studying the power of social influence, and the way in which it manipulates people&#x27;s opinions and behavior. Specifically, social influence refers to the way in which individuals change their ideas and actions to meet the demands of a social group, received authority, social role, or a minority within a group wielding influence over the majority.

===Group dynamics===


Social psychologists study group-related phenomena such as the behavior of crowds. A group can be defined as two or more individuals who are connected to each other by social relationships. Groups tend to interact, influence each other, and share a common identity. They have a number of emergent qualities that distinguish them from coincidental, temporary gatherings, which are termed social aggregates:

* Norms: Implicit rules and expectations for group members to follow.
* Roles: Implicit rules and expectations for specific members within the group.
* Relations: Patterns of liking within the group, and also differences in prestige or status.

The shared social identity of individuals within a group influences intergroup behavior, which denotes the way in which groups behave towards and perceive each other. These perceptions and behaviors in turn define the social identity of individuals within the interacting groups.

The tendency to define oneself by membership in a group may lead to intergroup discrimination, which involves favorable perceptions and behaviors directed towards the in-group, but negative perceptions and behaviors directed towards the out-group.

Groups often moderate and improve decision making, and are frequently relied upon for these benefits, such as in committees and juries. Groups also affect performance and productivity. Social facilitation, for example, is a tendency to work harder and faster in the presence of others.

Another important concept in this area is deindividuation, a reduced state of self-awareness that can be caused by feelings of anonymity. Deindividuation is associated with uninhibited and sometimes dangerous behavior. It is common in crowds and mobs, but it can also be caused by a disguise, a uniform, alcohol, dark environments, or online anonymity.

=== Interpersonal attraction ===
A major area of study of people&#x27;s relations to each other is interpersonal attraction, which refers to all factors that lead people to like each other, establish relationships, and in some cases fall in love. Several general principles of attraction have been discovered by social psychologists. One of the most important factors in interpersonal attraction is how similar two particular people are. The more similar two people are in general attitudes, backgrounds, environments, worldviews, and other traits, the more likely they will be attracted to each other.

Physical attractiveness is an important element of romantic relationships, particularly in the early stages characterized by high levels of passion. Later on, similarity and other compatibility factors become more important, and the type of love people experience shifts from passionate to companionate. In 1986, Robert Sternberg suggested that there are actually three components of love: intimacy, passion, and commitment. When two (or more) people experience all three, they are said to be in a state of consummate love.

According to social exchange theory, relationships are based on rational choice and cost-benefit analysis. A person may leave a relationship if their partner&#x27;s &quot;costs&quot; begin to outweigh their benefits, especially if there are good alternatives available. This theory is similar to the minimax principle proposed by mathematicians and economists. With time, long-term relationships tend to become communal rather than simply based on exchange.

== Research ==
=== Methods ===
Social psychology is an empirical science that attempts to answer questions about human behavior by testing hypotheses. Careful attention to research design, sampling, and statistical analysis is important in social psychology.

Whenever possible, social psychologists rely on controlled experimentation, which requires the manipulation of one or more independent variables in order to examine the effect on a dependent variable. Experiments are useful in social psychology because they are high in internal validity, meaning that they are free from the influence of confounding or extraneous variables, and so are more likely to accurately indicate a causal relationship. However, the small samples used in controlled experiments are typically low in external validity, or the degree to which the results can be generalized to the larger population. There is usually a trade-off between experimental control (internal validity) and being able to generalize to the population (external validity).

Because it is usually impossible to test everyone, research tends to be conducted on a sample of persons from the wider population. Social psychologists frequently use survey research when they are interested in results that are high in external validity. Surveys use various forms of random sampling to obtain a sample of respondents that is representative of a population. This type of research is usually descriptive or correlational because there is no experimental control over variables. Some psychologists have raised concerns for social psychological research relying too heavily on studies conducted on university undergraduates in academic settings, or participants from crowdsourcing labor markets such as Amazon Mechanical Turk. In a 1986 study by David O. Sears, over 70% of experiments used North American undergraduates as subjects, a subset of the population that is unrepresentative of the population as a whole.

Regardless of which method has been chosen, social psychologists statistically review the significance of their results before accepting them in evaluating an underlying hypothesis. Statistics and probability testing define what constitutes a significant finding, which can be as low as 5% or less, and is unlikely due to chance. Replication testing is also important in ensuring that the results are valid and not due to chance. False positive conclusions, often resulting from the pressure to publish or the author&#x27;s own confirmation bias, are a hazard in the field.

=== Famous experiments ===
==== Asch conformity experiments ====

The Asch conformity experiments used a line-length estimation task to demonstrate the power of people&#x27;s impulses to conform with other members in a small group. The task was designed to be easy to assess but wrong answers were deliberately given by at least some, oftentimes most, of the other participants. In well over a third of the trials, participants conformed to the majority, even though the majority judgment was clearly wrong. Seventy-five percent of the participants conformed at least once during the experiment. Additional manipulations of the experiment showed that participant conformity decreased when at least one other individual failed to conform but increased when the individual began conforming or withdrew from the experiment. Also, participant conformity increased substantially as the number of &quot;incorrect&quot; individuals increased from one to three, and remained high as the incorrect majority grew. Participants with three other, incorrect participants made mistakes 31.8% of the time, while those with one or two incorrect participants made mistakes only 3.6% and 13.6% of the time, respectively.

==== Festinger cognitive dissonance experiments ====

In Leon Festinger&#x27;s cognitive dissonance experiment, participants were divided into two groups and were asked to perform a boring task. Both groups were later asked to dishonestly give their opinion of the task, but were rewarded according to two different pay scales. At the end of the study, some participants were paid $1 to say that they enjoyed the task, while the group of participants were paid $20 to tell the same lie. The first group ($1) later reported liking the task better than the second group ($20). Festinger&#x27;s explanation was that for people in the first group, being paid only $1 was not sufficient incentive. This led them to experience dissonance, or discomfort and internal conflict. They could only overcome that dissonance by justifying their lies. They did this by changing their previously unfavorable attitudes about the task. Being paid $20 provided a reason for doing the boring task, which resulted in no dissonance.

==== Milgram experiment ====

The Milgram experiment was designed to study how far people would go in obeying an authority figure. The experiment showed that normal American citizens would follow orders even when they believed they were causing an innocent person to suffer or even apparently die.

==== Stanford prison experiment ====

Philip Zimbardo&#x27;s Stanford prison study, a simulated exercise involving students playing at being prison guards and inmates, attempted to show how far people would go in role playing. In just a few days, the guards became brutal and cruel, and the prisoners became miserable and compliant. This was initially argued to be an important demonstration of the power of the immediate social situation and its capacity to overwhelm normal personality traits. Subsequent research has contested the initial conclusions of the study. For example, it has been pointed out that participant self-selection may have affected the participants&#x27; behavior, and that the participants&#x27; personalities influenced their reactions in a variety of ways, including how long they chose to remain in the study. The 2002 BBC prison study, designed to replicate the conditions in the Stanford study, produced conclusions that were drastically different from the initial findings.

==== Bandura&#x27;s Bobo doll ====
Albert Bandura&#x27;s Bobo doll experiment attempted to demonstrate how aggression is learned by imitation. In the experiment, 72 children, grouped based on similar levels of pre-tested aggressivity, either witnessed an aggressive or a non-aggressive actor interact with a &quot;bobo doll.&quot; The children were then placed alone in the room with the doll and observed to see if they would imitate the same behavior of the actor they had observed. As hypothesized, the children who had witnessed the aggressive actor, imitated the behavior and proceeded to act aggressively towards the doll. Both male and female children who witnessed the non-aggressive actor behaved less aggressively towards the doll. However, boys were more likely to exhibit aggression, especially after observing the behavior from an actor of the same gender. In addition, boys were found to imitate more physical aggression, while girls displayed more verbal aggression.

=== Ethics ===
The goal of social psychology is to understand cognition and behavior as they naturally occur in a social context, but the very act of observing people can influence and alter their behavior. For this reason, many social psychology experiments utilize deception to conceal or distort certain aspects of the study. Deception may include false cover stories, false participants (known as confederates or stooges), false feedback given to the participants, and other techniques that help remove potential obstacles to participation.

The practice of deception has been challenged by psychologists who maintain that deception under any circumstances is unethical and that other research strategies (e.g., role-playing) should be used instead. Research has shown that role-playing studies do not produce the same results as deception studies, and this has cast doubt on their validity. In addition to deception, experimenters have at times put people in potentially uncomfortable or embarrassing situations (e.g., the Milgram experiment and Stanford prison experiment), and this has also been criticized for ethical reasons.

Virtually all social psychology research in the modern day must pass an ethical review. At most colleges and universities, this is conducted by an ethics committee or institutional review board, which examines the proposed research to make sure that no harm is likely to come to the participants, and that the study&#x27;s benefits outweigh any possible risks or discomforts to people participating.

Furthermore, a process of informed consent is often used to make sure that volunteers know what will be asked of them in the experiment and understand that they are allowed to quit the experiment at any time. A debriefing is typically done at the experiment&#x27;s conclusion in order to reveal any deceptions used and generally make sure that the participants are unharmed by the procedures. Today, most research in social psychology involves minimal risk, or no greater risk of harm than can be expected from normal daily activities or routine psychological testing.

=== Replication crisis ===

Many social psychological research findings have proven difficult to replicate, leading some to argue that social psychology is undergoing a replication crisis. A 2014 special edition of &quot;Social Psychology&quot; focused on replication studies, finding that a number of previously held social psychological beliefs were difficult to replicate. Likewise, a 2012 special edition of &quot;Perspectives on Psychological Science&quot; focused on issues ranging from publication bias to null-aversion which have contributed to the replication crisis.

Some factors have been identified in social psychological research as contributing to the crisis. For one, questionable research practices have been identified as common. Such practices, while not necessarily intentionally fraudulent, often involve converting undesired statistical outcomes into desired outcomes via the manipulation of statistical analyses, sample sizes, or data management systems, typically to convert non-significant findings into significant ones. Some studies have suggested that at least mild versions of these practices are prevalent.

Some social psychologists have also published fraudulent research that has entered into mainstream academia, most notably the admitted data fabrication by Diederik Stapel as well as allegations against others. Fraudulent research is not the main contributor to the replication crisis. Many researchers attribute the failure to replicate as a result of the difficulty of being able to recreate the exact same conditions of a study conducted many years before, as the environment and people have changed.

Even before the current replication crisis, several effects in social psychology have also been found to be difficult to replicate. For example, the scientific journal &quot;Judgment and Decision Making&quot; has published several studies over the years that fail to provide support for the unconscious thought theory.

Replication failures are not unique to social psychology and are found in many fields of science. One of the consequences of the current crisis is that some areas of social psychology once considered solid, such as social priming, have come under increased scrutiny due to failure to replicate findings.

=== The &quot;WEIRD&quot; Problem ===
The &quot;WEIRD problem&quot; highlights the disproportionate representation of participants from Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) societies in psychological research. This issue has significant implications for how findings are generalized to all human populations. The heavy reliance on WEIRD samples may result in unrepresentative data, making it difficult to draw accurate conclusions about human behavior that apply to people from all cultural backgrounds.

Researchers have found that relying predominantly on WEIRD samples limits our ability to understand global human behaviors accurately. Cross-cultural variations are often ignored, leading to the misconception that findings from WEIRD populations can be universally applied. This is problematic because WEIRD populations are not representative of the broader diversity of human experiences, which affects our understanding of basic psychological processes such as perception, cognition, and well-being.

Recognizing cultural diversity is essential not only for gaining multiple perspectives in problem-solving but also for ensuring that everyone feels included and represented in the study of psychology. Understanding different cultures enriches our knowledge of human nature and challenges existing biases, ultimately leading to a more comprehensive and inclusive body of psychological research. Thus, the WEIRD problem represents both a challenge and an opportunity: a need to broaden the scope of research to better reflect the true diversity of humanity.

== See also ==
* Crowd psychology
* Cultural psychology
* Intergroup relations
* List of cognitive biases
* List of social psychologists
* Sociological approach to social psychology
== References ==
== External links ==

* Social psychology on &quot;PLOS&quot; — subject area page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="0" end="17" title="Social psychology" label="Social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="50" end="57" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q205555" start="60" end="67" title="feeling" label="feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="74" end="82" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="194" end="208" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="249" end="262" title="mind" label="mental states"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="404" end="423" title="Social relation" label="social interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="540" end="550" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="666" end="678" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="716" end="732" title="Causality" label="cause-and-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052882" start="908" end="923" title="Norman Triplett" label="Norman Triplett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535412" start="968" end="987" title="social facilitation" label="social facilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667610" start="1147" end="1163" title="Wolfgang Stroebe" label="Wolfgang Stroebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430352" start="1250" end="1263" title="Floyd Henry Allport" label="Floyd Allport"/>
<link wikidata="Q77106" start="1415" end="1425" title="Kurt Lewin" label="Kurt Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1451" end="1463" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231428" start="1524" end="1534" title="persuasion" label="persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="1539" end="1549" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1582" end="1603" title="Psychological warfare#World War II" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="1708" end="1714" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="1719" end="1735" title="Racism" label="racial prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="1737" end="1750" title="Social stigma" label="Social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1999" end="2011" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2074" end="2085" title="sociologist" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="2450" end="2470" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q230749" start="2472" end="2494" title="Bystander effect" label="bystander intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="2500" end="2510" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="2648" end="2668" title="analysis of variance" label="analysis of variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532171" start="2977" end="2989" title="Situationism (psychology)" label="situationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="3247" end="3253" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="3258" end="3269" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3305" end="3322" title="Research#Research ethics" label="ethical standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="3346" end="3357" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="3506" end="3517" title="Attribution (psychology)" label="attribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432778" start="3519" end="3535" title="social cognition" label="social cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="3541" end="3553" title="self-concept" label="self-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3566" end="3583" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q538904" start="3848" end="3866" title="applied psychology" label="applied psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045692" start="3954" end="3967" title="Industrial and organizational psychology" label="the workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="4680" end="4707" title="Cognitive dissonance theory" label="Cognitive dissonance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255102" start="5007" end="5020" title="Self-report study" label="self-reported"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007314" start="5035" end="5066" title="Implicit stereotype" label="implicit, unconscious attitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q774081" start="5090" end="5121" title="implicit-association test" label="Implicit Association Test (IAT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="5520" end="5530" title="Conformity (psychology)" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632514" start="5532" end="5556" title="interpersonal attraction" label="interpersonal attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="5581" end="5590" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="5833" end="5841" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="5979" end="5992" title="Orator" label="Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530061" start="6003" end="6014" title="credibility" label="credibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q381160" start="6016" end="6022" title="expert" label="expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q659974" start="6027" end="6042" title="trustworthiness" label="trustworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q758234" start="6048" end="6062" title="Physical attractiveness" label="attractiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q628523" start="6065" end="6072" title="Message" label="Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="6102" end="6108" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="6110" end="6117" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211198" start="6209" end="6217" title="Audience" label="Audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="6241" end="6253" title="demographics" label="demographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="6255" end="6272" title="personality trait" label="personality trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q908656" start="6279" end="6289" title="preference" label="preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="6294" end="6300" title="Media (communication)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571836" start="6389" end="6396" title="Social environment" label="Context"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310231" start="6466" end="6487" title="Dual process theory" label="Dual-process theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q282853" start="6515" end="6543" title="elaboration likelihood model" label="elaboration likelihood model"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="6736" end="6746" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383646" start="7225" end="7241" title="Social cognitive theory" label="social-cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q558077" start="7276" end="7293" title="Williams syndrome" label="Williams syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="7298" end="7304" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="7374" end="7385" title="Attribution (psychology)" label="attribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q575786" start="8265" end="8294" title="fundamental attribution error" label="fundamental attribution error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156820" start="8588" end="8605" title="self-serving bias" label="self-serving bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748260" start="8888" end="8897" title="Heuristics in judgment and decision making" label="Heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462985" start="8992" end="9014" title="availability heuristic" label="availability heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="9047" end="9058" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432778" start="9445" end="9461" title="social cognition" label="social cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960297" start="9479" end="9493" title="hindsight bias" label="hindsight bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082351" start="9499" end="9511" title="Confabulation" label="false memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="9623" end="9640" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="9792" end="9799" title="Schema (psychology)" label="Schemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826617" start="9969" end="9982" title="automaticity" label="automatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="10274" end="10284" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880280" start="10370" end="10396" title="ultimate attribution error" label="ultimate attribution error"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837800" start="10736" end="10747" title="self-schema" label="self-schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q315916" start="11451" end="11465" title="Leon Festinger" label="Leon Festinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q645999" start="11484" end="11508" title="social comparison theory" label="social comparison theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166994" start="11668" end="11677" title="Daryl Bem" label="Daryl Bem"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="12160" end="12170" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399332" start="12172" end="12182" title="Compliance (psychology)" label="compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456974" start="12188" end="12197" title="Obedience (human behavior)" label="obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993355" start="12767" end="12797" title="informational social influence" label="informational social influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399332" start="13302" end="13312" title="Compliance (psychology)" label="compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382615" start="13766" end="13792" title="foot-in-the-door technique" label="foot-in-the-door technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417167" start="13986" end="14001" title="bait and switch" label="bait and switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456974" start="14243" end="14252" title="Obedience (human behavior)" label="obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q191474" start="14422" end="14435" title="Milgram study" label="Milgram study"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="14584" end="14608" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="14751" end="14756" title="stock market crash" label="crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q13430821" start="15435" end="15440" title="crowd" label="crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q874405" start="15445" end="15450" title="Social group" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="15528" end="15548" title="interpersonal relationship" label="social relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="15769" end="15774" title="Norm (sociology)" label="Norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q214339" start="15839" end="15843" title="Role" label="Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="15919" end="15928" title="Interpersonal relationship" label="Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971421" start="16080" end="16099" title="Intergroup relations" label="intergroup behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="16372" end="16386" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="16576" end="16591" title="decision making" label="decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="16713" end="16725" title="productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183262" start="16871" end="16886" title="deindividuation" label="deindividuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="16907" end="16921" title="self-awareness" label="self-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q758234" start="17787" end="17810" title="Physical attractiveness" label="Physical attractiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210705" start="17927" end="17934" title="limerence" label="passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362357" start="18100" end="18116" title="Robert Sternberg" label="Robert Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q780716" start="18325" end="18347" title="social exchange theory" label="social exchange theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q751319" start="18612" end="18629" title="minimax principle" label="minimax principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="18661" end="18671" title="Economist" label="economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="18826" end="18835" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="18974" end="18994" title="statistics" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q367359" start="19079" end="19105" title="Scientific control" label="controlled experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="19154" end="19175" title="Dependent and independent variables" label="independent variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="19212" end="19230" title="Dependent and independent variables" label="dependent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113800" start="19301" end="19318" title="internal validity" label="internal validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125472" start="19369" end="19380" title="confounding" label="confounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057880" start="19554" end="19571" title="external validity" label="external validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="19887" end="19893" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="19920" end="19930" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q814232" start="19968" end="19974" title="Statistical survey" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="20085" end="20100" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="random sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="20223" end="20234" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733115" start="20517" end="20539" title="Amazon Mechanical Turk" label="Amazon Mechanical Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238173" start="20560" end="20574" title="David O. Sears" label="David O. Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="20974" end="20985" title="Statistical significance" label="significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="21061" end="21072" title="Reproducibility" label="Replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="21161" end="21175" title="False positive" label="False positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q451845" start="21214" end="21233" title="Publish or perish" label="pressure to publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="21259" end="21276" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q778684" start="21376" end="21403" title="Asch conformity experiments" label="Asch conformity experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q315916" start="22567" end="22581" title="Leon Festinger" label="Leon Festinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="22589" end="22609" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191474" start="23556" end="23574" title="Milgram experiment" label="Milgram experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="23635" end="23644" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q296042" start="23859" end="23874" title="Philip Zimbardo" label="Philip Zimbardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235089" start="23882" end="23903" title="Stanford prison study" label="Stanford prison study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732824" start="24667" end="24683" title="The Experiment" label="BBC prison study"/>
<link wikidata="Q153753" start="24861" end="24875" title="Albert Bandura" label="Albert Bandura"/>
<link wikidata="Q888802" start="24883" end="24903" title="Bobo doll experiment" label="Bobo doll experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="24958" end="24967" title="imitation" label="imitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q888802" start="25140" end="25149" title="Bobo doll experiment" label="bobo doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="26076" end="26085" title="deception" label="deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361181" start="26525" end="26537" title="role-playing" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191474" start="26837" end="26855" title="Milgram experiment" label="Milgram experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q235089" start="26860" end="26886" title="Stanford prison experiment" label="Stanford prison experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="27017" end="27024" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q362104" start="27112" end="27138" title="institutional review board" label="institutional review board"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="27372" end="27388" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669680" start="27557" end="27567" title="debriefing" label="debriefing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303778" start="28085" end="28103" title="replication crisis" label="replication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550761" start="28137" end="28154" title="Social Psychology (journal)" label="Social Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170765" start="28334" end="28371" title="Perspectives on Psychological Science" label="Perspectives on Psychological Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q982790" start="29210" end="29225" title="Diederik Stapel" label="Diederik Stapel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29733" end="29761" title="Society for Judgment and Decision Making#Publications and journal" label="Judgment and Decision Making"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882912" start="29850" end="29876" title="unconscious thought theory" label="unconscious thought theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="30377" end="30382" title="WEIRD bias" label="WEIRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355183" start="31793" end="31809" title="Crowd psychology" label="Crowd psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378247" start="31812" end="31831" title="Cultural psychology" label="Cultural psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971421" start="31834" end="31854" title="Intergroup relations" label="Intergroup relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607828" start="31857" end="31881" title="List of cognitive biases" label="List of cognitive biases"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639698" start="31884" end="31912" title="List of social psychologists" label="List of social psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381154" start="31915" end="31957" title="Social psychology (sociology)" label="Sociological approach to social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q233358" start="32026" end="32030" title="PLOS" label="PLOS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26992" wikidata="Q8474" url="?curid=26992" title="Suleiman the Magnificent">
<text>Suleiman I ( ; , ; 6 November 14946 September 1566), commonly known as Suleiman the Magnificent in the Western world and as Suleiman the Lawgiver ( ) in his own realm, was the Ottoman sultan between 1520 and his death in 1566. Under his administration, the Ottoman Empire ruled over at least 25 million people.

After succeeding his father Selim I on 30 September 1520, Suleiman began his reign by launching military campaigns against the Christian powers of Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean; Belgrade fell to him in 1521 and Rhodes in 1522–1523, and at Mohács in 1526, Suleiman broke the strength of the Kingdom of Hungary.

Presiding over the apex of the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s economic, military, and political strength, Suleiman rose to become a prominent monarch of 16th-century Europe, as he personally led Ottoman armies in their conquests of a number of European Christian strongholds before his advances were finally checked at the siege of Vienna in 1529. On the front against the Safavids, his efforts enabled the Ottomans to annex much of the Middle East, in addition to large areas of North Africa as far west as modern-day Algeria. Simultaneously, the Ottoman fleet dominated the seas from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea and through the Persian Gulf.

At the helm of the rapidly expanding Ottoman Empire, Suleiman personally instituted major judicial changes relating to society, education, taxation, and criminal law. His reforms, carried out in conjunction with the Ottoman chief judicial official Ebussuud Efendi, harmonized the relationship between the two forms of Ottoman law: sultanic (Kanun) and Islamic (Sharia). He was a distinguished poet and goldsmith; he also became a great patron of fine culture, overseeing the &quot;Golden Age&quot; of the Ottoman Empire in its artistic, literary, and architectural development.

In 1533, Suleiman broke with Ottoman tradition by marrying Roxelana (), a woman from his Imperial Harem. Roxelana, so named in Western Europe for her red hair, was a Ruthenian who converted to Sunni Islam from Eastern Orthodox Chrisitianity and thereafter became one of the most influential figures of the &quot;Sultanate of Women&quot; period in the Ottoman Empire. Upon Suleiman&#x27;s death in 1566, which ended his 46-year-long reign, he was succeeded by his and Roxelana&#x27;s son Selim II. Suleiman&#x27;s other potential heirs, Mehmed and Mustafa, had died; Mehmed had succumbed to smallpox in 1543, while Mustafa had been executed via strangling on Suleiman&#x27;s orders in 1553. His other son Bayezid was also executed on his orders, along with Bayezid&#x27;s four sons, after a rebellion in 1561. Although scholars typically regarded the period after his death to be one of crisis and adaptation rather than of simple decline, the end of Suleiman&#x27;s reign was a watershed in Ottoman history. In the decades after Suleiman, the Ottoman Empire began to experience significant political, institutional, and economic changes—a phenomenon often referred to as the Era of Transformation.

==Alternative names and titles==
Suleiman the Magnificent ( ), as he was known in the West, was also called Suleiman the First ( ), and Suleiman the Lawgiver ( ) for his reform of the Ottoman legal system.

It is unclear when exactly the term (the Lawgiver) first came to be used as an epithet for Suleiman. It is entirely absent from sixteenth and seventeenth-century Ottoman sources and may date from the early 18th century.

There is a tradition of Western origin, according to which Suleiman the Magnificent was &quot;Suleiman II&quot;, but that tradition has been based on an erroneous assumption that Süleyman Çelebi was to be recognised as a legitimate sultan.

==Early life==
Suleiman was born in Trabzon on the southern coast of the Black Sea to Şehzade Selim (later Selim I), probably on 6 November 1494, although this date is not known with absolute certainty or evidence. His mother was Hafsa Sultan, a concubine convert to Islam of unknown origins, who died in 1534. At the age of seven, Suleiman began studies of science, history, literature, theology and military tactics in the schools of the imperial Topkapı Palace in Constantinople. As a young man, he befriended Pargalı Ibrahim, a Greek slave who later became one of his most trusted advisers (but who was later executed on Suleiman&#x27;s orders). At age seventeen, he was appointed as the governor of first Kaffa (Theodosia), then Manisa, with a brief tenure at Edirne.

===Accession===
Upon the death of his father, Selim I (r. 1512–1520), Suleiman entered Constantinople and ascended to the throne as the tenth Ottoman sultan. An early description of Suleiman, a few weeks following his accession, was provided by the Venetian envoy Bartolomeo Contarini: 
==Military campaigns==
===Conquests in Europe===

Upon succeeding his father, Suleiman began a series of military conquests, eventually leading to a revolt led by the Ottoman-appointed governor of Damascus in 1521. Suleiman soon made preparations for the conquest of Belgrade from the Kingdom of Hungary—something his great-grandfather Mehmed II had failed to achieve because of John Hunyadi&#x27;s strong defense in the region. Its capture was vital in removing the Hungarians and Croats who, following the defeats of the Albanians, Bosniaks, Bulgarians, Byzantines and the Serbs, remained the only formidable force who could block further Ottoman gains in Europe. Suleiman encircled Belgrade and began a series of heavy bombardments from an island in the Danube. Belgrade, with a garrison of only 700 men, and receiving no aid from Hungary, fell in August 1521.

The road to Hungary and Austria lay open, but Suleiman turned his attention instead to the Eastern Mediterranean island of Rhodes, the home base of the Knights Hospitaller. Suleiman built a large fortification, Marmaris Castle, that served as a base for the Ottoman Navy. Following a five-month siege, Rhodes capitulated and Suleiman allowed the Knights of Rhodes to depart. The conquest of the island cost the Ottomans 50,000 to 60,000 dead from battle and sickness (Christian claims went as high as 64,000 Ottoman battle deaths and 50,000 disease deaths).

As relations between Hungary and the Ottoman Empire deteriorated, Suleiman resumed his campaign in Central Europe, and on 29 August 1526 he defeated Louis II of Hungary (1506–1526) at the Battle of Mohács. Upon encountering the lifeless body of King Louis, Suleiman is said to have lamented: &quot;I came indeed in arms against him; but it was not my wish that he should be thus cut off before he scarcely tasted the sweets of life and royalty.&quot; While Suleiman was campaigning in Hungary, Turkmen tribes in central Anatolia (in Cilicia) revolted under the leadership of Kalender Çelebi.

Some Hungarian nobles proposed that Ferdinand, who was the ruler of neighboring Austria and tied to Louis II&#x27;s family by marriage, be King of Hungary, citing previous agreements that the Habsburgs would take the Hungarian throne if Louis died without heirs. However, other nobles turned to the nobleman John Zápolya, whom Suleiman supported. Under Charles V and his brother Ferdinand I, the Habsburgs reoccupied Buda and took possession of Hungary. Reacting in 1529, Suleiman marched through the valley of the Danube and regained control of Buda; in the following autumn, his forces laid siege to Vienna. This was to be the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s most ambitious expedition and the apogee of its drive to the West. With a reinforced garrison of 16,000 men, the Austrians inflicted the first defeat on Suleiman, sowing the seeds of a bitter Ottoman–Habsburg rivalry that lasted until the 20th century. His second attempt to conquer Vienna failed in 1532, as Ottoman forces were delayed by the siege of Güns and failed to reach Vienna. In both cases, the Ottoman army was plagued by bad weather, forcing them to leave behind essential siege equipment, and was hobbled by overstretched supply lines. In 1533 the Treaty of Constantinople was signed by Ferdinand I, in which he acknowledged Ottoman suzerainty and recognised Suleiman as his &quot;father and suzerain&quot;, he also agreed to pay an annual tribute and accepted the Ottoman grand vizier as his brother and equal in rank.

By the 1540s, a renewal of the conflict in Hungary presented Suleiman with the opportunity to avenge the defeat suffered at Vienna. In 1541, the Habsburgs attempted to lay siege to Buda but were repulsed, and more Habsburg fortresses were captured by the Ottomans in two consecutive campaigns in 1541 and 1544 as a result, Ferdinand and Charles were forced to conclude a humiliating five-year treaty with Suleiman. Ferdinand renounced his claim to the Kingdom of Hungary and was forced to pay a fixed yearly sum to the Sultan for the Hungarian lands he continued to control. Of more symbolic importance, the treaty referred to Charles V not as &quot;Emperor&quot; but as the &quot;King of Spain&quot;, leading Suleiman to identify as the true &quot;Caesar&quot;.

In 1552, Suleiman&#x27;s forces laid siege to Eger, located in the northern part of the Kingdom of Hungary, but the defenders led by István Dobó repelled the attacks and defended the Eger Castle.

===Ottoman–Safavid War===

Suleiman&#x27;s father had made war with Persia a high priority. At first, Suleiman shifted attention to Europe and was content to contain Persia, which was preoccupied by its own enemies to its east. After Suleiman stabilized his European frontiers, he now turned his attention to Persia, the base for the rival Shia Muslim faction. The Safavid dynasty became the main enemy after two episodes. First, Shah Tahmasp killed the Baghdad governor loyal to Suleiman, and put his own man in. Second, the governor of Bitlis had defected and sworn allegiance to the Safavids. As a result, in 1533, Suleiman ordered his Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha to lead an army into eastern Asia Minor where he retook Bitlis and occupied Tabriz without resistance. Suleiman joined Ibrahim in 1534. They made a push towards Persia, only to find the Shah sacrificing territory instead of facing a pitched battle, resorting to harassment of the Ottoman army as it proceeded along the harsh interior. In 1535 Suleiman made a grand entrance into Baghdad. He enhanced his local support by restoring the tomb of Abu Hanifa, the founder of the Hanafi school of Islamic law to which the Ottomans adhered.

Attempting to defeat the Shah once and for all, Suleiman embarked upon a second campaign in 1548–1549. As in the previous attempt, Tahmasp avoided confrontation with the Ottoman army and instead chose to retreat, using scorched earth tactics in the process and exposing the Ottoman army to the harsh winter of the Caucasus. Suleiman abandoned the campaign with temporary Ottoman gains in Tabriz and the Urmia region, a lasting presence in the province of Van, control of the western half of Azerbaijan and some forts in Georgia.

In 1553, Suleiman began his third and final campaign against the Shah. Having initially lost territories in Erzurum to the Shah&#x27;s son, Suleiman retaliated by recapturing Erzurum, crossing the Upper Euphrates and laying waste to parts of Persia. The Shah&#x27;s army continued its strategy of avoiding the Ottomans, leading to a stalemate from which neither army made any significant gain. In 1555, a settlement known as the Peace of Amasya was signed, which defined the borders of the two empires. By this treaty, Armenia and Georgia were divided equally between the two, with Western Armenia, western Kurdistan, and western Georgia (incl. western Samtskhe) falling in Ottoman hands while Eastern Armenia, eastern Kurdistan, and eastern Georgia (incl. eastern Samtskhe) stayed in Safavid hands. The Ottoman Empire obtained most of Iraq, including Baghdad, which gave them access to the Persian Gulf, while the Persians retained their former capital Tabriz and all their other northwestern territories in the Caucasus and as they were prior to the wars, such as Dagestan and all of what is now Azerbaijan.

===Campaigns in the Indian Ocean===

Ottoman ships had been sailing in the Indian Ocean since the year 1518. Ottoman admirals such as Hadim Suleiman Pasha, Seydi Ali Reis and Kurtoğlu Hızır Reis are known to have voyaged to the Mughal imperial ports of Thatta, Surat and Janjira. The Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great himself is known to have exchanged six documents with Suleiman the Magnificent.

Suleiman led several naval campaigns against the Portuguese in an attempt to remove them and reestablish trade with the Mughal Empire. Aden in Yemen was captured by the Ottomans in 1538, in order to provide an Ottoman base for raids against Portuguese possessions on the western coast of the Mughal Empire. Sailing on, the Ottomans failed against the Portuguese at the siege of Diu in September 1538, but then returned to Aden, where they fortified the city with 100 pieces of artillery. From this base, Sulayman Pasha managed to take control of the whole country of Yemen, also taking Sana&#x27;a.

With its strong control of the Red Sea, Suleiman successfully managed to dispute control of the trade routes to the Portuguese and maintained a significant level of trade with the Mughal Empire throughout the 16th century.

From 1526 until 1543, Suleiman stationed over 900 Turkish soldiers to fight alongside the Somali Adal Sultanate led by Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi during the Conquest of Abyssinia. After the first Ajuran-Portuguese war, the Ottoman Empire would in 1559 absorb the weakened Adal Sultanate into its domain. This expansion furthered Ottoman rule in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. This also increased its influence in the Indian Ocean to compete with the Portuguese Empire with its close ally, the Ajuran Empire.

In 1564, Suleiman received an embassy from Aceh (a sultanate on Sumatra, in modern Indonesia), requesting Ottoman support against the Portuguese. As a result, an Ottoman expedition to Aceh was launched, which was able to provide extensive military support to the Acehnese.

The discovery of new maritime trade routes by Western European states allowed them to avoid the Ottoman trade monopoly. The Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 initiated a series of Ottoman-Portuguese naval wars in the Ocean throughout the 16th century. The Ajuran Sultanate allied with the Ottomans defied the Portuguese economic monopoly in the Indian Ocean by employing a new coinage which followed the Ottoman pattern, thus proclaiming an attitude of economic independence in regard to the Portuguese.

===Mediterranean and North Africa===


Having consolidated his conquests on land, Suleiman was greeted with the news that the fortress of Koroni in Morea (the modern Peloponnese, peninsular Greece) had been lost to Charles V&#x27;s admiral, Andrea Doria. The presence of the Spanish in the Eastern Mediterranean concerned Suleiman, who saw it as an early indication of Charles V&#x27;s intention to rival Ottoman dominance in the region. Recognizing the need to reassert naval preeminence in the Mediterranean, Suleiman appointed an exceptional naval commander in the form of Khair ad Din, known to Europeans as Barbarossa. Once appointed admiral-in-chief, Barbarossa was charged with rebuilding the Ottoman fleet.

In 1535, Charles V led a Holy League of 26,700 soldiers (10,000 Spaniards, 8,000 Italians, 8,000 Germans, and 700 Knights of St. John) to victory against the Ottomans at Tunis, which together with the war against Venice the following year, led Suleiman to accept proposals from Francis I of France to form an alliance against Charles. Huge Muslim territories in North Africa were annexed. The piracy carried on thereafter by the Barbary pirates of North Africa can be seen in the context of the wars against Spain.

In 1541, the Spaniards led an unsuccessful expedition to Algiers. In 1542, facing a common Habsburg enemy during the Italian Wars, Francis I sought to renew the Franco-Ottoman alliance. In early 1542, Polin successfully negotiated the details of the alliance, with the Ottoman Empire promising to send 60,000 troops against the territories of the German king Ferdinand, as well as 150 galleys against Charles, while France promised to attack Flanders, harass the coasts of Spain with a naval force, and send 40 galleys to assist the Turks for operations in the Levant.

In August 1551, Ottoman naval commander Turgut Reis attacked and captured Tripoli, which had been a possession of the Knights of Malta since 1530. In 1553, Turgut Reis was nominated commander of Tripoli by Suleiman, making the city an important center for piratical raids in the Mediterranean and the capital of the Ottoman province of Tripolitania. In 1560, a powerful naval force was sent to recapture Tripoli, but that force was defeated in the Battle of Djerba.

Elsewhere in the Mediterranean, when the Knights Hospitallers were re-established as the Knights of Malta in 1530, their actions against Muslim navies quickly drew the ire of the Ottomans, who assembled another massive army in order to dislodge the Knights from Malta. The Ottomans invaded Malta in 1565, undertaking the Great Siege of Malta, which began on 18 May and lasted until 8 September, and is portrayed vividly in the frescoes of Matteo Perez d&#x27;Aleccio in the Hall of St. Michael and St. George. At first, it seemed that this would be a repeat of the battle on Rhodes, with most of Malta&#x27;s cities destroyed and half the Knights killed in battle; but a relief force from Spain entered the battle, resulting in the loss of 10,000 Ottoman troops and the victory of the local Maltese citizenry.

==Legal and political reforms==

While Sultan Suleiman was known as &quot;the Magnificent&quot; in the West, he was always &quot;Kanuni&quot; Suleiman or &quot;The Lawgiver&quot; () to his Ottoman subjects. The overriding law of the empire was the Shari&#x27;ah, or Sacred Law, which as the divine law of Islam was outside of the Sultan&#x27;s powers to change. Yet an area of distinct law known as the &quot;Kanuns&quot; (, canonical legislation) was dependent on Suleiman&#x27;s will alone, covering areas such as criminal law, land tenure and taxation. He collected all the judgments that had been issued by the nine Ottoman Sultans who preceded him. After eliminating duplications and choosing between contradictory statements, he issued a single legal code, all the while being careful not to violate the basic laws of Islam. It was within this framework that Suleiman, supported by his Grand Mufti Ebussuud, sought to reform the legislation to adapt to a rapidly changing empire. When the Kanun laws attained their final form, the code of laws became known as the &quot;kanun‐i Osmani&quot; (), or the &quot;Ottoman laws&quot;. Suleiman&#x27;s legal code was to last more than three hundred years.

The Sultan also played a role in protecting the Jewish subjects of his empire for centuries to come. In late 1553 or 1554, on the suggestion of his favorite doctor and dentist, the Spanish Jew Moses Hamon, the Sultan issued a &quot;firman&quot; () formally denouncing blood libels against the Jews. Furthermore, Suleiman enacted new criminal and police legislation, prescribing a set of fines for specific offenses, as well as reducing the instances requiring death or mutilation. In the area of taxation, taxes were levied on various goods and produce, including animals, mines, profits of trade, and import-export duties.

Higher &quot;medreses&quot; provided education of university status, whose graduates became &quot;imams&quot; () or teachers. Educational centers were often one of many buildings surrounding the courtyards of mosques, others included libraries, baths, soup kitchens, residences and hospitals for the benefit of the public.

==The arts under Suleiman==

Under Suleiman&#x27;s patronage, the Ottoman Empire entered the golden age of its cultural development. Hundreds of imperial artistic societies (called the &quot;Ehl-i Hiref&quot;, &quot;Community of the Craftsmen&quot;) were administered at the Imperial seat, the Topkapı Palace. After an apprenticeship, artists and craftsmen could advance in rank within their field and were paid commensurate wages in quarterly annual installments. Payroll registers that survive testify to the breadth of Suleiman&#x27;s patronage of the arts, the earliest of the documents dating from 1526 list 40 societies with over 600 members. The &quot;Ehl-i Hiref&quot; attracted the empire&#x27;s most talented artisans to the Sultan&#x27;s court, both from the Islamic world and from the recently conquered territories in Europe, resulting in a blend of Arabic, Turkish and European cultures. Artisans in service of the court included painters, book binders, furriers, jewellers and goldsmiths. Whereas previous rulers had been influenced by Persian culture (Suleiman&#x27;s father, Selim I, wrote poetry in Persian), Suleiman&#x27;s patronage of the arts saw the Ottoman Empire assert its own artistic legacy.

Suleiman himself was an accomplished poet, writing in Persian and Turkish under the takhallus (nom de plume) &quot;Muhibbi&quot; (, &quot;Lover&quot;). Some of Suleiman&#x27;s verses have become Turkish proverbs, such as the well-known &quot;Everyone aims at the same meaning, but many are the versions of the story&quot;. When his young son Mehmed died in 1543, he composed a moving chronogram to commemorate the year: &quot;Peerless among princes, my Sultan Mehmed&quot;. In Turkish the chronogram reads (&quot;Şehzadeler güzidesi Sultan Muhammed&#x27;üm&quot;), in which the Arabic Abjad numerals total 955, the equivalent in the Islamic calendar of 1543 AD. In addition to Suleiman&#x27;s own work, many great talents enlivened the literary world during Suleiman&#x27;s rule, including Fuzûlî and Bâkî. The literary historian Elias John Wilkinson Gibb observed that &quot;at no time, even in Turkey, was greater encouragement given to poetry than during the reign of this Sultan&quot;. Suleiman&#x27;s most famous verse is:

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:2em&quot;&gt;
The people think of wealth and power as the greatest fate,
But in this world a spell of health is the best state.
What men call sovereignty is a worldly strife and constant war;
Worship of God is the highest throne, the happiest of all estates.
&lt;/poem&gt;

Suleiman also became renowned for sponsoring a series of monumental architectural developments within his empire. The Sultan sought to turn Constantinople into the center of Islamic civilization by a series of projects, including bridges, mosques, palaces and various charitable and social establishments. The greatest of these were built by the Sultan&#x27;s chief architect, Mimar Sinan, under whom Ottoman architecture reached its zenith. Sinan became responsible for over three hundred monuments throughout the empire, including his two masterpieces, the Süleymaniye and Selimiye mosques—the latter built in Adrianople (now Edirne) in the reign of Suleiman&#x27;s son Selim II. Suleiman also restored the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem and the Walls of Jerusalem (which are the current walls of the Old City of Jerusalem), renovated the Kaaba in Mecca, and constructed a complex in Damascus.

===Tulips===
Suleiman loved gardens and his shaykh grew a white tulip in one of the gardens. Some of the nobles in the court had seen the tulip and they also began growing their own. Soon images of the tulip were woven into rugs and fired into ceramics. Suleiman is credited with large-scale cultivation of the tulip and it is thought that the tulips spread throughout Europe because of Suleiman. It is thought that diplomats who visited him were gifted the flowers while visiting his court.

Suleiman&#x27;s passion for tulips set a precedent for their cultivation and cultural significance in the Ottoman Empire. This fascination continued to flourish, reaching its zenith under Sultan Ahmet III, who ascended the throne in 1703. Ahmet III&#x27;s gardens in Istanbul were adorned with tulips from Turkey&#x27;s mountains and the finest bulbs imported from Dutch commercial growers. Throughout his reign, he imported millions of Dutch tulip bulbs, reflecting the enduring legacy of Suleiman&#x27;s influence and the extravagant height of tulip culture during this period.

==Personal life==
===Consorts===
Suleiman had two known consorts:
* Mahidevran Hatun, a Circassian or Albanian or Montenegrin concubine, she entered in Süleyman&#x27;s harem when he was prince in Manisa;
* Hürrem Sultan, known in West as Roxelana (m. 1533), Suleiman&#x27;s only favorite concubine during his reign, and later legal wife and first Haseki sultan, possibly a daughter of a Ruthenian Orthodox priest.

===Sons===
Suleiman I had at least eight sons:
* Şehzade Mahmud (, Manisa Palace, Manisa – 29 October 1520, Old Palace, Istanbul, and buried in Yavuz Selim Mosque);
* Şehzade Murad (, Manisa Palace, Manisa – 19 October 1520, Old Palace, and Istanbul, buried in Yavuz Selim Mosque);
* Şehzade Mustafa (1516/1517, Manisa Palace, Manisa – executed, by the order of his father, 6 October 1553, Konya, buried in Muradiye Complex, Bursa), with Mahidevran; 
* Şehzade Mehmed (1521, Old Palace, Istanbul – 6 November 1543, Manisa Palace, Manisa, buried in Şehzade Mosque, Istanbul), with Hürrem;
* Sultan Selim II (30 May 1524, Old Palace, Istanbul – 15 December 1574, Topkapı Palace, Istanbul, buried in Selim II Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque), with Hürrem;
* Şehzade Abdullah (, Old Palace, Istanbul – , Old Palace, Istanbul, and buried in Yavuz Selim Mosque), with Hürrem;
* Şehzade Bayezid (1527, Old Palace, Istanbul – executed by agents of his father on 25 September 1561, Qazvin, Safavid Empire, buried in Melik-i Acem Türbe, Sivas), with Hürrem;
* Şehzade Cihangir (1531, Old Palace, Istanbul – 27 November 1553, Konya, buried in Şehzade Mosque, Istanbul), with Hürrem;

===Daughters ===
Suleiman had two daughters: 
* Raziye Sultan ( 1519 – 1520, and buried in Yahya Efendi mausoleum);
* Mihrimah Sultan (1522, Old Palace, Istanbul – 25 January 1578, buried in Suleiman I Mausoleum, Süleymaniye Mosque), with Hürrem, married Rüstem Pasha in 1539;

===Relationship with Hurrem Sultan===
Suleiman fell in love with Hurrem Sultan, a harem girl from Ruthenia, then part of Poland. Western diplomats, taking notice of the palace gossip about her, called her &quot;Russelazie&quot; or &quot;Roxelana&quot;, referring to her Ruthenian origins. The daughter of an Orthodox priest, she was captured by Tatars from Crimea, sold as a slave in Constantinople, and eventually rose through the ranks of the Harem to become Suleiman&#x27;s favorite. Hurrem, a former concubine, became the legal wife of the Sultan, much to the astonishment of the observers in the palace and the city. He also allowed Hurrem Sultan to remain with him at court for the rest of her life, breaking another tradition—that when imperial heirs came of age, they would be sent along with the imperial concubine who bore them to govern remote provinces of the Empire, never to return unless their progeny succeeded to the throne.

Under his pen name, Muhibbi, Sultan Suleiman composed this poem for Hurrem Sultan:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:2em&quot;&gt;
Throne of my lonely niche, my wealth, my love, my moonlight.
My most sincere friend, my confidant, my very existence, my Sultan, my one and only love.
The most beautiful among the beautiful ...
My springtime, my merry faced love, my daytime, my sweetheart, laughing leaf ...
My plants, my sweet, my rose, the one only who does not distress me in this room ...
My Istanbul, my Karaman, the earth of my Anatolia
My Badakhshan, my Baghdad and Khorasan
My woman of the beautiful hair, my love of the slanted brow, my love of eyes full of misery ...
I&#x27;ll sing your praises always
I, lover of the tormented heart, Muhibbi of the eyes full of tears, I am happy.
&lt;/poem&gt;

===Grand Vizier Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha===
Before his downfall, Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha was an inseparable friend and possible lover of Suleiman. In fact, he is referred to by his chroniclers as &quot;the favourite&quot; (Maḳbūl) along with &quot;the executed&quot; (Maḳtūl). Historians state that Suleiman I is remembered for &quot;his passion for two of his slaves: for his beloved Ibrahim when the sultan was a hot-blooded youth, and for his beloved Hurrem when he was mature.&quot;

Ibrahim was originally a Christian from Parga (in Epirus), who was captured in a raid during the 1499–1503 Ottoman–Venetian War, and was given as a slave to Suleiman most likely in 1514. Ibrahim converted to Islam and Suleiman made him the royal falconer, then promoted him to first officer of the Royal Bedchamber. It was reported that they slept together in the same bed. The sultan also built Ibrahim a lavish palace on the ancient Hippodrome, Istanbul&#x27;s main forum outside the Hagia Sophia and Topkapı Palace. Despite his following marriage and his new sumptuous residence, Ibrahim sometimes spent the night with Suleiman I at Topkapı Palace. In turn, the sultan occasionally slept at Ibrahim&#x27;s lodgings. Ibrahim Pasha rose to Grand Vizier in 1523 and commander-in-chief of all the armies. Suleiman also conferred upon Ibrahim Pasha the honor of &quot;beylerbey&quot; of Rumelia (first-ranking military governor-general), granting Ibrahim authority over all Ottoman territories in Europe, as well as command of troops residing within them in times of war. At the time, Ibrahim was only about thirty years old and lacked any actual military expertise; it is said that &#x27;tongues wagged&#x27; at this unprecedented promotion straight from palace service to the two highest offices of the empire.

During his thirteen years as Grand Vizier, his rapid rise to power and vast accumulation of wealth had made Ibrahim many enemies at the Sultan&#x27;s court. Suleiman&#x27;s suspicion of Ibrahim was worsened by a quarrel between the latter and the finance secretary (&quot;defterdar&quot;) İskender Çelebi. The dispute ended in the disgrace of Çelebi on charges of intrigue, with Ibrahim convincing Suleiman to sentence the &quot;defterdar&quot; to death. Ibrahim also supported Şehzade Mustafa as the successor of Suleiman. This caused disputes between him and Hurrem Sultan, who wanted her sons to succeed to the throne. Ibrahim eventually fell from grace with the Sultan and his wife. Suleiman consulted his Qadi, who suggested that Ibrahim be put to death. The Sultan recruited assassins and ordered them to strangle Ibrahim in his sleep.

==Succession==
Sultan Suleiman&#x27;s two known consorts (Hurrem and Mahidevran) had borne him six sons, four of whom survived past the 1550s. They were Mustafa, Selim, Bayezid, and Cihangir. The eldest was Mahidevran&#x27;s son, while Selim, Bayezid, and Cihangir were born to Hurrem. Hurrem is usually held at least partly responsible for the intrigues in nominating a successor, though there is no evidence to support this. Although she was Suleiman&#x27;s wife, she exercised no official public role. This did not, however, prevent Hurrem from wielding powerful political influence. Until the reign of Ahmed I (1603–1617), the Empire had no formal means of nominating a successor, so successions usually involved the death of competing princes in order to avert civil unrest and rebellions.

By 1552, when the campaign against Persia had begun with Rüstem appointed commander-in-chief of the expedition, intrigues against Mustafa began. Rüstem sent one of Suleiman&#x27;s most trusted men to report that since Suleiman was not at the head of the army, the soldiers thought the time had come to put a younger prince on the throne; at the same time, he spread rumours that Mustafa had proved receptive to the idea. Angered by what he came to believe were Mustafa&#x27;s plans to claim the throne, the following summer upon return from his campaign in Persia, Suleiman summoned him to his tent in the Ereğli valley. When Mustafa entered his father&#x27;s tent to meet with him, Suleiman&#x27;s eunuchs attacked Mustafa, and after a long struggle the mutes killed him using a bow-string.
Cihangir is said to have died of grief a few months after the news of his half-brother&#x27;s murder. The two surviving brothers, Selim and Bayezid, were given command in different parts of the empire. Within a few years, however, civil war broke out between the brothers, each supported by his loyal forces. With the aid of his father&#x27;s army, Selim defeated Bayezid in Konya in 1559, leading the latter to seek refuge with the Safavids along with his four sons. Following diplomatic exchanges, the Sultan demanded from the Safavid Shah that Bayezid be either extradited or executed. In return for large amounts of gold, the Shah allowed a Turkish executioner to strangle Bayezid and his four sons in 1561, clearing the path for Selim&#x27;s succession to the throne five years later.

==Death==
On 6 September 1566, Suleiman, who had set out from Constantinople to command an expedition to Hungary, died before an Ottoman victory at the siege of Szigetvár in Hungary at the age of 71 and his Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha kept his death secret during the retreat for the enthronement of Selim II. The sultan&#x27;s body was taken back to Istanbul to be buried, while his heart, liver, and some other organs were buried in Turbék, outside Szigetvár. A mausoleum constructed above the burial site came to be regarded as a holy place and pilgrimage site. Within a decade a mosque and Sufi hospice were built near it, and the site was protected by a salaried garrison of several dozen men.

==Legacy==

The formation of Suleiman&#x27;s legacy began even before his death. Throughout his reign literary works were commissioned praising Suleiman and constructing an image of him as an ideal ruler, most significantly by Celalzade Mustafa, chancellor of the empire from 1534 to 1557. Later Ottoman writers applied this idealised image of Suleiman to the Near Eastern literary genre of advice literature named &quot;naṣīḥatnāme&quot;, urging sultans to conform to his model of rulership and to maintain the empire&#x27;s institutions in their sixteenth-century form. Such writers were pushing back against the political and institutional transformation of the empire after the middle of the sixteenth century, and portrayed deviation from the norm as it had existed under Suleiman as evidence of the decline of the empire. Western historians, failing to recognise that these &#x27;decline writers&#x27; were working within an established literary genre and often had deeply personal reasons for criticizing the empire, long took their claims at face value and consequently adopted the idea that the empire entered a period of decline after the death of Suleiman. Since the 1980s this view has been thoroughly reexamined, and modern scholars have come to overwhelmingly reject the idea of decline, labelling it an &quot;untrue myth&quot;.

Suleiman&#x27;s conquests had brought under the control of the Empire major Muslim cities (such as Baghdad), many Balkan provinces (reaching present day Croatia and Hungary), and most of North Africa. His expansion into Europe had given the Ottoman Turks a powerful presence in the European balance of power. Indeed, such was the perceived threat of the Ottoman Empire under the reign of Suleiman that Austria&#x27;s ambassador Busbecq warned of Europe&#x27;s imminent conquest: &quot;On [the Turks&#x27;] side are the resources of a mighty empire, strength unimpaired, habituation to victory, endurance of toil, unity, discipline, frugality and watchfulness ... Can we doubt what the result will be? ... When the Turks have settled with Persia, they will fly at our throats supported by the might of the whole East; how unprepared we are I dare not say.&quot; Suleiman&#x27;s legacy was not, however, merely in the military field. The French traveler Jean de Thévenot bears witness a century later to the &quot;strong agricultural base of the country, the well being of the peasantry, the abundance of staple foods and the pre-eminence of organization in Suleiman&#x27;s government&quot;.

Even thirty years after his death, &quot;Sultan Solyman&quot; was quoted by the English playwright William Shakespeare as a military prodigy in &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, where the Prince of Morocco boasts about his prowess by saying that he defeated Suleiman in three battles (Act 2, Scene 1).

Through the distribution of court patronage, Suleiman also presided over a golden age in Ottoman arts, witnessing immense achievement in the realms of architecture, literature, art, theology and philosophy. Today the skyline of the Bosphorus and of many cities in modern Turkey and the former Ottoman provinces, are still adorned with the architectural works of Mimar Sinan. One of these, the Süleymaniye Mosque, is the final resting place of Suleiman: he is buried in a domed mausoleum attached to the mosque.

Nevertheless, assessments of Suleiman&#x27;s reign have frequently fallen into the trap of the Great Man theory of history. The administrative, cultural, and military achievements of the age were a product not of Suleiman alone, but also of the many talented figures who served him, such as grand viziers Ibrahim Pasha and Rüstem Pasha, the Grand Mufti Ebussuud Efendi, who played a major role in legal reform, and chancellor and chronicler Celalzade Mustafa, who played a major role in bureaucratic expansion and in constructing Suleiman&#x27;s legacy.

In an inscription dating from 1537 on the citadel of Bender, Moldova, Suleiman the Magnificent gave expression to his power:

Suleiman, as sculpted by Joseph Kiselewski, is present on one of the 23 relief portraits over the gallery doors of the House Chamber of the United States Capitol that depicts historical figures noted for their work in establishing the principles that underlie American law.

==See also==
* List of revolts during Suleiman&#x27;s reign
* &quot;Muhteşem Yüzyıl&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
===Printed sources===
* 
* 
* 
* Clot, André. &quot;Suleiman the magnificent&quot; (Saqi, 2012).
* Garnier, Edith &quot;L&#x27;Alliance Impie&quot; Editions du Felin, 2008, Paris Interview
* 
* Lybyer, Albert Howe. &quot;The Government of the Ottoman Empire in the Time of Suleiman the Magnificent&quot; (Harvard UP, 1913) online. 
* Norwich, John Julius. &quot;Four princes: Henry VIII, Francis I, Charles V, Suleiman the Magnificent and the obsessions that forged modern Europe&quot; (Grove/Atlantic, 2017) popular history.
* 
* 

===Additional on-line sources===

* Based on original work by Linda Komaroff.


==Further reading==
* ; deals with Suleiman 1494–1566 
* Lamb, Harold. &quot;Suleiman the Magnificent Sultan of the East&quot; (1951) online
* Parry, V. J. &quot;The Ottoman Empire, 1520–1566.&quot; in &quot;The New Cambridge Modern History II: The Reformation 1520–1559&quot; (2nd ed 1990): 570–594 online
* Yermolenko, Galina I., ed. &quot;Roxolana in European literature, history and culture &quot; (Routledge, 2016) 
==External links==
* Portraits and Tughra of Suleiman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="0" end="10" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="71" end="95" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="103" end="116" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="124" end="145" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Lawgiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="176" end="190" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="257" end="271" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="340" end="347" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="439" end="455" title="Christendom" label="Christian powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q535542" start="509" end="517" title="Siege of Belgrade (1521)" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q767935" start="542" end="548" title="Siege of Rhodes (1522)" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="570" end="576" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="621" end="639" title="Kingdom of Hungary in the Middle Ages" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025264" start="828" end="842" title="Army of the classical Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207576" start="956" end="971" title="Siege of Vienna (1529)" label="siege of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="1006" end="1014" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="1181" end="1194" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="1244" end="1251" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1268" end="1280" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892993" start="1531" end="1546" title="Ebussuud Efendi" label="Ebussuud Efendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679796" start="1601" end="1612" title="Law of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014705" start="1624" end="1629" title="Qanun (law)" label="Kanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="1644" end="1650" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224606" start="1810" end="1818" title="Culture of the Ottoman Empire" label="artistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328366" start="1820" end="1828" title="Ottoman literature" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="1834" end="1847" title="Ottoman architecture" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q255809" start="1921" end="1929" title="Roxelana" label="Roxelana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797528" start="1951" end="1965" title="Ottoman Imperial Harem" label="Imperial Harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="2028" end="2037" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="2055" end="2066" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="2072" end="2102" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox Chrisitianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543663" start="2174" end="2192" title="Sultanate of Women" label="Sultanate of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="2349" end="2357" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991195" start="2398" end="2404" title="Şehzade Mehmed" label="Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251392" start="2409" end="2416" title="Şehzade Mustafa" label="Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606870" start="2566" end="2573" title="Şehzade Bayezid" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220065" start="2770" end="2799" title="Ottoman decline thesis" label="rather than of simple decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564225" start="2853" end="2868" title="Ottoman history" label="Ottoman history"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220521" start="3037" end="3058" title="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire" label="Era of Transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3147" end="3151" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095044" start="3668" end="3683" title="Süleyman Çelebi" label="Süleyman Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="3766" end="3773" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="3803" end="3812" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="3837" end="3844" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425979" start="3960" end="3972" title="Hafsa Sultan" label="Hafsa Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="4179" end="4193" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="4197" end="4211" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q511943" start="4243" end="4258" title="Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha" label="Pargalı Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4440" end="4445" title="Feodosiya#Caffa" label="Kaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q147089" start="4464" end="4470" title="Manisa" label="Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="4495" end="4501" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="4550" end="4557" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="4753" end="4761" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287148" start="4768" end="4788" title="Bartolomeo Contarini (nobleman)" label="Bartolomeo Contarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="4988" end="4996" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q535542" start="5046" end="5066" title="Siege of Belgrade 1521" label="conquest of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5076" end="5094" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="5127" end="5136" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="5170" end="5182" title="John Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="5314" end="5323" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="5325" end="5333" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="5335" end="5345" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5347" end="5357" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="5366" end="5371" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="5476" end="5484" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="5548" end="5554" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5755" end="5768" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5779" end="5785" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="5808" end="5827" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772114" start="5867" end="5882" title="Marmaris Castle" label="Marmaris Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="5914" end="5926" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q767935" start="5951" end="5956" title="Siege of Rhodes (1522)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="6002" end="6019" title="Knights of Rhodes" label="Knights of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="6364" end="6383" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="6403" end="6419" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="6709" end="6716" title="Yorouks" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="6748" end="6755" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052771" start="6790" end="6805" title="Jelali revolts" label="Kalender Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="6844" end="6853" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="7000" end="7009" title="Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="7116" end="7128" title="John Zápolya" label="John Zápolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="7161" end="7170" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q207576" start="7401" end="7416" title="Siege of Vienna (1529)" label="siege to Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q673641" start="7803" end="7816" title="siege of Güns" label="siege of Güns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997897" start="8020" end="8044" title="Truce of Constantinople (1533)" label="Treaty of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="8059" end="8070" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321519" start="9094" end="9107" title="Siege of Eger (1552)" label="siege to Eger"/>
<link wikidata="Q513502" start="9190" end="9201" title="István Dobó" label="István Dobó"/>
<link wikidata="Q721728" start="9240" end="9251" title="Eger Castle" label="Eger Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9420" end="9426" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="9594" end="9605" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q161205" start="9619" end="9634" title="Safavid dynasty" label="Safavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q298410" start="9689" end="9696" title="Tahmasp I" label="Tahmasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="9708" end="9715" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83531" start="9792" end="9798" title="Bitlis" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="9991" end="9997" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190896" start="10358" end="10368" title="Abu Hanifa" label="Abu Hanifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="10389" end="10395" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="10764" end="10772" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="10838" end="10844" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179665" start="10853" end="10858" title="Urmia" label="Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80550" start="10905" end="10908" title="Van Province" label="Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10941" end="10951" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="10970" end="10977" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="11088" end="11095" title="Erzurum" label="Erzurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119319" start="11409" end="11424" title="Peace of Amasya" label="Peace of Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311567" start="11562" end="11577" title="Western Armenia" label="Western Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="11587" end="11596" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029317" start="11633" end="11641" title="Samtskhe atabegate" label="Samtskhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595218" start="11674" end="11689" title="Eastern Armenia" label="Eastern Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="11816" end="11820" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="11871" end="11883" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="11934" end="11940" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="12046" end="12054" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="12078" end="12088" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="12166" end="12178" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="12208" end="12215" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826903" start="12225" end="12245" title="Hadim Suleiman Pasha" label="Hadim Suleiman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672296" start="12247" end="12261" title="Seydi Ali Reis" label="Seydi Ali Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459407" start="12266" end="12285" title="Kurtoğlu Hızır Reis" label="Kurtoğlu Hızır Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="12319" end="12325" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27212" start="12344" end="12350" title="Thatta" label="Thatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="12352" end="12357" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126222" start="12362" end="12369" title="Janjira State" label="Janjira"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="12390" end="12405" title="Akbar the Great" label="Akbar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="12536" end="12546" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="12607" end="12620" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="12622" end="12626" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="12630" end="12635" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394749" start="12856" end="12868" title="Siege of Diu (1538)" label="siege of Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="13073" end="13084" title="Sana&amp;#x27;a" label="Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="13118" end="13125" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="13267" end="13280" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="13401" end="13407" title="Somali people" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="13408" end="13422" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="13430" end="13456" title="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi" label="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915203" start="13468" end="13489" title="Abyssinian–Adal war" label="Conquest of Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762191" start="13501" end="13528" title="Ottoman–Portuguese conflicts (1538–57)" label="first Ajuran-Portuguese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="13656" end="13663" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="13672" end="13686" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q862532" start="13805" end="13818" title="Ajuran Sultanate" label="Ajuran Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061057" start="13864" end="13868" title="Aceh Sultanate" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="13885" end="13892" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="13904" end="13913" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669333" start="13983" end="14009" title="Ottoman embassy to Aceh" label="Ottoman expedition to Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="14219" end="14229" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="14247" end="14264" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q762191" start="14283" end="14324" title="Ottoman naval expeditions in the Indian Ocean" label="a series of Ottoman-Portuguese naval wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q954866" start="14758" end="14764" title="Koroni" label="Koroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196055" start="14768" end="14773" title="Morea" label="Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="14786" end="14797" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="14835" end="14844" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="14861" end="14873" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="15196" end="15208" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Khair ad Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="15232" end="15242" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="15506" end="15511" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="15549" end="15555" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="15614" end="15633" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457631" start="15642" end="15669" title="Franco-Ottoman alliance" label="an alliance against Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="15765" end="15780" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502863" start="15895" end="15916" title="Algiers expedition (1541)" label="expedition to Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="15969" end="15981" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457631" start="16013" end="16036" title="Franco-Ottoman alliance" label="Franco-Ottoman alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="16294" end="16302" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="16462" end="16473" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860095" start="16487" end="16503" title="Siege of Tripoli (1551)" label="captured Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="16617" end="16624" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859497" start="16678" end="16693" title="Barbary slave trade" label="piratical raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="16758" end="16770" title="Ottoman Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q613478" start="16870" end="16886" title="Battle of Djerba" label="Battle of Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="16978" end="16994" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="17210" end="17230" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="Great Siege of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q927064" start="17328" end="17355" title="Matteo Perez d&amp;#x27;Aleccio" label="Matteo Perez d&amp;#x27;Aleccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="17948" end="17961" title="Shari&amp;#x27;ah" label="Shari&amp;#x27;ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="18005" end="18010" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538679" start="18592" end="18603" title="Grand Mufti" label="Grand Mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892993" start="18604" end="18612" title="Mehmet Ebussuud el-İmadi" label="Ebussuud"/>
<link wikidata="Q983414" start="19098" end="19109" title="Moses Hamon" label="Moses Hamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130651" start="19137" end="19143" title="firman (decree)" label="firman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="19173" end="19185" title="blood libels" label="blood libels"/>
<link wikidata="Q224606" start="19965" end="19985" title="Culture of the Ottoman Empire" label="cultural development"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="20148" end="20162" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q953291" start="20905" end="20920" title="Culture of Iran" label="Persian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723574" start="21159" end="21168" title="takhallus" label="takhallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991195" start="21417" end="21423" title="Şehzade Mehmed" label="Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q161108" start="21459" end="21469" title="chronogram" label="chronogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q308487" start="21660" end="21674" title="Abjad numerals" label="Abjad numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="21708" end="21724" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178379" start="21865" end="21871" title="Fuzûlî" label="Fuzûlî"/>
<link wikidata="Q852738" start="21876" end="21880" title="Bâkî" label="Bâkî"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329078" start="21905" end="21930" title="Elias John Wilkinson Gibb" label="Elias John Wilkinson Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22479" end="22492" title="Ottoman architecture#Classical period (1437–1703)" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="22788" end="22799" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178643" start="22970" end="22981" title="Süleymaniye Mosque" label="Süleymaniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q184534" start="22986" end="22994" title="Selimiye Mosque (Edirne)" label="Selimiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="23039" end="23045" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="23083" end="23091" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="23120" end="23136" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918723" start="23158" end="23176" title="Walls of Jerusalem" label="Walls of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="23213" end="23234" title="Old City (Jerusalem)" label="Old City of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="23251" end="23256" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="23260" end="23265" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="23296" end="23304" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="23351" end="23357" title="shaykh" label="shaykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q59080" start="24449" end="24465" title="Mahidevran" label="Mahidevran Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q255809" start="24587" end="24600" title="Roxelana" label="Hürrem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="24728" end="24741" title="Haseki sultan" label="Haseki sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="24768" end="24777" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="24778" end="24786" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565329" start="24940" end="24958" title="Yavuz Selim Mosque" label="Yavuz Selim Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251392" start="25080" end="25095" title="Şehzade Mustafa" label="Şehzade Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="25186" end="25191" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747162" start="25203" end="25219" title="Muradiye Complex" label="Muradiye Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="25221" end="25226" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991195" start="25249" end="25263" title="Şehzade Mehmed" label="Şehzade Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="25344" end="25358" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="25386" end="25401" title="Selim II" label="Sultan Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="25513" end="25525" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003966" start="25550" end="25566" title="Şehzade Abdullah" label="Şehzade Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606870" start="25667" end="25682" title="Şehzade Bayezid" label="Şehzade Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181578" start="25768" end="25774" title="Qazvin" label="Qazvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="25776" end="25790" title="Safavid Empire" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="25822" end="25827" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809153" start="25845" end="25861" title="Şehzade Cihangir" label="Şehzade Cihangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="25910" end="25915" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="25927" end="25941" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180990" start="26016" end="26029" title="Raziye Sultan" label="Raziye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80764" start="26086" end="26101" title="Mihrimah Sultan (daughter of Suleiman I)" label="Mihrimah Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178643" start="26181" end="26199" title="Süleymaniye Mosque" label="Süleymaniye Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q642614" start="26223" end="26235" title="Rüstem Pasha" label="Rüstem Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q255809" start="26311" end="26324" title="Roxelana" label="Hurrem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="26344" end="26352" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="26367" end="26373" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="26554" end="26562" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242966" start="26579" end="26597" title="Crimean–Nogai raids into East Slavic lands" label="captured by Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="26603" end="26609" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045287" start="26621" end="26626" title="Slavery in the Ottoman Empire" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996375" start="26723" end="26731" title="Favourite" label="favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q511943" start="28056" end="28077" title="Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha" label="Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q851077" start="28517" end="28522" title="Parga" label="Parga"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="28527" end="28533" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153331" start="28574" end="28604" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1499–1503)" label="1499–1503 Ottoman–Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="28723" end="28731" title="Falconry" label="falconer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="28912" end="28922" title="Hippodrome" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="28963" end="28975" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="28980" end="28994" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="29218" end="29230" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q740406" start="29343" end="29352" title="beylerbey" label="beylerbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="29362" end="29369" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593173" start="30061" end="30070" title="defterdar" label="defterdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816459" start="30078" end="30093" title="İskender Çelebi" label="İskender Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217029" start="30499" end="30503" title="Qadi" label="Qadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251392" start="30785" end="30792" title="Şehzade Mustafa" label="Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="30794" end="30799" title="Selim II" label="Selim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606870" start="30801" end="30808" title="Şehzade Bayezid" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809153" start="30814" end="30822" title="Şehzade Cihangir" label="Cihangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q59080" start="30839" end="30849" title="Mahidevran" label="Mahidevran"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="31238" end="31245" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q996056" start="32034" end="32047" title="Ereğli, Konya" label="Ereğli valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="32127" end="32133" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="32350" end="32355" title="Selim II" label="Selim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606870" start="32360" end="32367" title="Şehzade Bayezid" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="32595" end="32600" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="32653" end="32661" title="Safavids" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q298410" start="32749" end="32761" title="Tahmasp I" label="Safavid Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q606621" start="33163" end="33181" title="siege of Szigetvár" label="siege of Szigetvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="33231" end="33251" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="33317" end="33325" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27103628" start="33452" end="33458" title="Turbék" label="Turbék"/>
<link wikidata="Q373542" start="33468" end="33477" title="Szigetvár" label="Szigetvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="33611" end="33615" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819481" start="33963" end="33973" title="nişancı" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382928" start="34108" end="34125" title="Islamic advice literature" label="advice literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967799" start="34138" end="34149" title="nasihatname" label="naṣīḥatnāme"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220521" start="34360" end="34374" title="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="35137" end="35143" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="35160" end="35167" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="35175" end="35181" title="Balkan peninsula" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="35214" end="35221" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q647633" start="35489" end="35496" title="Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq" label="Busbecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284987" start="36013" end="36029" title="Jean de Thévenot" label="Jean de Thévenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="36351" end="36370" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="36402" end="36424" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="36452" end="36459" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="36789" end="36798" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="36919" end="36930" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178643" start="36950" end="36968" title="Süleymaniye Mosque" label="Süleymaniye Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526892" start="37164" end="37180" title="Great Man theory" label="Great Man theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q511943" start="37374" end="37387" title="Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha" label="Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q642614" start="37392" end="37404" title="Rüstem Pasha" label="Rüstem Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410729" start="37410" end="37421" title="Shaykh al-Islam" label="Grand Mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892993" start="37422" end="37437" title="Ebussuud Efendi" label="Ebussuud Efendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819481" start="37484" end="37494" title="nişancı" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="37677" end="37692" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender, Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284620" start="37775" end="37792" title="Joseph Kiselewski" label="Joseph Kiselewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="37890" end="37911" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="38010" end="38022" title="American law" label="American law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636565" start="38040" end="38084" title="List of revolts during Suleiman&amp;#x27;s reign" label="List of revolts during Suleiman&amp;#x27;s reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q176615" start="38093" end="38108" title="Muhteşem Yüzyıl" label="Muhteşem Yüzyıl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26994" wikidata="Q22" url="?curid=26994" title="Scotland">
<text>Scotland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It contains nearly one-third of the United Kingdom&#x27;s land area, consisting of the northern part of the island of Great Britain and more than 790 adjacent islands, principally in the archipelagos of the Hebrides and the Northern Isles. To the south-east, Scotland has its only land border, which is long and shared with England; the country is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west, the North Sea to the north-east and east, and the Irish Sea to the south. The population in 2022 was 5,439,842. Edinburgh is the capital and Glasgow is the most populous of the cities of Scotland.

The Kingdom of Scotland emerged as an independent sovereign state in the 9th century. In 1603, James VI succeeded to the thrones of England and Ireland, forming a personal union of the three kingdoms. On 1 May 1707, Scotland and England combined to create the new Kingdom of Great Britain, with the Parliament of Scotland subsumed into the Parliament of Great Britain. In 1999, a Scottish Parliament was re-established, and has devolved authority over many areas of domestic policy. The Scottish Government is the executive arm of the devolved government, headed by the first minister who chairs the cabinet and responsible for government policy and international engagement. Further powers are devolved to local government from the Scottish Government to the countries 32 subdivisions (known as &quot;council areas&quot;).

The country has its own distinct legal system, education system and religious history, which have all contributed to the continuation of Scottish culture and national identity. Scottish English and Scots are the most widely spoken languages in the country, existing on a dialect continuum with each other. Scottish Gaelic speakers can be found all over Scotland, however the language is largely spoken natively by communities within the Hebrides; Gaelic speakers now constitute less than 2% of the total population, though state-sponsored revitalisation attempts have led to a growing community of second language speakers.

The mainland of Scotland is broadly divided into three regions: the Highlands, a mountainous region in the north and north-west; the Lowlands, a flatter plain across the centre of the country; and the Southern Uplands, a hilly region along the southern border. The Highlands are the most mountainous region of the British Isles and contain its highest peak, Ben Nevis, at . The region also contains many lakes, called lochs; the term is also applied to the many saltwater inlets along the country&#x27;s deeply indented western coastline. The geography of the many islands is varied. Some, such as Mull and Skye, are noted for their mountainous terrain, while the likes of Tiree and Coll are much flatter.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Scotland&quot; comes from , the Latin name for the Gaels. Philip Freeman has speculated on the likelihood of a group of raiders adopting a name from an Indo-European root, *&quot;skot&quot;, citing the parallel in Greek (), meaning &quot;darkness, gloom&quot;. The Late Latin word (&quot;land of the Gaels&quot;) was initially used to refer to Ireland, and likewise in early Old English was used for Ireland. By the 11th century at the latest, &quot;Scotia&quot; was being used to refer to (Gaelic-speaking) Scotland north of the River Forth, alongside &quot;Albania&quot; or &quot;Albany&quot;, both derived from the Gaelic . The use of the words &quot;Scots&quot; and &quot;Scotland&quot; to encompass all of what is now Scotland became common in the Late Middle Ages.

==History==

===Prehistory===
Prehistoric Scotland, before the arrival of the Roman Empire, was culturally divergent.

Repeated glaciations, which covered the entire land mass of modern Scotland, destroyed any traces of human habitation that may have existed before the Mesolithic period. It is believed the first post-glacial groups of hunter-gatherers arrived in Scotland around 12,800 years ago, as the ice sheet retreated after the last glaciation. At the time, Scotland was covered in forests, had more bog-land, and the main form of transport was by water. These settlers began building the first known permanent houses on Scottish soil around 9,500 years ago, and the first villages around 6,000 years ago. The well-preserved village of Skara Brae on the mainland of Orkney dates from this period. Neolithic habitation, burial, and ritual sites are particularly common and well preserved in the Northern Isles and Western Isles, where a lack of trees led to most structures being built of local stone. Evidence of sophisticated pre-Christian belief systems is demonstrated by sites such as the Callanish Stones on Lewis and the Maes Howe on Orkney, which were built in the third millennium BC.

===Early history===

The first written reference to Scotland was in 320 BC by Greek sailor Pytheas, who called the northern tip of Britain &quot;Orcas&quot;, the source of the name of the Orkney islands.

Most of modern Scotland was not incorporated into the Roman Empire, and Roman control over parts of the area fluctuated over a rather short period. The first Roman incursion into Scotland was in 79 AD, when Agricola invaded Scotland; he defeated a Caledonian army at the Battle of Mons Graupius in 83 AD. After the Roman victory, Roman forts were briefly set along the Gask Ridge close to the Highland line, but by three years after the battle, the Roman armies had withdrawn to the Southern Uplands. Remains of Roman forts established in the 1st century have been found as far north as the Moray Firth. By the reign of the Roman emperor Trajan (), Roman control had lapsed to Britain south of a line between the River Tyne and the Solway Firth. Along this line, Trajan&#x27;s successor Hadrian () erected Hadrian&#x27;s Wall in northern England and the &quot;Limes Britannicus&quot; became the northern border of the Roman Empire. The Roman influence on the southern part of the country was considerable, and they introduced Christianity to Scotland.

The Antonine Wall was built from 142 at the order of Hadrian&#x27;s successor Antoninus Pius (), defending the Roman part of Scotland from the unadministered part of the island, north of a line between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth. The Roman invasion of Caledonia 208–210 was undertaken by emperors of the imperial Severan dynasty in response to the breaking of a treaty by the Caledonians in 197, but permanent conquest of the whole of Great Britain was forestalled by Roman forces becoming bogged down in punishing guerrilla warfare and the death of the senior emperor Septimius Severus () at Eboracum (York) after he was taken ill while on campaign. Although forts erected by the Roman army in the Severan campaign were placed near those established by Agricola and were clustered at the mouths of the glens in the Highlands, the Caledonians were again in revolt in 210–211 and these were overrun.

To the Roman historians Tacitus and Cassius Dio, the Scottish Highlands and the area north of the River Forth was called Caledonia. According to Cassius Dio, the inhabitants of Caledonia were the Caledonians and the Maeatae. Other ancient authors used the adjective &quot;Caledonian&quot; to mean anywhere in northern or inland Britain, often mentioning the region&#x27;s people and animals, its cold climate, its pearls, and a noteworthy region of wooded hills () which the 2nd century AD Roman philosopher Ptolemy, in his &quot;Geography&quot;, described as being south-west of the Beauly Firth. The name Caledonia is echoed in the place names of Dunkeld, Rohallion, and Schiehallion.

The Great Conspiracy constituted a seemingly coordinated invasion against Roman rule in Britain in the later 4th century, which included the participation of the Gaelic Scoti and the Caledonians, who were then known as Picts by the Romans. This was defeated by the &quot;comes&quot; Theodosius; but Roman military government was withdrawn from the island altogether by the early 5th century, resulting in the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain and the immigration of the Saxons to southeastern Scotland and the rest of eastern Great Britain.

=== Kingdom of Scotland ===
Beginning in the sixth century, the area that is now Scotland was divided into three areas: Pictland, a patchwork of small lordships in central Scotland; the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Northumbria, which had conquered southeastern Scotland; and Dál Riata, which included territory in western Scotland and northern Ireland, and spread Gaelic language and culture into Scotland. These societies were based on the family unit and had sharp divisions in wealth, although the vast majority were poor and worked full-time in subsistence agriculture. The Picts kept slaves (mostly captured in war) through the ninth century.

Gaelic influence over Pictland and Northumbria was facilitated by the large number of Gaelic-speaking clerics working as missionaries. Operating in the sixth century on the island of Iona, Saint Columba was one of the earliest and best-known missionaries. The Vikings began to raid Scotland in the eighth century. Although the raiders sought slaves and luxury items, their main motivation was to acquire land. The oldest Norse settlements were in northwest Scotland, but they eventually conquered many areas along the coast. Old Norse entirely displaced Pictish in the Northern Isles.

In the ninth century, the Norse threat allowed a Gael named Kenneth I (Cináed mac Ailpín) to seize power over Pictland, establishing a royal dynasty to which the modern monarchs trace their lineage, and marking the beginning of the end of Pictish culture. The kingdom of Cináed and his descendants, called Alba, was Gaelic in character but existed on the same area as Pictland. By the end of the tenth century, the Pictish language went extinct as its speakers shifted to Gaelic. From a base in eastern Scotland north of the River Forth and south of the River Spey, the kingdom expanded first southwards, into the former Northumbrian lands, and northwards into Moray. Around the turn of the millennium, there was a centralization in agricultural lands and the first towns began to be established.

In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, much of Scotland was under the control of a single ruler. Initially, Gaelic culture predominated, but immigrants from France, England and Flanders steadily created a more diverse society, with the Gaelic language starting to be replaced by Scots; and a modern nation-state emerged from this. At the end of this period, war against England started the growth of a Scottish national consciousness. David I (1124–1153) and his successors centralised royal power and united mainland Scotland, capturing regions such as Moray, Galloway, and Caithness, although he could not extend his power over the Hebrides, which had been ruled by various Scottish clans following the death of Somerled in 1164. In 1266, Scotland fought the short but consequential Scottish-Norwegian War which saw the reclamation of the Hebrides after the strong defeat of King Haakon IV and his forces at the Battle of Largs. Up until that point, the Hebrides had been under Norwegian Viking control for roughly 400 years and had developed a distinctive Norse–Gaelic culture that saw many Old Norse loanwords enter the Scottish Gaelic spoken by islanders, and through successive generations the Norse would become almost completely assimilated into Gaelic culture and the Scottish clan system. After the conflict, Scotland had to affirm Norwegian sovereignty of the Northern Isles, but they were later integrated into Scotland in the 15th century. Scandinavian culture in the form of the Norn language survived for a lot longer than in the Hebrides, and would strongly influence the local Scots dialect on Shetland and Orkney. Later, a system of feudalism was consolidated, with both Anglo-Norman incomers and native Gaelic chieftains being granted land in exchange for serving the king. The relationship with England was complex during this period: Scottish kings tried several times, sometimes with success, to exploit English political turmoil, followed by the longest period of peace between Scotland and England in the mediaeval period: from 12171296.

===Wars of Scottish Independence===
The death of Alexander III in March 1286 broke the succession line of Scotland&#x27;s kings. Edward I of England arbitrated between various claimants for the Scottish crown. In return for surrendering Scotland&#x27;s nominal independence, John Balliol was pronounced king in 1292. In 1294, Balliol and other Scottish lords refused Edward&#x27;s demands to serve in his army against the French. Scotland and France sealed a treaty on 23 October 1295, known as the Auld Alliance. War ensued, and John was deposed by Edward who took personal control of Scotland. Andrew Moray and William Wallace initially emerged as the principal leaders of the resistance to English rule in the Wars of Scottish Independence, until Robert the Bruce was crowned king of Scotland in 1306. Victory at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 proved the Scots had regained control of their kingdom. In 1320 the world&#x27;s first documented declaration of independence, the Declaration of Arbroath, won the support of Pope John XXII, leading to the legal recognition of Scottish sovereignty by the English Crown.

A civil war between the Bruce dynasty and their long-term rivals of the House of Comyn and House of Balliol lasted until the middle of the 14th century. Although the Bruce faction was successful, David II&#x27;s lack of an heir allowed his half-nephew Robert II, the Lord High Steward of Scotland, to come to the throne and establish the House of Stewart. The Stewarts ruled Scotland for the remainder of the Middle Ages. The country they ruled experienced greater prosperity from the end of the 14th century through the Scottish Renaissance to the Reformation, despite the effects of the Black Death in 1349 and increasing division between Highlands and Lowlands. Multiple truces reduced warfare on the southern border.

===Union of the Crowns===

The Treaty of Perpetual Peace was signed in 1502 by James IV of Scotland and Henry VII of England. James married Henry&#x27;s daughter, Margaret Tudor. James invaded England in support of France under the terms of the Auld Alliance and became the last monarch in Great Britain to die in battle, at Flodden in 1513. The war with England during the minority years of Mary, Queen of Scots between 1543 and 1551 is known as the Rough Wooing. In 1560, the Treaty of Edinburgh brought an end to the Siege of Leith and recognized the Protestant Elizabeth I as Queen of England. The Parliament of Scotland met and immediately adopted the Scots Confession, which signalled the Scottish Reformation&#x27;s sharp break from papal authority and Roman Catholic teaching. The Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots, was forced to abdicate in 1567.

In 1603, James VI, King of Scots inherited the thrones of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Ireland in the Union of the Crowns, and moved to London. This was a personal union as despite having the same monarch the kingdoms retained their separate parliaments, laws and other institutions. The first Union Jack was designed at James&#x27;s behest, to be flown in addition to the St Andrew&#x27;s Cross on Scots vessels at sea. James VI and I intended to create a single kingdom of Great Britain, but was thwarted in his attempt to do so by the Parliament of England, which supported the wrecking proposal that a full legal union be sought instead, a proposal to which the Scots Parliament would not assent, causing the king to withdraw the plan.

Except for a short period under the Protectorate, Scotland remained a separate state in the 17th century, but there was considerable conflict between the crown and the Covenanters over the form of church government. The military was strengthened, allowing the imposition of royal authority on the western Highland clans. The 1609 Statutes of Iona compelled the cultural integration of Hebridean clan leaders. In 1641 and again in 1643, the Parliament of Scotland unsuccessfully sought a union with England which was &quot;federative&quot; and not &quot;incorporating&quot;, in which Scotland would retain a separate parliament. The issue of union split the parliament in 1648.

After the execution of the Scottish king at Whitehall in 1649, amid the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and its events in Scotland, Oliver Cromwell, the victorious Lord Protector, imposed the British Isles&#x27; first written constitution – the Instrument of Government – on Scotland in 1652 as part of the republican Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Protectorate Parliament was the first Westminster parliament to include representatives nominally from Scotland. The monarchy of the House of Stuart was resumed with the Restoration in Scotland in 1660. The Parliament of Scotland sought a commercial union with England in 1664; the proposal was rejected in 1668. In 1670 the Parliament of England rejected a proposed political union with Scotland. English proposals along the same lines were abandoned in 1674 and in 1685. The Scots Parliament rejected proposals for a political union with England in 1689. Jacobitism, the political support for the exiled Catholic Stuart dynasty, remained a threat to the security of the British state under the Protestant House of Orange and the succeeding House of Hanover until the defeat of the Jacobite rising of 1745. In 1698, the Company of Scotland attempted a project to secure a trading colony on the Isthmus of Panama. Almost every Scottish landowner who had money to spare is said to have invested in the Darien scheme.

===Treaty of Union===

After another proposal from the English House of Lords was rejected in 1695, and a further Lords motion was voted down in the House of Commons in 1700, the Parliament of Scotland again rejected union in 1702. The failure of the Darien Scheme bankrupted the landowners who had invested, though not the burghs. Nevertheless, the nobles&#x27; bankruptcy, along with the threat of an English invasion, played a leading role in convincing the Scots elite to back a union with England. On 22 July 1706, the Treaty of Union was agreed between representatives of the Scots Parliament and the Parliament of England. The following year, twin Acts of Union were passed by both parliaments to create the united Kingdom of Great Britain with effect from 1 May 1707 with popular opposition and anti-union riots in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere. The union also created the Parliament of Great Britain, which succeeded both the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England, which rejected proposals from the Parliament of Ireland that the third kingdom be incorporated in the union.

Andrew Fletcher, a prominent Scottish patriot, argued that the ratification of the treaty would see Scotland &quot;more like a conquered province&quot;, and by 1713, the former Lord Chancellor of Scotland, James Ogilvy, 4th Earl of Findlater, who was a prominent supporter for the Treaty of Union between Scotland and England had changed his position on the treaty, and unsuccessfully advocated for the treaty to be reversed. The deposed Jacobite Stuart claimants had remained popular in the Highlands and north-east, particularly among non-Presbyterians, including Roman Catholics and Episcopalian Protestants. Two major Jacobite risings launched in 1715 and 1745 failed to remove the House of Hanover from the British throne. The threat of the Jacobite movement to the United Kingdom and its monarchs effectively ended at the Battle of Culloden, Great Britain&#x27;s last pitched battle. 

The passing of the Treaty of Union did not bring about immediate economic prosperity to Scotland as was widely speculated by the pamphleteer as a result of the little consideration given to prospects of the Scottish economy. Campaigners for the union between Scotland and England believed that there would be economic advantages to Scotland as a result of the failed Darien scheme which left the Kingdom of Scotland bankrupt. Eventually however, with trade tariffs with England abolished, trade blossomed, especially with Colonial America. The clippers belonging to the Glasgow Tobacco Lords were the fastest ships on the route to Virginia. Until the American War of Independence in 1776, Glasgow was the world&#x27;s premier tobacco port, dominating world trade. The disparity between the wealth of the merchant classes of the Scottish Lowlands and the ancient clans of the Scottish Highlands grew, amplifying centuries of division. 

In the Highlands, clan chiefs gradually started to think of themselves more as commercial landlords than leaders of their people. These social and economic changes included the first phase of the Highland Clearances and, ultimately, the demise of clanship.

=== Industrial age and the Scottish Enlightenment ===

The Scottish Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution turned Scotland into an intellectual, commercial and industrial powerhouse — so much so Voltaire said &quot;We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation.&quot; With the demise of Jacobitism and the advent of the Union, thousands of Scots, mainly Lowlanders, took up numerous positions of power in politics, civil service, the army and navy, trade, economics, colonial enterprises and other areas across the nascent British Empire. Historian Neil Davidson notes &quot;after 1746 there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life, particularly outside Scotland.&quot; Davidson also states &quot;far from being &#x27;peripheral&#x27; to the British economy, Scotland – or more precisely, the Lowlands – lay at its core.&quot;

The Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes. From the mid-century, there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and the post of Secretary of State for Scotland was revived. Towards the end of the century prime ministers of Scottish descent included William Gladstone, and the Earl of Rosebery. In the late 19th century the growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie&#x27;s success in the Mid Lanarkshire by-election, 1888, leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party, which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895, with Hardie as its first leader. Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world and known as &quot;the Second City of the Empire&quot; after London. After 1860, the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron (after 1870, made of steel), which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world. It became the world&#x27;s pre-eminent shipbuilding centre. The industrial developments, while they brought work and wealth, were so rapid that housing, town planning, and provision for public health did not keep pace with them, and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad, with overcrowding, high infant mortality, and growing rates of tuberculosis.

While the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded toward the end of the 18th century, disproportionately large Scottish contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or more, thanks to such figures as the physicists James Clerk Maxwell and Lord Kelvin, and the engineers and inventors James Watt and William Murdoch, whose work was critical to the technological developments of the Industrial Revolution throughout Britain. In literature, the most successful figure of the mid-19th century was Walter Scott. His first prose work, &quot;Waverley&quot; in 1814, is often called the first historical novel. It launched a highly successful career that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish cultural identity. In the late 19th century, a number of Scottish-born authors achieved international reputations, such as Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle, J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald. Scotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture. The Glasgow School, which developed in the late 19th century, and flourished in the early 20th century, produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the Arts and Crafts movement, and Japonism, which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style. Proponents included architect and artist Charles Rennie Mackintosh.

=== World wars and Scotland Act 1998 ===
Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War. It especially provided manpower, ships, machinery, fish and money. With a population of 4.8 million in 1911, Scotland sent over half a million men to the war, of whom over a quarter died in combat or from disease, and 150,000 were seriously wounded. Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig was Britain&#x27;s commander on the Western Front. The war saw the emergence of a radical movement called &quot;Red Clydeside&quot; led by militant trades unionists. Formerly a Liberal stronghold, the industrial districts switched to Labour by 1922, with a base among the Irish Catholic working-class districts. Women were especially active in building neighbourhood solidarity on housing issues. The &quot;Reds&quot; operated within the Labour Party with little influence in Parliament and the mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s.

During the Second World War, Scotland was targeted by Nazi Germany largely due to its factories, shipyards, and coal mines. Cities such as Glasgow and Edinburgh were targeted by German bombers, as were smaller towns mostly located in the central belt of the country. Perhaps the most significant air raid in Scotland was the Clydebank Blitz of March 1941, which intended to destroy naval shipbuilding in the area. 528 people were killed and 4,000 homes destroyed. Perhaps Scotland&#x27;s most unusual wartime episode occurred in 1941 when Rudolf Hess flew to Renfrewshire, possibly intending to broker a peace deal through the Duke of Hamilton. Before his departure from Germany, Hess had given his adjutant, Karlheinz Pintsch, a letter addressed to Adolf Hitler that detailed his intentions to open peace negotiations with the British. Pintsch delivered the letter to Hitler at the Berghof around noon on 11 May. Albert Speer later said Hitler described Hess&#x27;s departure as one of the worst personal blows of his life, as he considered it a personal betrayal. Hitler worried that his allies, Italy and Japan, would perceive Hess&#x27;s act as an attempt by Hitler to secretly open peace negotiations with the British.

After 1945, Scotland&#x27;s economic situation worsened due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. Only in recent decades has the country enjoyed something of a cultural and economic renaissance. Economic factors contributing to this recovery included a resurgent financial services industry, electronics manufacturing, (see Silicon Glen), and the North Sea oil and gas industry. The introduction in 1989 by Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s government of the Community Charge (widely known as the Poll Tax) one year before the rest of Great Britain, contributed to a growing movement for Scottish control over domestic affairs. On 21 December 1988, Pan Am Flight 103 exploded mid–air over the town of Lockerbie, killing all on board as well as eleven Lockerbie residents. It remains the deadliest terrorist attack in the United Kingdom.

Following a referendum on devolution proposals in 1997, the Scotland Act 1998 was passed by the British Parliament, which established a devolved Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government with responsibility for most laws specific to Scotland. The Scottish Parliament was reconvened in Edinburgh on 4 July 1999. The first to hold the office of first minister of Scotland was Donald Dewar, who served until his sudden death in 2000.

=== 21st century ===

The Scottish Parliament Building at Holyrood opened in October 2004 after lengthy construction delays and running over budget. The Scottish Parliament&#x27;s form of proportional representation (the additional member system) resulted in no one party having an overall majority for the first three Scottish parliament elections.

The pro-independence Scottish National Party led by Alex Salmond achieved an overall majority in the 2011 election, winning 69 of the 129 seats available. The success of the SNP in achieving a majority in the Scottish Parliament paved the way for the September 2014 referendum on Scottish independence. The majority voted against the proposition, with 55% voting no to independence. More powers, particularly concerning taxation, were devolved to the Scottish Parliament after the referendum, following cross-party talks in the Smith Commission.

Since the 2014 referendum, events such as the UK leaving the European Union, despite a majority of voters in Scotland voting to remain a member, have led to calls for a second independence referendum. In 2022, the Lord Advocate Dorothy Bain argued the case for the Scottish Government to hold another referendum on the issue, with the Supreme Court later ruling against the argument. Following the Supreme Court decision, the Scottish Government stated that it wished to make amendments to the Scotland Act 1998 that would allow a referendum to be held in 2023.

== Geography and natural history ==

The mainland of Scotland comprises the northern third of the land mass of the island of Great Britain, which lies off the northwest coast of Continental Europe. The total area is with a land area of , comparable to the size of the Czech Republic. Scotland&#x27;s only land border is with England, and runs for between the basin of the River Tweed on the east coast and the Solway Firth in the west. The Atlantic Ocean borders the west coast and the North Sea is to the east. The island of Ireland lies only from the south-western peninsula of Kintyre; Norway is to the northeast and the Faroe Islands, to the north.

The territorial extent of Scotland is generally that established by the 1237 Treaty of York between Scotland and the Kingdom of England and the 1266 Treaty of Perth between Scotland and Norway. Important exceptions include the Isle of Man, which having been lost to England in the 14th century is now a crown dependency outside of the United Kingdom; the island groups Orkney and Shetland, which were acquired from Norway in 1472; and Berwick-upon-Tweed, lost to England in 1482

The geographical centre of Scotland lies a few miles from the village of Newtonmore in Badenoch. Rising to above sea level, Scotland&#x27;s highest point is the summit of Ben Nevis, in Lochaber, while Scotland&#x27;s longest river, the River Tay, flows for a distance of .

=== Geology and geomorphology ===


The whole of Scotland was covered by ice sheets during the Pleistocene ice ages and the landscape is much affected by glaciation. From a geological perspective, the country has three main sub-divisions: the Highlands and Islands, the Central Lowlands, and the Southern Uplands.

The Highlands and Islands lie to the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault, which runs from Arran to Stonehaven. This part of Scotland largely comprises ancient rocks from the Cambrian and Precambrian, which were uplifted during the later Caledonian orogeny. It is interspersed with igneous intrusions of a more recent age, remnants of which formed mountain massifs such as the Cairngorms and Skye Cuillins. In north-eastern mainland Scotland weathering of rock that occurred before the Last Ice Age has shaped much of the landscape.

A significant exception to the above are the fossil-bearing beds of Old Red Sandstones found principally along the Moray Firth coast. The Highlands are generally mountainous and the highest elevations in the British Isles are found here. Scotland has over 790 islands divided into four main groups: Shetland, Orkney, and the Inner Hebrides and Outer Hebrides. There are numerous bodies of freshwater including Loch Lomond and Loch Ness. Some parts of the coastline consist of machair, a low-lying dune pasture land.

The Central Lowlands is a rift valley mainly comprising Paleozoic formations. Many of these sediments have economic significance for it is here that the coal and iron-bearing rocks that fuelled Scotland&#x27;s industrial revolution are found. This area has also experienced intense volcanism, Arthur&#x27;s Seat in Edinburgh being the remnant of a once much larger volcano. This area is relatively low-lying, although even here hills such as the Ochils and Campsie Fells are rarely far from view.

The Southern Uplands is a range of hills almost long, interspersed with broad valleys. They lie south of a second fault line (the Southern Uplands fault) that runs from Girvan to Dunbar. The geological foundations largely comprise Silurian deposits laid down some 400 to 500 million years ago. The high point of the Southern Uplands is Merrick with an elevation of . The Southern Uplands is home to Scotland&#x27;s highest village, Wanlockhead ( above sea level).

=== Climate ===

The climate of most of Scotland is temperate and oceanic, and tends to be very changeable. As it is warmed by the Gulf Stream from the Atlantic, it has much milder winters (but cooler, wetter summers) than areas on similar latitudes, such as Labrador, southern Scandinavia, the Moscow region in Russia, and the Kamchatka Peninsula on the opposite side of Eurasia. Temperatures are generally lower than in the rest of the UK, with the temperature of recorded at Braemar in the Grampian Mountains, on 11 February 1895, the coldest ever recorded anywhere in the UK. Winter maxima average in the Lowlands, with summer maxima averaging . The highest temperature recorded was at Floors Castle, Scottish Borders on 19 July 2022.

The west of Scotland is usually warmer than the east, owing to the influence of Atlantic ocean currents and the colder surface temperatures of the North Sea. Tiree, in the Inner Hebrides, is one of the sunniest places in the country: it had more than 300 hours of sunshine in May 1975. Rainfall varies widely across Scotland. The western highlands of Scotland are the wettest, with annual rainfall in a few places exceeding . In comparison, much of lowland Scotland receives less than annually. Heavy snowfall is not common in the lowlands, but becomes more common with altitude. Braemar has an average of 59 snow days per year, while many coastal areas average fewer than 10 days of lying snow per year.

=== Flora and fauna ===

Scotland&#x27;s wildlife is typical of the north-west of Europe, although several of the larger mammals such as the lynx, brown bear, wolf, elk and walrus were hunted to extinction in historic times. There are important populations of seals and internationally significant nesting grounds for a variety of seabirds such as gannets. The golden eagle is something of a national icon.

On the high mountain tops, species including ptarmigan, mountain hare and stoat can be seen in their white colour phase during winter months. Remnants of the native Scots pine forest exist and within these areas the Scottish crossbill, the UK&#x27;s only endemic bird species and vertebrate, can be found alongside capercaillie, Scottish wildcat, red squirrel and pine marten. Various animals have been re-introduced, including the white-tailed eagle in 1975, the red kite in the 1980s, and there have been experimental projects involving the beaver and wild boar. Today, much of the remaining native Caledonian Forest lies within the Cairngorms National Park and remnants of the forest remain at 84 locations across Scotland. On the west coast, remnants of ancient Celtic Rainforest remain, particularly on the Taynish peninsula in Argyll, these forests are particularly rare due to high rates of deforestation throughout Scottish history.

The flora of the country is varied incorporating both deciduous and coniferous woodland as well as moorland and tundra species. Large-scale commercial tree planting and management of upland moorland habitat for the grazing of sheep and field sport activities like deer stalking and driven grouse shooting impacts the distribution of indigenous plants and animals. The UK&#x27;s tallest tree is a grand fir planted beside Loch Fyne, Argyll in the 1870s, and the Fortingall Yew may be 5,000 years old and is probably the oldest living thing in Europe. Although the number of native vascular plants is low by world standards, Scotland&#x27;s substantial bryophyte flora is of global importance.

== Demographics ==

===Population===
During the 1820s, many Scots migrated from Scotland to countries such as Australia, the United States and Canada, principally from the Highlands which remained poor in comparison to elsewhere in Scotland. The Highlands was the only part of mainland Britain with a recurrent famine. A small range of products were exported from the region, which had negligible industrial production and a continued population growth that tested the subsistence agriculture. These problems, and the desire to improve agriculture and profits were the driving forces of the ongoing Highland Clearances, in which many of the population of the Highlands suffered eviction as lands were enclosed, principally so that they could be used for sheep farming. The first phase of the clearances followed patterns of agricultural change throughout Britain. The second phase was driven by overpopulation, the Highland Potato Famine and the collapse of industries that had relied on the wartime economy of the Napoleonic Wars.

The population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. Even with the development of industry, there were not enough good jobs. As a result, during the period 1841–1931, about 2 million Scots migrated to North America and Australia, and another 750,000 Scots relocated to England. Caused by the advent of refrigeration and imports of lamb, mutton and wool from overseas, the 1870s brought with them a collapse of sheep prices and an abrupt halt in the previous sheep farming boom.

Scotland is the most sparsely populated country of the United Kingdom. In August 2012, the Scottish population reached an all-time high of 5.25 million people. The reasons given were that, in Scotland, births were outnumbering the number of deaths, and immigrants were moving to Scotland from overseas. In 2011, 43,700 people moved from Wales, Northern Ireland or England to live in Scotland. The most recent census in Scotland was conducted by the Scottish Government and the National Records of Scotland in March 2022. The population of Scotland at the 2022 Census was 5,436,600, the highest ever, beating the previous record of 5,295,400 at the 2011 Census. It was 5,062,011 at the 2001 Census. An ONS estimate for mid-2021 was 5,480,000. In the 2011 Census, 62% of Scotland&#x27;s population stated their national identity as &#x27;Scottish only&#x27;, 18% as &#x27;Scottish and British&#x27;, 8% as &#x27;British only&#x27;, and 4% chose &#x27;other identity only&#x27;.

Throughout its history, Scotland has long had a tradition of migration from Scotland and immigration into Scotland. In 2021, the Scottish Government released figures showing that an estimated 41,000 people had immigrated from other international countries into Scotland, while an average of 22,100 people had migrated from Scotland. Scottish Government data from 2002 shows that by 2021, there had been a sharp increase in immigration to Scotland, with 2002 estimates standing at 27,800 immigrants. While immigration had increased from 2002, migration from Scotland had dropped, with 2002 estimates standing at 26,200 people migrating from Scotland.

===Urbanisation===

Although Edinburgh is the capital of Scotland, the largest city is Glasgow, which has just over 584,000 inhabitants. The Greater Glasgow conurbation, with a population of almost 1.2 million, is home to nearly a quarter of Scotland&#x27;s population. The Central Belt is where most of the main towns and cities of Scotland are located, including Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee, and Perth. Scotland&#x27;s only major city outside the Central Belt is Aberdeen. The Scottish Lowlands host 80% of the total population, where the Central Belt accounts for 3.5 million people.

In general, only the more accessible and larger islands remain inhabited. Currently, fewer than 90 remain inhabited. The Southern Uplands is essentially rural and dominated by agriculture and forestry. Because of housing problems in Glasgow and Edinburgh, five new towns were designated between 1947 and 1966. They are East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Cumbernauld, Livingston, and Irvine.

The largest council area by population is Glasgow City, with Highland being the largest in terms of geographical area.

===Languages===
Scotland has three indigenous languages: English, Scots, and Scottish Gaelic. Scottish Standard English, a variety of English as spoken in Scotland, is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with broad Scots at the other. Scottish Standard English may have been influenced to varying degrees by Scots. Highland English is spoken in that region, while Gaelic is mostly spoken in the Western Isles, where it continues to be used by a large proportion of residents.

Overall, the use of Scotland&#x27;s indigenous languages other than English has declined since the 19th century. The 2011 census indicated that 63% of the population had &quot;no skills in Scots&quot;. The use of Gaelic is confined to 1% of the population. The number of Gaelic speakers in Scotland dropped from 250,000 in 1881 to 60,000 in 2008. Across the whole of Scotland, the 2011 census showed that 25,000 people (0.49% of the population) used Gaelic at home. The most common language spoken at home in Scotland after English and Scots is Polish, with about 1.1% of the population, or 54,000 people.

Immigration since World War II has given Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Dundee small South Asian communities. In 2011, there were an estimated 49,000 ethnically Pakistani people living in Scotland, making them the largest non-White ethnic group. The 2004 enlargement of the European Union spurred an increase in migration from Central and Eastern Europe to Scotland, and the 2011 census indicated that 61,000 Poles lived there.

There are many more people with Scottish ancestry living abroad than the total population of Scotland. In the 2000 Census, 9.2 million Americans self-reported some degree of Scottish descent. Ulster&#x27;s Protestant population is mainly of lowland Scottish descent, and it is estimated that there are more than 27 million descendants of the Scots-Irish migration now living in the US. In Canada, the Scottish-Canadian community accounts for 4.7 million people. About 20% of the original European settler population of New Zealand came from Scotland.

=== Religion ===

As per the 2022 Census, a majority of Scots (51.12%) reported not following any religion. The most practiced religion is Christianity (38.79%), mostly the Church of Scotland (20.36%) and Roman Catholicism (13.3%). In almost every council area, the most common response to the census question was &quot;No religion,&quot; except in Na h-Eileanan Siar and Inverclyde, where the Church of Scotland (35.3%) and Catholicism (33.4%) were the most common responses, respectively.

Forms of Christianity have dominated religious life in what is now Scotland for more than 1,400 years.
Since the Scottish Reformation of 1560, the national church (the Church of Scotland, also known as The Kirk) has been Protestant in orientation and Reformed in theology. Since 1689 it has had a Presbyterian system of church government independent from the state. Its membership dropped just below 300,000 in 2020 (5% of the total population) The Church operates a territorial parish structure, with every community in Scotland having a local congregation.

Scotland also has a significant Roman Catholic population with 13.3% professing that faith, particularly in Greater Glasgow and the north-west. After the Reformation, Roman Catholicism in Scotland continued in the Highlands and some western islands like Uist and Barra, and it was strengthened during the 19th century by immigration from Ireland. Other Christian denominations in Scotland include the Free Church of Scotland, and various other Presbyterian offshoots. Scotland&#x27;s third largest church is the Scottish Episcopal Church.

Other minority faiths include Islam (2.2%), Hinduism (0.55%), Sikhism and Buddhism. The Samyé Ling monastery near Eskdalemuir, which celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2007, is the oldest Buddhist monastery in Western Europe.

=== Education ===
The Scottish education system has always had a characteristic emphasis on a broad education. In the 15th century, the Humanist emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496, which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn &quot;perfyct Latyne&quot;, resulting in an increase in literacy among a male and wealthy elite. In the Reformation, the 1560 &quot;First Book of Discipline&quot; set out a plan for a school in every parish, but this proved financially impossible. In 1616 an act in Privy council commanded every parish to establish a school. By the late seventeenth century there was a largely complete network of parish schools in the lowlands, but in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas. Education remained a matter for the church rather than the state until the Education (Scotland) Act 1872.

Education in Scotland is the responsibility of the Scottish Government and is overseen by its executive agency Education Scotland. The &quot;Curriculum for Excellence&quot;, Scotland&#x27;s national school curriculum, presently provides the curricular framework for children and young people from age 3 to 18. All 3- and 4-year-old children in Scotland are entitled to a free nursery place. Formal primary education begins at approximately 5 years old and lasts for 7 years (P1–P7); children in Scotland study National Qualifications of the Curriculum for Excellence between the ages of 14 and 18. The school leaving age is 16, after which students may choose to remain at school and study further qualifications. A small number of students at certain private schools may follow the English system and study towards GCSEs and A and AS-Levels instead.

There are fifteen Scottish universities, some of which are among the oldest in the world. The four universities founded before the end of the 16th century – the University of St Andrews, the University of Glasgow, the University of Aberdeen and the University of Edinburgh – are collectively known as the ancient universities of Scotland, all of which rank among the 200 best universities in the world in the THE rankings, with Edinburgh placing in the top 50. Scotland had more universities per capita in QS&#x27; World University Rankings&#x27; top 100 in 2012 than any other nation. The country produces 1% of the world&#x27;s published research with less than 0.1% of the world&#x27;s population, and higher education institutions account for 9% of Scotland&#x27;s service sector exports. Scotland&#x27;s University Courts are the only bodies in Scotland authorised to award degrees.

=== Health ===

Health care in Scotland is mainly provided by NHS Scotland, Scotland&#x27;s public health care system. This was founded by the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947 (later repealed by the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978) that took effect on 5 July 1948 to coincide with the launch of the NHS in England and Wales. Prior to 1948, half of Scotland&#x27;s landmass was already covered by state-funded health care, provided by the Highlands and Islands Medical Service. Healthcare policy and funding is the responsibility of the Scottish Government&#x27;s Health Directorates. In 2014, the NHS in Scotland had around 140,000 staff.

The total fertility rate (TFR) in Scotland is below the replacement rate of 2.1 (the TFR was 1.73 in 2011). The majority of births are to unmarried women (51.3% of births were outside of marriage in 2012).

Life expectancy for those born in Scotland between 2012 and 2014 is 77.1 years for males and 81.1 years for females. This is the lowest of any of the four countries of the UK. The number of hospital admissions in Scotland for diseases such as cancer was 2,528 in 2002. Over the next ten years, by 2012, this had increased to 2,669. Hospital admissions for other diseases, such as coronary heart disease (CHD) were lower, with 727 admissions in 2002, and decreasing to 489 in 2012.

== Government and politics ==


Scotland is part of the United Kingdom, a constitutional monarchy whose current sovereign is Charles III. The monarchy uses a variety of styles, titles and other symbols specific to Scotland, most of which originated in the pre–union Kingdom of Scotland. These include the Royal Standard of Scotland, the royal coat of arms, and the title Duke of Rothesay, which is traditionally given to the heir apparent. There are also distinct Scottish Officers of State and Officers of the Crown, and the Order of the Thistle, a chivalric order, is specific to the country.

The Parliament of the United Kingdom and the Parliament of Scotland are the country&#x27;s primary legislative bodies. The UK Parliament is sovereign and therefore has supremacy over the Scottish Parliament, but generally restricts itself to legislating over reserved matters: primarily some taxes, some aspects of social security, defence, international relations, and broadcasting. There is a convention the UK Parliament will not legislate over devolved matters without the Scottish Parliament&#x27;s consent. Scotland is represented in the House of Commons, the lower chamber of the UK Parliament, by 57 Members of Parliament (out of a total of 650). They are elected to single-member constituencies under the first-past-the-post system of voting. The Scotland Office represents the British government in Scotland and represents Scottish interests within the government. The Scotland Office is led by the secretary of state for Scotland, who sits in the Cabinet of the United Kingdom. The Labour MP Ian Murray has held the position since July 2024.

The Scottish Parliament is a unicameral legislature with 129 members (MSPs): 73 of them represent individual constituencies and are elected on a first-past-the-post system, and the other 56 are elected in eight different electoral regions by the additional member system. MSPs normally serve for a five-year period. The Scottish Parliament has the most extensive devolved powers amongst the devolved parliaments in the United Kingdom, and considered one of the most powerful devolved parliaments internationally. The largest party since the 2021 Scottish Parliament election, has been the Scottish National Party (SNP), which won 64 of the 129 seats. The Scottish Conservatives, Scottish Labour, the Scottish Liberal Democrats and the Scottish Greens also have representation in the current Parliament. The next Scottish Parliament election is due to be held on 7 May 2026.

The Scottish Government, which has been described as one of the most powerful devolved governments globally, is led by the first minister, who is nominated by MSPs and is typically the leader of the largest party in the Parliament. Other ministers are appointed by the first minister and serve at their discretion. As the head of the Scottish Government, the first minister is responsible for the comprehensive development, implementation and presentation of government policy, and is responsible for promoting the interests of the country at home and internationally. John Swinney, leader of the Scottish National Party (SNP), has served as the first minister since 8 May 2024.

=== Diplomacy and relations ===


As leader of the Scottish Government, the first minister is a member of the Heads of Government Council and the Council of the Nations and Regions, the bodies which facilitate intergovernmental relations. Foreign policy is a reserved matter and primarily the responsibility of the Foreign Office, a department of the UK Government. Nevertheless, the Scottish Government may promote Scottish interests abroad and encourage foreign investment in Scotland. The first minister and the constitution secretary have portfolios which include foreign affairs. Scotland&#x27;s international network consists of two Scotland Houses, one in Brussels and the other in London, seven Scottish Government international offices, and over thirty Scottish Development International offices in other countries globally. Both Scotland Houses are independent Scottish Government establishments, whilst the seven Scottish Government international offices are based in British embassies or British High Commission offices. The Scottish Government has a network of offices in Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Copenhagen, Dublin, London, Ottawa, Paris, and Washington, D.C., which promote Scottish interests in their respective areas. Additionally, the country has a number of foreign diplomatic missions, most of which are located in the capital city, Edinburgh.

The nation has historic ties to France as a result of the &#x27;Auld Alliance&#x27;, a treaty signed between the Kingdom of Scotland and Kingdom of France in 1295 to discourage an English invasion of either country. The alliance effectively ended in the sixteenth century, but the two countries continue to have a close relationship, with a Statement of Intent being signed in 2013 between the Scottish Government and the Government of France. In 2004 the Scotland Malawi Partnership was established, which co-ordinates Scottish activities to strengthen existing links with Malawi, and in 2021, the Scottish Government and Government of Ireland signed the Ireland-Scotland Bilateral Review, committing both governments to increased levels of co-operation on areas such as diplomacy, economy and business. Scotland also has historical and cultural ties with the Scandinavian countries. Scottish Government policy advocates for stronger political relations with the Nordic and Baltic countries, which has resulted in some Nordic-inspired policies being adopted such as baby boxes. Representatives from the Scottish Parliament attended the Nordic Council for the first time in 2022.

Scotland is a member of the British–Irish Council, the Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power (REGLEG), the British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly, the Council of European Municipalities and Regions, the Inter-Parliamentary Forum, the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Parliamentary Partnership Assembly with the European Union. Scotland held the Presidency of Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power from November 2003 until November 2004 during the premiership of Jack McConnell.

=== Devolution and independence ===

Devolution—the granting of central government powers to a regional government– gained increasing popularity as a policy in the United Kingdom the late twentieth century; it was described by John Smith, then Leader of the Labour Party, as the &quot;settled will of the Scottish people&quot;. The Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government were subsequently established under the Scotland Act 1998; the Act followed a successful referendum in 1997 which found majority support for both creating the Parliament and granting it limited powers to vary income tax. The Act enabled the new institutions to legislate in all areas not explicitly reserved by the UK Parliament.

Two more pieces of legislation, the Scotland Acts of 2012 and 2016, gave the Scottish Parliament further powers to legislate on taxation and social security; the 2016 Act also gave the Scottish Government powers to manage the affairs of the Crown Estate in Scotland. Conversely, the United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020 constrains the Scottish Parliament&#x27;s autonomy to regulate goods and services, and the academic view is that this undermines devolution.

The 2007 Scottish Parliament elections led to the Scottish National Party (SNP), which supports Scottish independence, forming a minority government. The new government established a &quot;National Conversation&quot; on constitutional issues, proposing a number of options such as increasing the powers of the Scottish Parliament, federalism, or a referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom. The three main unionist opposition parties–Scottish Labour, the Scottish Conservatives, and the Scottish Liberal Democrats–created a separate commission to investigate the distribution of powers between devolved Scottish and UK-wide bodies while not considering independence. In August 2009 the SNP proposed a bill to hold a referendum on independence in November 2010, but was defeated by opposition from all other major parties.

The 2011 Scottish Parliament election resulted in an SNP overall majority in the Scottish Parliament, and on 18 September 2014 a referendum on Scottish independence was held. The referendum resulted in a rejection of independence, by 55.3% to 44.7%. During the campaign, the three main parties in the British Parliament–the Conservatives, Labour, and the Liberal Democrats–pledged to extend the powers of the Scottish Parliament. An all-party commission chaired by Robert Smith, Baron Smith of Kelvin was formed, which led to the Scotland Act 2016.

Following the European Union Referendum Act 2015, the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum was held on 23 June 2016 on Britain&#x27;s membership of the European Union. A majority in the United Kingdom voted to withdraw from the EU, while a majority within Scotland voted to remain a member. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, announced the following day that as a result a new independence referendum was &quot;highly likely&quot;. On 31 January 2020, the United Kingdom formally withdrew from the European Union. Because constitutional affairs are reserved matters under the Scotland Act, the Scottish Parliament would again have to be granted temporary additional powers under Section 30 to hold a legally binding vote.

=== Local government ===
For local government purposes Scotland is subdivided into 32 single-tier council areas. The areas were established in 1996, and their councils are responsible for the provision of all local government services. Decisions are made by councillors, who are elected at local elections every five years. The leader of the council is typically a councillor from the party with the most seats; councils also have a civic head, typically called the provost or lord provost, who represents the council on ceremonial occasions and chairs council meetings. Community Councils are informal organisations that represent smaller subdivisions within each council area.

Police Scotland and the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service cover the entire country. For healthcare and postal districts, and a number of other governmental and non-governmental organisations such as the churches, there are other long-standing methods of subdividing Scotland for the purposes of administration.

There are eight cities in Scotland: Aberdeen, Dundee, Dunfermline, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Inverness, Perth and Stirling. City status in the United Kingdom is conferred by the monarch through letters patent.

=== Military ===


As one of the countries of the United Kingdom, the British Armed Forces are the armed forces of Scotland. Of the money spent on UK defence, about £3.3 billion can be attributed to Scotland as of 2018/2019. Scotland had a long military tradition predating the Treaty of Union with England. Following the Treaty of Union in 1707, the Scots Army and Royal Scots Navy merged with their English counterparts to form the Royal Navy and the British Army, which together form part of the British Armed Forces. The Atholl Highlanders, Europe&#x27;s only remaining legal private army, did not join the Scots Army or Royal Scots Navy in merging with English armed forces, remaining a private army not under the command of the British Armed Forces.

Numerous Scottish regiments have at various times existed in the British Army. Distinctively Scottish regiments in the British Army include the Scots Guards, the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards and the 154 (Scottish) Regiment RLC, an Army Reserve regiment of the Royal Logistic Corps. In 2006, as a result of the &quot;Delivering Security in a Changing World&quot; white paper, the Scottish infantry regiments in the Scottish Division were amalgamated to form the Royal Regiment of Scotland. As a result of the Cameron–Clegg coalition&#x27;s Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010, the Scottish regiments of the line in the British Army infantry, having previously formed the Scottish Division, were reorganised into the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division in 2017. Before the formation of the Scottish Division, the Scottish infantry was organised into a Lowland Brigade and Highland Brigade.

Because of their topography and perceived remoteness, parts of Scotland have housed many sensitive defence establishments. Between 1960 and 1991, the Holy Loch was a base for the US fleet of Polaris-equipped ballistic missile submarines. Today, His Majesty&#x27;s Naval Base Clyde, north-west of Glasgow, is the base for the four Trident-armed ballistic missile submarines that comprise the Britain&#x27;s nuclear deterrent.

Scotland&#x27;s Scapa Flow was the main base for the Royal Navy in the 20th century. As the Cold War intensified in 1961, the United States deployed Polaris ballistic missiles, and submarines, in the Firth of Clyde&#x27;s Holy Loch. Public protests from CND campaigners proved futile. The Royal Navy successfully convinced the government to allow the base because it wanted its own Polaris submarines, and it obtained them in 1963. The RN&#x27;s nuclear submarine base opened with four Polaris submarines at the expanded Faslane Naval Base on the Gare Loch. The first patrol of a Trident-armed submarine occurred in 1994, although the US base was closed at the end of the Cold War.

A single front-line Royal Air Force base is located in Scotland. RAF Lossiemouth, located in Moray, is the most northerly air defence fighter base in the United Kingdom and is home to four Eurofighter Typhoon combat aircraft squadrons, three Poseidon MRA1 squadrons, and a full–time, permanently based RAF Regiment squadron. An additional four RAF Reserve Squadrons are based in Scotland – 612 Squadron, 2622 (Highland) Squadron and 602 Squadron in Glasgow, and 603 Squadron in Edinburgh.

=== Law and order ===


Scots law has a basis derived from Roman law, combining features of both uncodified civil law, dating back to the , and common law with medieval sources. The terms of the Treaty of Union with England in 1707 guaranteed the continued existence of a separate legal system in Scotland from that of England and Wales. Prior to 1611, there were several regional law systems in Scotland, most notably Udal law in Orkney and Shetland, based on old Norse law. Various other systems derived from common Celtic or Brehon laws survived in the Highlands until the 1800s.
Scots law provides for three types of courts responsible for the administration of justice: civil, criminal and heraldic. The supreme civil court is the Court of Session, although civil appeals can be taken to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom (or before 1 October 2009, the House of Lords). The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court in Scotland. The Court of Session is housed at Parliament House, in Edinburgh, which was the home of the pre-Union Parliament of Scotland with the High Court of Justiciary and the Supreme Court of Appeal currently located at the Lawnmarket. The sheriff court is the main criminal and civil court, hearing most cases. There are 49 sheriff courts throughout the country. District courts were introduced in 1975 for minor offences and small claims. These were gradually replaced by Justice of the Peace Courts from 2008 to 2010.

For three centuries the Scots legal system was unique for being the only national legal system without a parliament. This ended with the advent of the Scottish Parliament in 1999, which legislates for devolved matters. Many features within the system have been preserved. Within criminal law, the Scots legal system is unique in having three possible verdicts: &quot;guilty&quot;, &quot;not guilty&quot; and &quot;not proven&quot;. Both &quot;not guilty&quot; and &quot;not proven&quot; result in an acquittal, typically with no possibility of retrial per the rule of double jeopardy. A retrial can hear new evidence at a later date that might have proven conclusive in the earlier trial at first instance, where the person acquitted subsequently admits the offence or where it can be proved that the acquittal was tainted by an attempt to pervert the course of justice. Scots juries, sitting in criminal cases, consist of fifteen jurors, which is three more than is typical in many countries.

The Lord Advocate is the chief legal officer of the Scottish Government and the Crown in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is the head of the systems in Scotland for the investigation and prosecution of crime, the investigation of deaths as well as serving as the principal legal adviser to the Scottish Government and representing the government in legal proceedings. They are the chief public prosecutor for Scotland and all prosecutions on indictment are conducted by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service in the Lord Advocate&#x27;s name on behalf of the Monarch. The officeholder is one of the Great Officers of State of Scotland. The current Lord Advocate, Dorothy Bain, was nominated by first minister Nicola Sturgeon, and was appointed in June 2021. The Lord Advocate is supported by the Solicitor General for Scotland.

Since 2013, Scotland has had a unified police force known as Police Scotland. The Scottish Prison Service (SPS) manages the prisons in Scotland, which collectively house over 8,500 prisoners. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice and Home Affairs is responsible for the Scottish Prison Service within the Scottish Government.

== Economy ==

Scotland has a Western-style open mixed economy closely linked with the rest of the UK and the wider world. Scotland is one of the leading financial centres in Europe, and is the largest financial centre in the United Kingdom outside of London. Edinburgh is the financial services centre of Scotland, with many large finance firms based there, including: Lloyds Banking Group, the Bank of Scotland, the Government-owned Royal Bank of Scotland and Standard Life. Edinburgh was ranked 15th in the list of world financial centres in 2007, but fell to 37th in 2012, following damage to its reputation, and in 2016 was ranked 56th out of 86. Its rank had returned to 17th by 2020. Historically, the Scottish economy was dominated by heavy industry underpinned by shipbuilding in Glasgow, coal mining and steel industries. Petroleum-related industries associated with the extraction of North Sea oil have also been important employers since the 1970s, especially in the north-east of Scotland. De-industrialisation during the 1970s and 1980s saw a shift from a manufacturing focus towards a more service-oriented economy. The Scottish National Investment Bank was established in 2020 by the Scottish Government, which uses public money to fund commercial projects across Scotland in the hope that this seed capital will encourage further private investment, to help develop a fairer, more sustainable economy. £2 billion of taxpayers&#x27; money was earmarked for the bank.

In 2023, Scotland&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP), including offshore oil and gas, was estimated at £218.0 billion. In 2021, Scottish exports in goods and services (excluding intra-UK trade) were estimated to be £50.1 billion. Scotland&#x27;s primary goods exports are mineral fuels, machinery and transport, and beverages and tobacco. The country&#x27;s largest export markets in goods are the European Union, Asia and Oceania, and North America. Whisky is one of Scotland&#x27;s more known goods of economic activity. Exports increased by 87% in the decade to 2012 and were valued at £4.3 billion in 2013, which was 85% of Scotland&#x27;s food and drink exports. It supports around 10,000 jobs directly and 25,000 indirectly. It may contribute £400–682 million to Scotland, rather than several billion pounds, as more than 80% of whisky produced is owned by non-Scottish companies. A briefing published in 2002 by the Scottish Parliament Information Centre (SPICe) for the Scottish Parliament&#x27;s Enterprise and Life Long Learning Committee stated that tourism accounted for up to 5% of GDP and 7.5% of employment.

Scotland was one of the industrial powerhouses of Europe from the time of the Industrial Revolution onwards, being a world leader in manufacturing. This left a legacy in the diversity of goods and services which Scotland produces, from textiles, whisky and shortbread to jet engines, buses, computer software, investment management and other related financial services. In common with most other advanced industrialised economies, Scotland has seen a decline in the importance of both manufacturing industries and primary-based extractive industries. This has been combined with a rise in the service sector of the economy, which has grown to be the largest sector in Scotland.

===Income and poverty===

The average weekly income for workplace-based employees in Scotland is £573, and £576 for home-based employees. Scotland has the third highest median gross salary in the United Kingdom at £26,007, which is higher than the overall UK average annual salary of £25,971. With an average of £14.28, Scotland has the third highest median hourly rate (excluding overtime working hours) of the countries of the United Kingdom, and like the annual salary, this is higher than the average UK figure as a whole. The highest paid industries in Scotland tend of be in the utility electricity, gas and air conditioning sectors, while industries like tourism, accommodation and food and drink tend to be the lowest paid. The top local authority for pay, based on place of residence, is East Renfrewshire (£20.87 per hour).

The top local authority for pay based on place of work is East Ayrshire (£16.92 per hour). Scotland&#x27;s cities commonly have the largest salaries in Scotland based on place of work. 2021/2022 data indicate that there were 2.6 million dwellings across Scotland, with 318,369 local authority dwellings. A typical price for a house in Scotland was £195,391 in August 2022.

Between 2016 and 2020, the Scottish Government estimated that 10% of people in Scotland were in persistent poverty following housing costs, with similar rates of persistent poverty for children (10%), working-age adults (10%) and pensioners (11%). Persistent child poverty rates had seen a relatively sharp drop; however, the accuracy of this was deemed to be questionable due to various factors such as households re-entering the longitudinal sample allowing data gaps to be filled. The Scottish Government introduced the Scottish Child Payment in 2021 for low-income families with children under six years of age in an attempt to reduce child poverty rates, with families receiving a payment of roughly £1,040 per year. As of October 2023, 10% of the Scottish population were estimated to be living in poverty.

=== Currency ===

Although the Bank of England is the central bank for the UK, three Scottish clearing banks issue Sterling banknotes: the Bank of Scotland, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the Clydesdale Bank. The Bank of Scotland was the first bank in Europe to successfully print its own paper currency, with the new banknotes entering circulation in 1696, making the Bank of Scotland the longest continuous issuer of banknotes in the world. The issuing of banknotes by retail banks in Scotland is subject to the Banking Act 2009, which repealed all earlier legislation under which banknote issuance was regulated, and the Scottish and Northern Ireland Banknote Regulations 2009.

The value of the Scottish banknotes in circulation in 2013 was £3.8 billion, underwritten by the Bank of England using funds deposited by each clearing bank, under the Banking Act 2009, to cover the total value of such notes in circulation.

===Infrastructure and transportation===

Scotland has five international airports operating scheduled services to Europe, North America and Asia, as well as domestic services to England, Northern Ireland and Wales and within Scotland. Highlands and Islands Airports operates eleven airports across the Highlands, Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, which are primarily used for short distance, public service operations, although Inverness Airport has a number of scheduled flights to destinations across the UK and mainland Europe. Edinburgh Airport is currently Scotland&#x27;s busiest airport handling over 13 million passengers in 2017. It is also the UK&#x27;s 6th busiest airport. The airline Loganair has its headquarters at Glasgow Airport and markets itself as &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Airline&quot;.

Network Rail owns and operates the fixed infrastructure assets of the railway system in Scotland, while the Scottish Government retains overall responsibility for rail strategy and funding in Scotland. Scotland&#x27;s rail network has 359 railway stations and around of track. In 2018–19 there were 102million passenger journeys on Scottish railways. On 1 January 2006, Transport Scotland was established, which would oversee the regulation of railways in Scotland and administer major rail projects.
Since April 2022, Transport Scotland has taken ScotRail back into public ownership via its operator of last resort, Scottish Rail Holdings. It did the same with the Caledonian Sleeper service in June 2023.

The Glasgow Subway is the only underground system in Scotland. It opened on 14 December 1896, making it the third-oldest underground network in the world after the Budapest Metro and the London Underground. It is owned and operated by Strathclyde Partnership for Transport.

The Scottish motorways and major trunk roads are managed by Transport Scotland. The remainder of the road network is managed by the Scottish local authorities in each of their areas.

Regular ferry services operate between the Scottish mainland and outlying islands. Ferries serving both the inner and outer Hebrides are principally operated by the state-owned enterprise Caledonian MacBrayne. Services to the Northern Isles are operated by Serco. Other routes, such as southwest Scotland to Northern Ireland, are served by multiple companies. DFDS Seaways operated a freight-only Rosyth – Zeebrugge ferry service, until a fire damaged the vessel DFDS were using. A passenger service was also operated between 2002 and 2010.

===Science, technology and energy===

Scotland&#x27;s primary sources of energy are provided through renewable energy (61.8%), nuclear (25.7%) and fossil fuel generation (10.9%). Whitelee Wind Farm is the largest onshore wind farm in the United Kingdom, and was Europe&#x27;s largest onshore wind farm for some time. Tidal power is an emerging source of energy in Scotland. The MeyGen tidal stream energy plant in the north of the country is claimed to be the largest tidal stream energy project in the world. In Scotland, 98.6% of all electricity used was from renewable sources. This is minus net exports. Between October 2021 and September 2022 63.1% of all electricity generated in Scotland was from renewable sources, 83.6% was classed as low carbon and 14.5% was from fossil fuels. The Scottish Government has a target to have the equivalent of 50% of the energy for Scotland&#x27;s heat, transport and electricity consumption to be supplied from renewable sources by 2030. They have stated that, in 2022, the equivalent of 113% of the country&#x27;s overall electrical consumption was produced by renewable energy, making it the highest recorded figure of renewable energy generated to date.

Scotland&#x27;s inventions and discoveries are said to have revolutionised human technology and have played a major role in the creation of the modern world. Such inventions – the television, the telephone, refrigerators, the MRI scanner, flushing toilets and the steam engine – are said to have been possible by Scotland&#x27;s universities and parish schools, together with the commitment Scots had to education during the Scottish Enlightenment. Alexander Fleming is responsible for the discovery of the world&#x27;s first broadly effective antibiotic substance, which he named penicillin, earning him a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1945. Modern Scottish inventions – the Falkirk Wheel and the Glasgow Tower – hold world records for being the only rotating boat lift and the tallest fully rotating freestanding structure in the world respectively.

Scotland&#x27;s space industry is a world leader in sustainable space technology, and, according to the UK Space Agency, there are 173 space companies currently operating in Scotland as of May 2021. These include spacecraft manufacturers, launch providers, downstream data analyzers, and research organisations. The space industry in Scotland is projected to generate £2billion in income for Scotland&#x27;s space cluster by 2030. Scottish space industry jobs represent almost one in five of all UK space industry employment. In addition to its space industry, Scotland is home to two planned spaceports – Sutherland spaceport and SaxaVord Spaceport – with launch vehicles such as the Orbex Prime from Scottish–based aerospace company Orbex expected to be launched from Sutherland.

==Culture and society==
===Scottish music===

Scottish music is a significant aspect of the nation&#x27;s culture, with both traditional and modern influences. A famous traditional Scottish instrument is the Great Highland bagpipe, a woodwind reed instrument consisting of three drones and a melody pipe (called the chanter), which are fed continuously by a reservoir of air in a bag. The popularity of pipe bands—primarily featuring bagpipes, various types of snares and drums, and showcasing Scottish traditional dress and music—has spread throughout the world. Bagpipes are featured in holiday celebrations, parades, funerals, weddings, and other events internationally. Many military regiments have a pipe band of their own. In addition to the Great Highland pipes, several smaller, somewhat quieter bellows-blown varieties of bagpipe are played in Scotland, including the smallpipes and the Border pipes.

Scottish popular music has gained an international following, with artists such as Lewis Capaldi, Amy Macdonald, KT Tunstall, Nina Nesbitt, Chvrches, Gerry Cinnamon and Paolo Nutini gaining international success. DJ Calvin Harris was one of the most streamed artists on Spotify in 2023, whilst Susan Boyle&#x27;s debut album was one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century, and was the best-selling album internationally in 2009. Runrig popularised Celtic rock and frequently performed in Scottish Gaelic, with their 1995 single &quot;An Ubhal as Àirde&quot; the first song in the language to reach the UK Top 20. Musical talent in Scotland is recognised via the Scottish Music Awards, Scottish Album of the Year Award, the Scots Trad Music Awards and the BBC Radio Scotland Young Traditional Musician award.

===Literature and media===

Scotland has a literary heritage dating back to the early Middle Ages. The earliest extant literature composed in what is now Scotland was in Brythonic speech in the 6th century, but is preserved as part of Welsh literature. Later medieval literature included works in Latin, Gaelic, Old English and French. The first surviving major text in Early Scots is the 14th-century poet John Barbour&#x27;s epic &quot;Brus&quot;, focusing on the life of Robert I, and was soon followed by a series of vernacular romances and prose works. In the 16th century, the crown&#x27;s patronage helped the development of Scots drama and poetry, but the accession of James VI to the English throne removed a major centre of literary patronage and Scots was sidelined as a literary language. Interest in Scots literature was revived in the 18th century by figures including James Macpherson, whose Ossian Cycle made him the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation and was a major influence on the European Enlightenment. It was also a major influence on Robert Burns, whom many consider the national poet, and Walter Scott, whose Waverley Novels did much to define Scottish identity in the 19th century. Towards the end of the Victorian era a number of Scottish-born authors achieved international reputations as writers in English, including Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle, J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald.

In the 20th century the Scottish Renaissance saw a surge of literary activity and attempts to reclaim the Scots language as a medium for serious literature. Members of the movement were followed by a new generation of post-war poets including Edwin Morgan, who would be appointed the first Makar by the Scottish Government in 2004. Sorley MacLean was described by the Scottish Poetry Library as &quot;one of the major Scottish poets of the modern era&quot; because of his &quot;mastery of his chosen medium and his engagement with the European poetic tradition and European politics&quot;. Nobel Prize Laureate Seamus Heaney credited MacLean with saving Scottish Gaelic poetry. From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival, particularly associated with a group of writers including Irvine Welsh. Scottish poets who emerged in the same period included Carol Ann Duffy, who, in May 2009, was the first Scot named the monarch&#x27;s Poet Laureate. Scotland&#x27;s national poet is known as the Makar and is appointed by the first minister to promote literacy, writing and poetry across the country, as well as to produce work for national events and produce annual reports to the government. The incumbent Makar is Pàdraig MacAoidh, the first Scottish Gaelic writer to hold the position.

National newspapers such as the &quot;Daily Record&quot;, &quot;The Herald&quot;, &quot;The Scotsman&quot; and &quot;The National&quot; are all produced in Scotland. Important regional dailies include the Evening News in Edinburgh, &quot;The Courier&quot; in Dundee in the east, and &quot;The Press and Journal&quot; serving Aberdeen and the north. Scotland is represented at the Celtic Media Festival, which showcases film and television from the Celtic countries. Scottish entrants have won many awards since the festival began in 1980.

Scotland&#x27;s national broadcaster is BBC Scotland, a division of the BBC, which runs three national television stations BBC One Scotland, BBC Scotland channel and the Gaelic-language broadcaster BBC Alba, and the national radio stations, &quot;BBC Radio Scotland&quot; and &quot;BBC Radio nan Gàidheal&quot;, among others. The main Scottish commercial television station is STV which broadcasts on two of the three ITV regions of Scotland.
=== Celtic connections ===

As one of the Celtic nations, Scotland and Scottish culture are represented at inter-Celtic events at home and over the world. Scotland hosts several music festivals including Celtic Connections (Glasgow), and the Hebridean Celtic Festival (Stornoway). Festivals celebrating Celtic culture, such as Festival Interceltique de Lorient (Brittany), the Pan Celtic Festival (Ireland), and the National Celtic Festival (Portarlington, Australia), feature elements of Scottish culture such as language, music and dance.

=== National identity ===

The image of St. Andrew, martyred while bound to an X-shaped cross, first appeared in the Kingdom of Scotland during the reign of William I. Following the death of King Alexander III in 1286 an image of Andrew was used on the seal of the Guardians of Scotland who assumed control of the kingdom during the subsequent interregnum. Use of a simplified symbol associated with Saint Andrew, the saltire, has its origins in the late 14th century; the Parliament of Scotland decreeing in 1385 that Scottish soldiers should wear a white Saint Andrew&#x27;s Cross on the front and back of their tunics. Use of a blue background for the Saint Andrew&#x27;s Cross is said to date from at least the 15th century. Since 1606 the saltire has also formed part of the design of the Union Flag. 

There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and unofficial, including the thistle, the nation&#x27;s floral emblem (celebrated in the song, The Thistle o&#x27; Scotland), the Declaration of Arbroath, incorporating a statement of political independence made on 6 April 1320, the textile pattern tartan that often signifies a particular Scottish clan and the royal Lion Rampant flag. Highlanders can thank James Graham, 3rd Duke of Montrose, for the repeal in 1782 of the Dress Act 1746, which prohibiting the wearing of tartans.

Scotland has its own regalia known as the Honours of Scotland (informally the Scottish Crown Jewels) which consists of the Crown of Scotland, a Sceptre and Scottish Sword of State. The Scottish crown was worn by Scottish monarchs during their coronation, and today is kept in the Crown Room at Edinburgh Castle. The Crown of Scotland is present at each state opening of the Scottish Parliament. Collectively, the Honours of Scotland are the oldest regalia in the British Isles, dating from the late 15th and early 16th centuries.

Although there is no official national anthem of Scotland, &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot; is played on special occasions and sporting events such as football and rugby matches involving the Scotland national teams and since 2010 is also played at the Commonwealth Games after it was voted the overwhelming favourite by participating Scottish athletes. Other currently less popular candidates for the National Anthem of Scotland include &quot;Scotland the Brave&quot;, &quot;Highland Cathedral&quot;, &quot;Scots Wha Hae&quot; and &quot;A Man&#x27;s A Man for A&#x27; That&quot;.

St Andrew&#x27;s Day, 30 November, is the national day, although Burns&#x27; Night tends to be more widely observed, particularly outside Scotland. In 2006, the Scottish Parliament passed the St Andrew&#x27;s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007, designating the day an official bank holiday. Tartan Day is a recent innovation from Canada.

The national animal of Scotland is the unicorn, which has been a Scottish heraldic symbol since the 12th century. The Court of the Lord Lyon regulates Scottish heraldry and the Public Register of All Armorial Bearings in Scotland.

=== Cuisine ===
Scottish cuisine has distinctive attributes and recipes of its own but shares much with wider British and European cuisine as a result of local and foreign influences, both ancient and modern. Traditional Scottish dishes exist alongside international foodstuffs brought about by migration. Scotland&#x27;s natural larder of game, dairy products, fish, fruit, and vegetables is the chief factor in traditional Scots cooking, with a high reliance on simplicity and a lack of spices from abroad, as these were historically rare and expensive.

Irn-Bru is the most common Scottish carbonated soft drink, often described as &quot;Scotland&#x27;s other national drink&quot; (after whisky). During the Late Middle Ages and early modern era, French cuisine played a role in Scottish cookery due to cultural exchanges brought about by the &quot;Auld Alliance&quot;, especially during the reign of Mary, Queen of Scots. Mary, on her return to Scotland, brought an entourage of French staff who are considered responsible for revolutionising Scots cooking and for some of Scotland&#x27;s unique food terminology.

=== Sports ===

Scotland hosts its own national sporting competitions and has independent representation at several international sporting events, including the FIFA World Cup, the UEFA Nations League, the UEFA European Championship, the Rugby Union World Cup, the Rugby League World Cup, the Cricket World Cup, the Netball World Cup and the Commonwealth Games. Scotland has its own national governing bodies, such as the Scottish Football Association (the second oldest national football association in the world) and the Scottish Rugby Union. Variations of football have been played in Scotland for centuries, with the earliest reference dating back to 1424.

The world&#x27;s first official international association football match, between Scotland and England was held in Glasgow on 30 November 1872, and resulted in a 0–0 draw. The Scottish Cup was first contested in 1873, and is the oldest trophy in association football. The Scottish Football Association (SFA) is the main governing body for Scottish association football, and a founding member of the International Football Association Board (IFAB) which governs the Laws of the Game. Scotland is one of only four countries to have a permanent representative on the IFAB; the other four representatives being appointed for set periods by FIFA. The SFA has responsibility for the Scotland national football team and the Scotland women&#x27;s team.

With the modern game of golf originating in 15th-century Scotland, the country is promoted as the home of golf. To many golfers the Old Course in the Fife town of St Andrews, an ancient links course dating to before 1552, is considered a site of pilgrimage. In 1764, the standard 18-hole golf course was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes. The world&#x27;s oldest golf tournament, and golf&#x27;s first major, is The Open Championship, which was first played on 17 October 1860 at Prestwick Golf Club, in Ayrshire, Scotland, with Scottish golfers winning the earliest majors. There are many other famous golf courses in Scotland, including Carnoustie, Gleneagles, Muirfield, and Royal Troon.

The Scottish Rugby Union is the second oldest rugby union in the world. Murrayfield Stadium in Edinburgh is the national stadium of the Scottish national rugby team. The Scotland rugby team played their first official test match, winning 1–0 against England at Raeburn Place in 1871. Scotland has competed in the Six Nations from the inaugural tournament in 1883, winning it 14 times outright—including the last Five Nations in 1999—and sharing it another 8. The Rugby World Cup was introduced in 1987 and Scotland have competed in all nine competitions, the most recent being in the 2023 Rugby World Cup. Scotland competes with the England rugby team annually for the Calcutta Cup. Each year, this fixture is played out as part of the Six Nations, with Scotland having last won in 2024.

Other distinctive features of the national sporting culture include the Highland games, curling and shinty. In boxing, Scotland has had 13 world champions, including Ken Buchanan, Benny Lynch and Jim Watt. Scotland has also been successful in motorsport, particularly in Formula One. Notable drivers include; David Coulthard, Jim Clark, Paul Di Resta, and Jackie Stewart. In IndyCar, Dario Franchitti has won 4 consecutive IndyCar world championships.

Scotland has competed at every Commonwealth Games since 1930 and has won 356 medals in total—91 Gold, 104 Silver and 161 Bronze. Scotland has hosted the Commonwealth Games three times – Edinburgh played host to the Commonwealth Games in 1970 and 1986, and most recently Glasgow in 2014. Glasgow was confirmed as the host city for the 2026 Commonwealth Games in September 2024. Edinburgh was the host city for the inaugural Commonwealth Youth Games in 2000.

== See also ==

* Outline of Scotland&#x27;

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Sources===
* 

== Further reading ==

* Devine, T. M. [1999] (2000). &quot;The Scottish Nation 1700–2000&quot; (New edition). London: Penguin. 
* Donnachie, Ian and George Hewitt. &quot;Dictionary of Scottish History.&quot; (2001). 384 pp.
* Keay, John, and Julia Keay. &quot;Collins Encyclopedia of Scotland&quot; (2nd ed. 2001), 1101pp; 4000 articles; emphasis on history
* Koch, J. T. &quot;Celtic Culture: a Historical Encyclopedia&quot; (ABC-CLIO, 2006), , 999pp.
* MacGibbon, David and Ross, Thomas, &quot;The ecclesiastical architecture of Scotland from the earliest Christian times to the seventeenth century; vol. 3/3&quot;, (1897).
* Tabraham, Chris, and Colin Baxter. &quot;The Illustrated History of Scotland&quot; (2004) excerpt and text search
* Trevor-Roper, Hugh, &quot;The Invention of Scotland: Myth and History&quot;, Yale, 2008, 
* Watson, Fiona, &quot;Scotland; From Prehistory to the Present&quot;. Tempus, 2003. 286 pp.
* Wilson, Neil. &quot;Lonely Planet Scotland&quot; (2013)
* Wormald, Jenny, &quot;Scotland: A History&quot; (2005) excerpt and text search
== External links ==

* – official online gateway to Scotland managed by the Scottish Government
* Visit Scotland – official site of Scotland&#x27;s national tourist board
* Scottish Government – official site of the Scottish Government
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="0" end="8" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="14" end="21" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="42" end="56" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="176" end="189" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="217" end="224" title="Islands of Scotland" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="265" end="273" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="282" end="296" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991077" start="334" end="350" title="Anglo-Scottish border" label="only land border"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="382" end="389" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="424" end="438" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="466" end="475" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="512" end="521" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="574" end="583" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="603" end="610" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q123239417" start="639" end="657" title="cities of Scotland" label="cities of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="664" end="683" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="710" end="725" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="755" end="763" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="792" end="799" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="804" end="811" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="823" end="837" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="845" end="859" title="Union of the Crowns" label="three kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="924" end="948" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="959" end="981" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="1000" end="1027" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1040" end="1059" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="1088" end="1096" title="Devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573035" start="1126" end="1141" title="domestic policy" label="domestic policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="1147" end="1166" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1174" end="1187" title="Executive (government)" label="executive arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="1230" end="1244" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859621" start="1260" end="1267" title="Scottish Cabinet" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524369" start="1310" end="1334" title="International relations of Scotland" label="international engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="1367" end="1383" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="1433" end="1445" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="1518" end="1530" title="Scots law" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509538" start="1532" end="1548" title="Education in Scotland" label="education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775679" start="1553" end="1570" title="History of Christianity in Scotland" label="religious history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="1622" end="1638" title="Culture of Scotland" label="Scottish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114749" start="1643" end="1660" title="Scottish national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="1662" end="1678" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1683" end="1688" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032680" start="1716" end="1740" title="Languages of Scotland" label="languages in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="1756" end="1773" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1791" end="1806" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="1922" end="1930" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="2024" end="2038" title="Revitalisation of Scottish Gaelic" label="revitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="2083" end="2098" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="2178" end="2187" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="2243" end="2251" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="2311" end="2327" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="2468" end="2477" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="2528" end="2532" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="2708" end="2712" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="2717" end="2721" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="2783" end="2788" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="2793" end="2797" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="2890" end="2895" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183568" start="2897" end="2911" title="Philip Freeman" label="Philip Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="2991" end="3009" title="Indo-European root" label="Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="3104" end="3114" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3214" end="3225" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="3369" end="3380" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435677" start="3592" end="3608" title="Scotland in the Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249814" start="3641" end="3661" title="Prehistoric Scotland" label="Prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3689" end="3701" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247867" start="3831" end="3847" title="human habitation" label="human habitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3881" end="3898" title="Mesolithic period" label="Mesolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3948" end="3963" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4047" end="4062" title="Last glacial period" label="last glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q816437" start="4355" end="4365" title="Skara Brae" label="Skara Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="4385" end="4391" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4416" end="4425" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="4513" end="4527" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="4532" end="4545" title="Western Isles" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242938" start="4712" end="4728" title="Callanish Stones" label="Callanish Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="4732" end="4737" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q507076" start="4746" end="4755" title="Maes Howe" label="Maes Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="4759" end="4765" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="4904" end="4911" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="5050" end="5062" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5072" end="5084" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="5225" end="5233" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127337" start="5289" end="5312" title="Battle of Mons Graupius" label="Battle of Mons Graupius"/>
<link wikidata="Q569139" start="5387" end="5397" title="Gask Ridge" label="Gask Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173082" start="5411" end="5424" title="Highland Boundary Fault" label="Highland line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="5501" end="5517" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360927" start="5609" end="5620" title="Moray Firth" label="Moray Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="5642" end="5655" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="5656" end="5662" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="5731" end="5741" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="5750" end="5762" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="5805" end="5812" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="5824" end="5843" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308056" start="5878" end="5895" title="Limes Britannicus" label="Limes Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6044" end="6056" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="6075" end="6088" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="6149" end="6163" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="6277" end="6291" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="6300" end="6314" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651744" start="6320" end="6355" title="Roman invasion of Caledonia 208–210" label="Roman invasion of Caledonia 208–210"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="6399" end="6414" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="6601" end="6618" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="6655" end="6672" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q958954" start="6679" end="6687" title="Eboracum" label="Eboracum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="6689" end="6693" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="6767" end="6777" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976531" start="6889" end="6894" title="glens" label="glens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="7010" end="7017" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="7022" end="7033" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="7039" end="7057" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="7084" end="7095" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="7107" end="7116" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379394" start="7182" end="7193" title="Caledonians" label="Caledonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519584" start="7202" end="7209" title="Maeatae" label="Maeatae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7494" end="7501" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="7510" end="7531" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="&amp;quot;Geography&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q813410" start="7570" end="7582" title="Beauly Firth" label="Beauly Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="7635" end="7642" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359657" start="7644" end="7653" title="Rohallion" label="Rohallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q948061" start="7659" end="7671" title="Schiehallion" label="Schiehallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355110" start="7678" end="7694" title="Great Conspiracy" label="Great Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292989" start="7843" end="7848" title="Scoti" label="Scoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="7893" end="7898" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q537126" start="7939" end="7967" title="Comes Theodosius" label="&amp;quot;comes&amp;quot; Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="8083" end="8116" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="8144" end="8150" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="8336" end="8344" title="Pictland" label="Pictland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="8402" end="8413" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="8414" end="8436" title="Kingdom of Northumbria" label="Kingdom of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="8485" end="8494" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="8759" end="8782" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="8945" end="8968" title="Celtic Church" label="Gaelic-speaking clerics"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="9042" end="9046" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="9048" end="9061" title="Saint Columba" label="Saint Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="9119" end="9126" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429971" start="9280" end="9285" title="Norse Scotland" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="9384" end="9393" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="9413" end="9420" title="Pictish language" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="9428" end="9442" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q298263" start="9505" end="9514" title="Kenneth I" label="Kenneth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="9970" end="9981" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720" start="9999" end="10009" title="River Spey" label="River Spey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948254" start="10106" end="10111" title="Province of Moray" label="Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336993" start="10647" end="10678" title="Scottish national consciousness" label="Scottish national consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="10680" end="10687" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="10806" end="10814" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="10820" end="10829" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="10879" end="10887" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="10921" end="10935" title="Scottish clans" label="Scottish clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781786" start="10959" end="10967" title="Somerled" label="Somerled"/>
<link wikidata="Q430572" start="11030" end="11052" title="Scottish-Norwegian War" label="Scottish-Norwegian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="11086" end="11094" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="11127" end="11136" title="Haakon IV" label="Haakon IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097266" start="11159" end="11174" title="Battle of Largs" label="Battle of Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293452" start="11304" end="11316" title="Norse–Gaelic" label="Norse–Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="11339" end="11348" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="11369" end="11384" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="11499" end="11513" title="Gaelic culture" label="Gaelic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="11522" end="11535" title="Scottish clan" label="Scottish clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="11616" end="11630" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="11738" end="11751" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="11839" end="11844" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="11856" end="11864" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="11869" end="11875" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="11896" end="11905" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="12060" end="12067" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="12357" end="12370" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="12437" end="12456" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="12583" end="12595" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="12807" end="12820" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q472725" start="12904" end="12916" title="Andrew Moray" label="Andrew Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="12921" end="12936" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="13021" end="13050" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="13058" end="13074" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="13128" end="13149" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="13289" end="13312" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="13333" end="13347" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="13453" end="13466" title="Bruce dynasty" label="Bruce dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094924" start="13501" end="13515" title="House of Comyn" label="House of Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589976" start="13520" end="13536" title="House of Balliol" label="House of Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="13625" end="13633" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="13681" end="13690" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244355" start="13696" end="13725" title="Lord High Steward of Scotland" label="Lord High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="13767" end="13783" title="House of Stewart" label="House of Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="13838" end="13849" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="13978" end="13989" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="14018" end="14029" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="14070" end="14079" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="14084" end="14092" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740688" start="14182" end="14207" title="Treaty of Perpetual Peace" label="Treaty of Perpetual Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="14230" end="14250" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="14255" end="14275" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="14314" end="14328" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="14396" end="14409" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="14441" end="14454" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="14476" end="14483" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="14543" end="14563" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="14602" end="14614" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q947050" start="14629" end="14648" title="Treaty of Edinburgh" label="Treaty of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510186" start="14671" end="14685" title="Siege of Leith" label="Siege of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="14716" end="14727" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437930" start="14753" end="14775" title="Scottish Reformation Parliament" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125192" start="14808" end="14824" title="Scots Confession" label="Scots Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="14846" end="14866" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150804" start="14985" end="15001" title="Act Anent the demission of the Crown in favour of our Sovereign Lord, and his Majesty&amp;#x27;s Coronation 1567" label="abdicate in 1567"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="15013" end="15036" title="James VI and I" label="James VI, King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="15066" end="15084" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="15093" end="15111" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="15119" end="15138" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="15172" end="15186" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="15311" end="15321" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q102392" start="15390" end="15412" title="Flag of Scotland" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="15555" end="15576" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="15790" end="15806" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="15926" end="15937" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="15955" end="15972" title="Presbyterian church governance" label="church government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965672" start="16088" end="16104" title="Statutes of Iona" label="Statutes of Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="16480" end="16489" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="16508" end="16534" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508780" start="16539" end="16561" title="Scotland in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="its events in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="16563" end="16578" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="16595" end="16609" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633961" start="16676" end="16700" title="Instrument of Government" label="Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="16749" end="16795" title="Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland" label="Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="16934" end="16949" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316198" start="16971" end="16994" title="Restoration in Scotland" label="Restoration in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="17358" end="17368" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="17508" end="17523" title="House of Orange" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="17543" end="17559" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="17584" end="17607" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rising of 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990278" start="17622" end="17641" title="Company of Scotland" label="Company of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="17696" end="17713" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="17802" end="17815" title="Darien scheme" label="Darien scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="18342" end="18357" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="18400" end="18416" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Scots Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="18425" end="18446" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="18473" end="18486" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="18540" end="18564" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="18641" end="18650" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="18652" end="18659" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="18703" end="18730" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="18757" end="18779" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="18788" end="18809" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="18845" end="18866" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846602" start="18921" end="18936" title="Andrew Fletcher (patriot)" label="Andrew Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="19098" end="19125" title="Lord Chancellor of Scotland" label="Lord Chancellor of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336713" start="19127" end="19162" title="James Ogilvy, 4th Earl of Findlater" label="James Ogilvy, 4th Earl of Findlater"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="19359" end="19374" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="19462" end="19474" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="19507" end="19531" title="Episcopalian Protestants" label="Episcopalian Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="19572" end="19576" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="19581" end="19585" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="19607" end="19623" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="19749" end="19767" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="19795" end="19809" title="pitched battle" label="pitched battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254673" start="19942" end="19953" title="pamphleteer" label="pamphleteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="20180" end="20193" title="Darien scheme" label="Darien scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="20335" end="20351" title="Colonial America" label="Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811467" start="20391" end="20404" title="Tobacco Lords" label="Tobacco Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="20444" end="20452" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="20464" end="20492" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="20945" end="20964" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="21066" end="21088" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="21097" end="21118" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="21207" end="21215" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="21543" end="21557" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437929" start="21882" end="21906" title="Scottish Reform Act 1832" label="Scottish Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="22102" end="22133" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="22223" end="22240" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="22246" end="22266" title="Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery" label="the Earl of Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="22353" end="22364" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931917" start="22387" end="22420" title="Mid Lanarkshire by-election, 1888" label="Mid Lanarkshire by-election, 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437828" start="22455" end="22476" title="Scottish Labour Party (1888)" label="Scottish Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="22506" end="22530" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864678" start="22650" end="22675" title="Second City of the Empire" label="Second City of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="23583" end="23602" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="23607" end="23618" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="23652" end="23662" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q451444" start="23667" end="23682" title="William Murdoch" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="23861" end="23873" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678251" start="23903" end="23911" title="Waverley (novel)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="24205" end="24227" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="24229" end="24247" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="24249" end="24261" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="24266" end="24282" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255562" start="24366" end="24380" title="Glasgow School" label="Glasgow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="24523" end="24537" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="24542" end="24566" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q751880" start="24572" end="24580" title="Japonism" label="Japonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="24616" end="24626" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="24677" end="24688" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q220703" start="24737" end="24762" title="Charles Rennie Mackintosh" label="Charles Rennie Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080106" start="24842" end="24856" title="History of the United Kingdom during the First World War" label="British effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24864" end="24879" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="25131" end="25144" title="Field Marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312564" start="25145" end="25161" title="Douglas Haig" label="Sir Douglas Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239467" start="25274" end="25287" title="Red Clydeside" label="Red Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="25339" end="25346" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="25396" end="25402" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="25434" end="25448" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="25763" end="25775" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="25848" end="25855" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="25860" end="25869" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137071" start="26034" end="26049" title="Clydebank Blitz" label="Clydebank Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="26248" end="26259" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q332941" start="26336" end="26352" title="Douglas Douglas-Hamilton, 14th Duke of Hamilton" label="Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16078988" start="26418" end="26435" title="Karlheinz Pintsch" label="Karlheinz Pintsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="26459" end="26471" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="26623" end="26635" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="27260" end="27285" title="electronics manufacturing" label="electronics manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514959" start="27292" end="27304" title="Silicon Glen" label="Silicon Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="27315" end="27328" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395309" start="27418" end="27434" title="Poll tax (Great Britain)" label="Community Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="27608" end="27625" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q216045" start="27660" end="27669" title="Lockerbie" label="Lockerbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703955" start="27756" end="27794" title="Terrorism in the United Kingdom" label="terrorist attack in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690249" start="27809" end="27851" title="Scottish devolution referendum, 1997" label="referendum on devolution proposals in 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="27857" end="27874" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="27942" end="27961" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="27966" end="27985" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="28084" end="28093" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="28142" end="28168" title="first minister of Scotland" label="first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="28173" end="28185" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746031" start="28257" end="28285" title="Scottish Parliament Building" label="Scottish Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="28419" end="28446" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="28452" end="28476" title="additional member system" label="additional member system"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="28590" end="28602" title="Scottish independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="28603" end="28626" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="28634" end="28646" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="28683" end="28696" title="Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="28833" end="28883" title="Scottish independence referendum, 2014" label="September 2014 referendum on Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206069" start="29110" end="29126" title="Smith Commission" label="Smith Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24762224" start="29298" end="29328" title="Proposed second Scottish independence referendum" label="second independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="29343" end="29356" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298300" start="29357" end="29369" title="Dorothy Bain" label="Dorothy Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="29464" end="29477" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="29623" end="29640" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="29870" end="29888" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="29960" end="29974" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="30064" end="30075" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="30102" end="30114" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="30178" end="30187" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="30272" end="30279" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="30316" end="30329" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230310" start="30423" end="30437" title="Treaty of York" label="Treaty of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="30495" end="30510" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="30573" end="30584" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="30649" end="30665" title="crown dependency" label="crown dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="30715" end="30721" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="30726" end="30734" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="30781" end="30799" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062662" start="30843" end="30861" title="centre of Scotland" label="centre of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010363" start="30899" end="30909" title="Newtonmore" label="Newtonmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q45850" start="30913" end="30921" title="Badenoch" label="Badenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="30997" end="31006" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181006" start="31011" end="31019" title="Lochaber" label="Lochaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="31062" end="31071" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="31195" end="31206" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="31207" end="31215" title="ice ages" label="ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q729025" start="31419" end="31440" title="Highlands and Islands" label="Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173082" start="31474" end="31497" title="Highland Boundary Fault" label="Highland Boundary Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="31515" end="31520" title="Isle of Arran" label="Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002177" start="31524" end="31534" title="Stonehaven" label="Stonehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="31599" end="31607" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="31612" end="31623" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846077" start="31662" end="31680" title="Caledonian orogeny" label="Caledonian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="31706" end="31713" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="31801" end="31811" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="31816" end="31820" title="Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143317" start="31821" end="31829" title="Cuillins" label="Cuillins"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="31866" end="31876" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="31910" end="31922" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Last Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="32026" end="32043" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360927" start="32073" end="32084" title="Moray Firth" label="Moray Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="32096" end="32105" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="32257" end="32265" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="32267" end="32273" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="32283" end="32297" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="32302" end="32316" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="32368" end="32379" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="32384" end="32393" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q28527" start="32434" end="32441" title="machair (geography)" label="machair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327668" start="32479" end="32495" title="Central Lowlands" label="Central Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366717" start="32501" end="32512" title="rift valley" label="rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="32531" end="32540" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="32685" end="32706" title="industrial revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q712311" start="32768" end="32786" title="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Seat" label="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45828" start="32921" end="32927" title="Ochil Hills" label="Ochils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031632" start="32932" end="32945" title="Campsie Fells" label="Campsie Fells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="32977" end="32993" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="33087" end="33097" title="fault (geology)" label="fault line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011787" start="33142" end="33148" title="Girvan" label="Girvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="33152" end="33158" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="33204" end="33212" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086209" start="33309" end="33316" title="Merrick, Galloway" label="Merrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670511" start="33405" end="33416" title="Wanlockhead" label="Wanlockhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="33490" end="33499" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="33504" end="33511" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="33569" end="33580" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="33697" end="33705" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="33716" end="33727" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697" start="33733" end="33746" title="Moscow region" label="Moscow region"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="33750" end="33756" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="33766" end="33785" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="33810" end="33817" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897175" start="33916" end="33923" title="Braemar" label="Braemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="33931" end="33949" title="Grampian Mountains" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838960" start="34128" end="34141" title="Floors Castle" label="Floors Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="34143" end="34159" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="34267" end="34281" title="ocean currents" label="ocean currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="34325" end="34334" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="34336" end="34341" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="35232" end="35239" title="Northern gannet" label="gannets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="35245" end="35257" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205930" start="35337" end="35346" title="rock ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180035" start="35348" end="35361" title="mountain hare" label="mountain hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="35366" end="35371" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="35457" end="35467" title="Scots pine" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143180" start="35508" end="35526" title="Scottish crossbill" label="Scottish crossbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="35547" end="35554" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="35572" end="35582" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129059" start="35607" end="35619" title="western capercaillie" label="capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467104" start="35621" end="35637" title="Scottish wildcat" label="Scottish wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388" start="35639" end="35651" title="red squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046" start="35656" end="35667" title="pine marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="35724" end="35742" title="white-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="35756" end="35764" title="red kite" label="red kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="35835" end="35841" title="European beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="35846" end="35855" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663355" start="35893" end="35910" title="Caledonian Forest" label="Caledonian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025953" start="35927" end="35951" title="Cairngorms National Park" label="Cairngorms National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="36125" end="36131" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="36288" end="36297" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="36302" end="36312" title="coniferous" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="36333" end="36341" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="36346" end="36352" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164820" start="36470" end="36481" title="Field sports" label="field sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249440" start="36498" end="36511" title="deer stalking" label="deer stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307967" start="36516" end="36538" title="driven grouse shooting" label="driven grouse shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="36567" end="36577" title="indigenous (ecology)" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q147434" start="36630" end="36639" title="Abies grandis" label="grand fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867253" start="36655" end="36664" title="Loch Fyne" label="Loch Fyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003148" start="36695" end="36709" title="Fortingall Yew" label="Fortingall Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="36814" end="36828" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29993" start="36885" end="36894" title="bryophyte" label="bryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="37037" end="37046" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="37052" end="37065" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="37070" end="37076" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="37526" end="37545" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="37842" end="37864" title="Highland Potato Famine" label="Highland Potato Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="38352" end="38365" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="38545" end="38568" title="Population density" label="most sparsely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="38569" end="38576" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38926" end="38956" title="2021 United Kingdom census#2022 Census for Scotland" label="most recent census in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932348" start="39006" end="39034" title="National Records of Scotland" label="National Records of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="39338" end="39355" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="39365" end="39373" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="40186" end="40195" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="40298" end="40313" title="Greater Glasgow" label="Greater Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053720" start="40431" end="40443" title="Central Belt" label="Central Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="40635" end="40652" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053720" start="40697" end="40709" title="Central Belt" label="Central Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41000" end="41014" title="New towns in the United Kingdom#Scotland" label="five new towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q654226" start="41063" end="41076" title="East Kilbride" label="East Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q943351" start="41078" end="41088" title="Glenrothes" label="Glenrothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q996616" start="41090" end="41101" title="Cumbernauld" label="Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q848287" start="41103" end="41113" title="Livingston, West Lothian" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="41119" end="41125" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="41170" end="41182" title="Glasgow City Council" label="Glasgow City"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="41189" end="41197" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q645304" start="41283" end="41302" title="indigenous language" label="indigenous language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="41314" end="41319" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="41325" end="41340" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="41440" end="41460" title="linguistic continuum" label="linguistic continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="41473" end="41478" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758768" start="41573" end="41589" title="Highland English" label="Highland English"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="41653" end="41666" title="Western Isles" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="42590" end="42623" title="enlargement of the European Union" label="enlargement of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="42662" end="42669" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="42674" end="42688" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="42744" end="42749" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="42938" end="42946" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="42956" end="42962" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="43106" end="43117" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437641" start="43165" end="43182" title="Scottish-Canadian" label="Scottish-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="43489" end="43507" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="43521" end="43538" title="Catholic Church in Scotland" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="43665" end="43683" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Na h-Eileanan Siar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208271" start="43688" end="43698" title="Inverclyde" label="Inverclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775679" start="43817" end="43829" title="History of Christianity in Scotland" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="43921" end="43941" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649443" start="43955" end="43970" title="national church" label="national church"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="43976" end="43994" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380778" start="44010" end="44018" title="Kirk" label="The Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="44029" end="44039" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="44059" end="44067" title="Reformed theology" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="44105" end="44117" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="44400" end="44414" title="Roman Catholic Church in Scotland" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q354289" start="44622" end="44626" title="Uist" label="Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="44631" end="44636" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453390" start="44769" end="44792" title="Free Church of Scotland (since 1900)" label="Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="44880" end="44905" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082001" start="44938" end="44943" title="Islam in Scotland" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200884" start="44952" end="44960" title="Hinduism in Scotland" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270200" start="44996" end="45006" title="Samyé Ling" label="Samyé Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309761" start="45022" end="45033" title="Eskdalemuir" label="Eskdalemuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="45096" end="45104" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509538" start="45157" end="45182" title="Education in Scotland" label="Scottish education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258534" start="45229" end="45244" title="Liberal education" label="broad education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340862" start="45336" end="45354" title="Education Act 1496" label="Education Act 1496"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943017" start="45594" end="45618" title="First Book of Discipline" label="First Book of Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432251" start="45721" end="45741" title="School Establishment Act 1616" label="act in Privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28434588" start="46037" end="46066" title="Education (Scotland) Act 1872" label="Education (Scotland) Act 1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="46120" end="46139" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340921" start="46180" end="46198" title="Education Scotland" label="Education Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195140" start="46210" end="46235" title="Curriculum for Excellence" label="Curriculum for Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195140" start="46610" end="46635" title="Curriculum for Excellence" label="Curriculum for Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623950" start="46821" end="46836" title="List of private schools in Scotland" label="private schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110820" start="46852" end="46866" title="Education in England" label="English system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="46885" end="46889" title="GCSE" label="GCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="46895" end="46896" title="Advanced Level (UK)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="46901" end="46910" title="Advanced Level (UK)" label="AS-Levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104421" start="46939" end="46960" title="Scottish universities" label="Scottish universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027998" start="46990" end="47009" title="List of oldest universities in continuous operation" label="oldest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="47082" end="47106" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="47112" end="47133" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="47139" end="47161" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="47170" end="47193" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998530" start="47226" end="47258" title="ancient universities of Scotland" label="ancient universities of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="47330" end="47342" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="THE rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="47427" end="47467" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS&amp;#x27; World University Rankings&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="47551" end="47569" title="Academic publishing" label="published research"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933548" start="47872" end="47884" title="NHS Scotland" label="NHS Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973010" start="47953" end="47996" title="National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947" label="National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759441" start="48271" end="48308" title="Highlands and Islands Medical Service" label="Highlands and Islands Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294613" start="48396" end="48415" title="Scottish Government Health Directorates" label="Health Directorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="48477" end="48497" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="49236" end="49259" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="49287" end="49298" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="49428" end="49447" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727336" start="49467" end="49493" title="Royal Standard of Scotland" label="Royal Standard of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="49499" end="49517" title="Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom" label="royal coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059510" start="49533" end="49549" title="Duke of Rothesay" label="Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49635" end="49652" title="Great Officers of State (United Kingdom)#Scotland" label="Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="49688" end="49708" title="Order of the Thistle" label="Order of the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003221" start="49712" end="49727" title="Order of chivalry" label="chivalric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="49762" end="49794" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="49803" end="49825" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="49898" end="49907" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518229" start="50153" end="50163" title="Legislative consent motion" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="50302" end="50318" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="50324" end="50337" title="lower chamber" label="lower chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="50366" end="50387" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438021" start="50447" end="50461" title="Scottish Westminster constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="50472" end="50491" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q277020" start="50514" end="50529" title="Scotland Office" label="Scotland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="50667" end="50698" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="secretary of state for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="50716" end="50745" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q578432" start="50761" end="50771" title="Ian Murray (Scottish politician)" label="Ian Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="50841" end="50851" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="50957" end="50976" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="51058" end="51082" title="additional member system (Scottish Parliament)" label="additional member system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="51175" end="51190" title="Devolved, reserved and excepted matters" label="devolved powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="51203" end="51223" title="Devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolved parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="51353" end="51386" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="51401" end="51424" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="51467" end="51489" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Scottish Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="51491" end="51506" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="51512" end="51538" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="51547" end="51562" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q106809112" start="51619" end="51652" title="next Scottish Parliament election" label="next Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="51691" end="51710" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="51810" end="51824" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="52256" end="52268" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135556" start="52477" end="52504" title="Intergovernmental relations in the United Kingdom" label="Heads of Government Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q127699557" start="52513" end="52547" title="Council of the Nations and Regions" label="Council of the Nations and Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="52682" end="52696" title="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619348" start="52882" end="52904" title="constitution secretary" label="constitution secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="53030" end="53038" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="53056" end="53062" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633898" start="53346" end="53363" title="List of diplomatic missions of the United Kingdom" label="British embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616534" start="53646" end="53673" title="List of consular missions in Scotland" label="foreign diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="53798" end="53811" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="53871" end="53888" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="54156" end="54176" title="Government of France" label="Government of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435645" start="54190" end="54217" title="Scotland Malawi Partnership" label="Scotland Malawi Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="54308" end="54314" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="54357" end="54378" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429971" start="54557" end="54580" title="Scandinavian Scotland" label="historical and cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="54595" end="54617" title="Scandinavian countries" label="Scandinavian countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="54698" end="54704" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="54709" end="54715" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="54871" end="54885" title="Nordic Council" label="Nordic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655795" start="54943" end="54964" title="British–Irish Council" label="British–Irish Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q678630" start="54970" end="55023" title="REGLEG" label="Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971477" start="55038" end="55074" title="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly" label="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005815" start="55080" end="55126" title="Council of European Municipalities and Regions" label="Council of European Municipalities and Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q125545439" start="55132" end="55157" title="Inter-Parliamentary Forum" label="Inter-Parliamentary Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251615" start="55163" end="55205" title="Congress of Local and Regional Authorities" label="Congress of Local and Regional Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153823" start="55211" end="55249" title="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association" label="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q124785369" start="55258" end="55316" title="EU–UK Parliamentary Partnership Assembly" label="Parliamentary Partnership Assembly with the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q113485220" start="55454" end="55483" title="premiership of Jack McConnell" label="premiership of Jack McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="55523" end="55533" title="Devolution" label="Devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="55713" end="55723" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="55730" end="55756" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="55842" end="55861" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="55902" end="55919" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690249" start="55951" end="55969" title="Scottish devolution referendum, 1997" label="referendum in 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438129" start="56066" end="56081" title="Scottish variable rate" label="vary income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435631" start="56246" end="56250" title="Scotland Act 2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713000" start="56255" end="56259" title="Scotland Act 2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="56434" end="56458" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="Crown Estate in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q99340975" start="56476" end="56515" title="United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020" label="United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="56662" end="56696" title="Scottish Parliament general election, 2007" label="2007 Scottish Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="56708" end="56731" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="56754" end="56775" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="56787" end="56806" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971842" start="56847" end="56868" title="National Conversation" label="National Conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="56989" end="56999" title="federation" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="57110" end="57125" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="57131" end="57153" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Scottish Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="57163" end="57189" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152739" start="57209" end="57219" title="Calman Commission" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="57503" end="57536" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="57628" end="57663" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="57823" end="57836" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="57838" end="57844" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="57854" end="57871" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206069" start="57942" end="57952" title="Smith Commission" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q328624" start="57964" end="57999" title="Robert Smith, Baron Smith of Kelvin" label="Robert Smith, Baron Smith of Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187635" start="58063" end="58097" title="European Union Referendum Act 2015" label="European Union Referendum Act 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="58103" end="58159" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="58221" end="58235" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24762224" start="58444" end="58471" title="Proposed second Scottish independence referendum" label="new independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="58823" end="58839" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354822" start="59084" end="59099" title="Elections in Scotland" label="local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252809" start="59260" end="59267" title="Provost (civil)" label="provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259398" start="59271" end="59283" title="lord provost" label="lord provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="59365" end="59383" title="Community council" label="Community Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209499" start="59474" end="59489" title="Police Scotland" label="Police Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437729" start="59498" end="59530" title="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service" label="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q123239417" start="59795" end="59819" title="Cities of Scotland" label="eight cities in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="59821" end="59829" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="59831" end="59837" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="59839" end="59850" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="59852" end="59861" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="59863" end="59870" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="59872" end="59881" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="59883" end="59888" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="59893" end="59901" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="59903" end="59936" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="City status in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="59973" end="59987" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="60060" end="60080" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="60268" end="60283" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374814" start="60341" end="60351" title="Scots Army" label="Scots Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q666275" start="60356" end="60372" title="Royal Scots Navy" label="Royal Scots Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="60424" end="60434" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="60443" end="60455" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="60489" end="60509" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q251856" start="60515" end="60533" title="Atholl Highlanders" label="Atholl Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246182" start="60570" end="60582" title="private army" label="private army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438113" start="60756" end="60773" title="Scottish regiment" label="Scottish regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="60891" end="60903" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171116" start="60909" end="60935" title="Royal Scots Dragoon Guards" label="Royal Scots Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438006" start="60944" end="60971" title="154 (Scottish) Regiment RLC" label="154 (Scottish) Regiment RLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="60976" end="60988" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="61005" end="61025" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="Royal Logistic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254068" start="61061" end="61100" title="Delivering Security in a Changing World" label="Delivering Security in a Changing World"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="61107" end="61118" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437706" start="61159" end="61176" title="Scottish Division" label="Scottish Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038782" start="61206" end="61232" title="Royal Regiment of Scotland" label="Royal Regiment of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="61253" end="61276" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Cameron–Clegg coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621784" start="61284" end="61326" title="Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010" label="Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="61370" end="61382" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025514" start="61383" end="61391" title="Infantry of the British Army" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225253" start="61467" end="61501" title="Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division" label="Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694066" start="61601" end="61616" title="Lowland Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="Lowland Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758690" start="61621" end="61637" title="Highland Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="Highland Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625344" start="61790" end="61799" title="Holy Loch" label="Holy Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="61831" end="61838" title="Polaris ballistic missile" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="61848" end="61875" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q628776" start="61885" end="61920" title="HMNB Clyde" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Naval Base Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="61970" end="61977" title="Trident (missile)" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="61984" end="62011" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="62046" end="62063" title="nuclear deterrent" label="nuclear deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="62082" end="62092" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="62119" end="62129" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="62158" end="62166" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="62215" end="62240" title="Polaris ballistic missile" label="Polaris ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="62266" end="62280" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625344" start="62288" end="62297" title="Holy Loch" label="Holy Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="62320" end="62323" title="CND" label="CND"/>
<link wikidata="Q628776" start="62587" end="62605" title="HMNB Clyde" label="Faslane Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624860" start="62613" end="62622" title="Gare Loch" label="Gare Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="62646" end="62653" title="Trident missile" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="62769" end="62784" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164139" start="62814" end="62829" title="RAF Lossiemouth" label="RAF Lossiemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211106" start="62842" end="62847" title="Moray" label="Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="62871" end="62882" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="air defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="62883" end="62890" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="62938" end="62957" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q611401" start="62991" end="63004" title="Poseidon MRA1" label="Poseidon MRA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="63298" end="63307" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="63347" end="63356" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="63383" end="63393" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517527" start="63399" end="63415" title="Legal institutions of Scotland in the High Middle Ages" label="medieval sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876900" start="63658" end="63666" title="Udal law" label="Udal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="63670" end="63676" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="63681" end="63689" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058554" start="63757" end="63763" title="Celtic law" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q905501" start="63767" end="63778" title="Brehon laws" label="Brehon laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993654" start="63860" end="63866" title="Courts of Scotland" label="courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548873" start="63934" end="63942" title="Law of Arms" label="heraldic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="63975" end="63991" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="64008" end="64015" title="appeal (law)" label="appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="64036" end="64071" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="64103" end="64117" title="Judicial functions of the House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="64124" end="64148" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138911" start="64226" end="64242" title="Parliament House, Edinburgh" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="64294" end="64316" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q852908" start="64408" end="64418" title="Lawnmarket" label="Lawnmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494979" start="64424" end="64437" title="sheriff court" label="sheriff court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283312" start="64548" end="64563" title="District Courts of Scotland" label="District courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988501" start="64658" end="64684" title="Justice of the Peace Court" label="Justice of the Peace Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920228" start="65120" end="65130" title="not proven" label="not proven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="65206" end="65215" title="acquittal" label="acquittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="65274" end="65289" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10728581" start="65546" end="65575" title="Perverting the course of justice" label="pervert the course of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="65705" end="65718" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="65753" end="65772" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="65777" end="65786" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="66083" end="66100" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="66122" end="66133" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189419" start="66170" end="66212" title="Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service" label="Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66303" end="66326" title="Great Officers of State (United Kingdom)#Scotland" label="Great Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298300" start="66367" end="66379" title="Dorothy Bain" label="Dorothy Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154402" start="66500" end="66530" title="Solicitor General for Scotland" label="Solicitor General for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209499" start="66594" end="66609" title="Police Scotland" label="Police Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437912" start="66615" end="66638" title="Scottish Prison Service" label="Scottish Prison Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015480" start="66729" end="66775" title="Cabinet Secretary for Justice and Home Affairs" label="Cabinet Secretary for Justice and Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929451" start="66900" end="66904" title="Open economy" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="66905" end="66918" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152764" start="67226" end="67246" title="Lloyds Banking Group" label="Lloyds Banking Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="67252" end="67268" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="67291" end="67313" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q471958" start="67318" end="67331" title="Standard Life" label="Standard Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="67366" end="67397" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="list of world financial centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="67599" end="67613" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="67670" end="67686" title="steel making" label="steel industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="67751" end="67764" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="67961" end="67968" title="Tertiary sector of economic activity" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q67289065" start="67991" end="68024" title="Scottish National Investment Bank" label="Scottish National Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="69543" end="69564" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="69711" end="69717" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q652695" start="69722" end="69732" title="shortbread" label="shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="69775" end="69796" title="investment management" label="investment management"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="70058" end="70065" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="70729" end="70736" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="70737" end="70748" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="70750" end="70753" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="70758" end="70774" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="70806" end="70813" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="70884" end="70899" title="local authority" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="70941" end="70958" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="71037" end="71050" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q699405" start="71216" end="71224" title="dwelling" label="dwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="71256" end="71271" title="local authority" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="72198" end="72213" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="72221" end="72233" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091762" start="72261" end="72275" title="Clearing bank (United Kingdom)" label="clearing banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="72282" end="72290" title="Pound sterling" label="Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="72291" end="72299" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="72306" end="72322" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="72328" end="72350" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q971680" start="72359" end="72374" title="Clydesdale Bank" label="Clydesdale Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="72638" end="72649" title="retail bank" label="retail bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856312" start="72681" end="72697" title="Banking Act 2009" label="Banking Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856312" start="73017" end="73033" title="Banking Act 2009" label="Banking Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73145" end="73172" title="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies#Scotland" label="five international airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149321" start="73326" end="73356" title="Highlands and Islands Airports" label="Highlands and Islands Airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="73393" end="73402" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="73404" end="73410" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="73412" end="73420" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="73429" end="73442" title="Western Isles" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="73794" end="73802" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="73903" end="73915" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834896" start="74273" end="74291" title="Transport Scotland" label="Transport Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790993" start="74495" end="74518" title="operator of last resort" label="operator of last resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q113875955" start="74520" end="74542" title="Scottish Rail Holdings" label="Scottish Rail Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q506290" start="74615" end="74629" title="Glasgow Subway" label="Glasgow Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="74642" end="74660" title="Rapid transit" label="underground system"/>
<link wikidata="Q211044" start="74775" end="74789" title="Budapest Metro" label="Budapest Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="74798" end="74816" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622046" start="74846" end="74883" title="Strathclyde Partnership for Transport" label="Strathclyde Partnership for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="74919" end="74930" title="trunk roads" label="trunk roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="75018" end="75044" title="Scottish local authorities" label="Scottish local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="75194" end="75202" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="75235" end="75257" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="75258" end="75278" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="75296" end="75310" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q499104" start="75327" end="75332" title="Serco" label="Serco"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410089" start="75430" end="75442" title="DFDS Seaways" label="DFDS Seaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370161" start="75467" end="75499" title="Rosyth – Zeebrugge ferry service" label="Rosyth – Zeebrugge ferry service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019566" start="75791" end="75809" title="Whitelee Wind Farm" label="Whitelee Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="75833" end="75842" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q184037" start="75929" end="75940" title="Tidal power" label="Tidal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406148" start="75990" end="75996" title="MeyGen" label="MeyGen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438079" start="76812" end="76854" title="List of Scottish inventions and discoveries" label="Scotland&amp;#x27;s inventions and discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="76992" end="77002" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="77008" end="77017" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="77019" end="77032" title="refrigerators" label="refrigerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189700" start="77038" end="77049" title="MRI scanner" label="MRI scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q268534" start="77051" end="77066" title="flushing toilet" label="flushing toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="77076" end="77088" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="77237" end="77259" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="77261" end="77278" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="77356" end="77366" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="77393" end="77403" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="77419" end="77456" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99327" start="77499" end="77512" title="Falkirk Wheel" label="Falkirk Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533344" start="77521" end="77534" title="Glasgow Tower" label="Glasgow Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908" start="77584" end="77593" title="boat lift" label="boat lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973209" start="77692" end="77706" title="Space industry of Scotland" label="space industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140638" start="77780" end="77795" title="UK Space Agency" label="UK Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="78269" end="78279" title="spaceports" label="spaceports"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063893" start="78282" end="78302" title="Sutherland spaceport" label="Sutherland spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q102180898" start="78307" end="78325" title="SaxaVord Spaceport" label="SaxaVord Spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78361" end="78372" title="Orbex#Prime" label="Orbex Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="78393" end="78410" title="aerospace company" label="aerospace company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775638" start="78411" end="78416" title="Orbex" label="Orbex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048469" start="78505" end="78519" title="Scottish music" label="Scottish music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="78667" end="78689" title="Great Highland bagpipe" label="Great Highland bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085519" start="78862" end="78871" title="pipe band" label="pipe band"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="79263" end="79270" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q776563" start="79336" end="79346" title="Scottish smallpipes" label="smallpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q652470" start="79355" end="79367" title="Border pipes" label="Border pipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79370" end="79392" title="Music of Scotland#Pop, rock and fusion" label="Scottish popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q42315001" start="79453" end="79466" title="Lewis Capaldi" label="Lewis Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902" start="79468" end="79481" title="Amy Macdonald" label="Amy Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q230601" start="79483" end="79494" title="KT Tunstall" label="KT Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q510361" start="79496" end="79508" title="Nina Nesbitt" label="Nina Nesbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118436" start="79510" end="79518" title="Chvrches" label="Chvrches"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092139" start="79520" end="79534" title="Gerry Cinnamon" label="Gerry Cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313704" start="79539" end="79551" title="Paolo Nutini" label="Paolo Nutini"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="79586" end="79599" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997743" start="79615" end="79647" title="List of most-streamed artists on Spotify" label="most streamed artists on Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q83493" start="79664" end="79675" title="Susan Boyle" label="Susan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164554" start="79683" end="79694" title="I Dreamed a Dream (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068700" start="79699" end="79749" title="List of best-selling albums of the 21st century" label="one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q839817" start="79807" end="79813" title="Runrig" label="Runrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662148" start="79826" end="79837" title="Celtic rock" label="Celtic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="79866" end="79881" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130306782" start="79912" end="79929" title="An Ubhal as Àirde (The Highest Apple)" label="An Ubhal as Àirde"/>
<link wikidata="Q105821439" start="80040" end="80061" title="Scottish Music Awards" label="Scottish Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18326227" start="80063" end="80095" title="Scottish Album of the Year Award" label="Scottish Album of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435791" start="80101" end="80124" title="Scots Trad Music Awards" label="Scots Trad Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834948" start="80133" end="80178" title="BBC Radio Scotland Young Traditional Musician" label="BBC Radio Scotland Young Traditional Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="80357" end="80366" title="Brythonic languages" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204104" start="80422" end="80438" title="Welsh-language literature" label="Welsh literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="80557" end="80568" title="Early Scots" label="Early Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699264" start="80594" end="80606" title="John Barbour (poet)" label="John Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520145" start="80625" end="80629" title="The Brus" label="Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="81070" end="81086" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="81094" end="81106" title="Ossian" label="Ossian Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="81266" end="81278" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="81322" end="81334" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975429" start="81342" end="81357" title="Waverley Novels" label="Waverley Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="81555" end="81577" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="81579" end="81597" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="81599" end="81611" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="81616" end="81632" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783150" start="81659" end="81679" title="Scottish Renaissance" label="Scottish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q638783" start="81878" end="81890" title="Edwin Morgan (poet)" label="Edwin Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396507" start="81967" end="81981" title="Sorley MacLean" label="Sorley MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275733" start="82003" end="82026" title="Scottish Poetry Library" label="Scottish Poetry Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="82246" end="82259" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894514" start="82289" end="82311" title="Scottish Gaelic literature" label="Scottish Gaelic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q178403" start="82437" end="82449" title="Irvine Welsh" label="Irvine Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q237994" start="82506" end="82521" title="Carol Ann Duffy" label="Carol Ann Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="82585" end="82598" title="Poet Laureate" label="Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125354" start="82646" end="82651" title="Makar" label="Makar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131786112" start="82867" end="82883" title="Pàdraig MacAoidh" label="Pàdraig MacAoidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390965" start="82973" end="82997" title="Daily Record (Scotland)" label="&amp;quot;Daily Record&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179178" start="82999" end="83021" title="The Herald (Glasgow)" label="&amp;quot;The Herald&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="83029" end="83041" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573802" start="83058" end="83070" title="The National (Scotland)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047597" start="83146" end="83158" title="Edinburgh Evening News" label="Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727832" start="83179" end="83190" title="The Courier (Dundee)" label="The Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758095" start="83230" end="83251" title="The Press and Journal" label="The Press and Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055533" start="83321" end="83342" title="Celtic Media Festival" label="Celtic Media Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="83521" end="83533" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="83553" end="83556" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697053" start="83584" end="83603" title="Scottish television stations" label="television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834887" start="83604" end="83620" title="BBC One Scotland" label="BBC One Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754947" start="83622" end="83642" title="BBC Scotland (TV channel)" label="BBC Scotland channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84094" start="83679" end="83687" title="BBC Alba" label="BBC Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876757" start="83728" end="83746" title="BBC Radio Scotland" label="BBC Radio Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876772" start="83763" end="83785" title="BBC Radio nan Gàidheal" label="BBC Radio nan Gàidheal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198146" start="83858" end="83861" title="STV (TV network)" label="STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="83899" end="83902" title="ITV (network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="83966" end="83980" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753881" start="84128" end="84146" title="Celtic Connections" label="Celtic Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223458" start="84166" end="84191" title="Hebridean Celtic Festival" label="Hebridean Celtic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322517" start="84251" end="84284" title="Festival Interceltique de Lorient" label="Festival Interceltique de Lorient"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="84286" end="84294" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129631" start="84301" end="84320" title="Pan Celtic Festival" label="Pan Celtic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231520" start="84366" end="84379" title="Portarlington, Victoria" label="Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="84506" end="84516" title="Saint Andrew" label="St. Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="84583" end="84602" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="84623" end="84632" title="William the Lion" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="84657" end="84675" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="King Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="84719" end="84723" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552880" start="84731" end="84752" title="Guardians of Scotland" label="Guardians of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771585" start="84810" end="84821" title="interregnum" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="84884" end="84891" title="saltire" label="saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="84939" end="84961" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="85260" end="85270" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q538906" start="85375" end="85382" title="thistle" label="thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079693" start="85402" end="85415" title="national emblem" label="floral emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715" start="85441" end="85469" title="The Thistle o&amp;#x27; Scotland" label="The Thistle o&amp;#x27; Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="85476" end="85499" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="85595" end="85601" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="85636" end="85649" title="Scottish clan" label="Scottish clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727336" start="85664" end="85676" title="Royal Standard of Scotland" label="Lion Rampant"/>
<link wikidata="Q326693" start="85705" end="85739" title="James Graham, 3rd Duke of Montrose" label="James Graham, 3rd Duke of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307035" start="85771" end="85785" title="Dress Act 1746" label="Dress Act 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q119814" start="85851" end="85858" title="regalia" label="regalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848668" start="85872" end="85891" title="Honours of Scotland" label="Honours of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848668" start="85908" end="85929" title="Scottish Crown Jewels" label="Scottish Crown Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476173" start="85953" end="85970" title="Crown of Scotland" label="Crown of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139681" start="85986" end="86009" title="Scottish Sword of State" label="Scottish Sword of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="86042" end="86059" title="Scottish monarchs" label="Scottish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="86124" end="86140" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="86293" end="86306" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q965162" start="86391" end="86418" title="national anthem of Scotland" label="national anthem of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208275" start="86426" end="86444" title="Flower of Scotland" label="Flower of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q933313" start="86803" end="86821" title="Scotland the Brave" label="Scotland the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q647993" start="86835" end="86853" title="Highland Cathedral" label="Highland Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575019" start="86867" end="86880" title="Scots Wha Hae" label="Scots Wha Hae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814155" start="86897" end="86932" title="A Man&amp;#x27;s A Man for A&amp;#x27; That" label="A Man&amp;#x27;s A Man for A&amp;#x27; That"/>
<link wikidata="Q152662" start="86941" end="86961" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="86983" end="86995" title="national day" label="national day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016833" start="87006" end="87023" title="Burns&amp;#x27; Night" label="Burns&amp;#x27; Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592387" start="87133" end="87186" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="87220" end="87232" title="bank holiday" label="bank holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973122" start="87234" end="87244" title="Tartan Day" label="Tartan Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246" start="87321" end="87328" title="unicorn" label="unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="87400" end="87422" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621253" start="87433" end="87450" title="Scottish heraldry" label="Scottish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="87624" end="87631" title="British cuisine" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="87636" end="87652" title="European cuisine" label="European cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="87854" end="87858" title="Game (food)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="88003" end="88008" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q938806" start="88071" end="88078" title="Irn-Bru" label="Irn-Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="88225" end="88241" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="88246" end="88262" title="early modern era" label="early modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="88264" end="88278" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="88366" end="88379" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="88418" end="88438" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="88794" end="88808" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980635" start="88814" end="88833" title="UEFA Nations League" label="UEFA Nations League"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="88839" end="88865" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="88871" end="88892" title="Rugby Union World Cup" label="Rugby Union World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="88898" end="88920" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="88926" end="88943" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954025" start="88949" end="88966" title="Netball World Cup" label="Netball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="88975" end="88993" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="89055" end="89084" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q594917" start="89156" end="89176" title="Scottish Rugby Union" label="Scottish Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="89377" end="89385" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="89390" end="89397" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="89471" end="89483" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="89567" end="89596" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="89615" end="89629" title="sport governing body" label="governing body"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="89694" end="89734" title="International Football Association Board" label="International Football Association Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="89760" end="89776" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="Laws of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="89931" end="89935" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="89972" end="90003" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q917512" start="90012" end="90038" title="Scotland women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Scotland women&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="90065" end="90069" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110222" start="90139" end="90151" title="Golf in Scotland" label="home of golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q167245" start="90173" end="90183" title="Old Course at St Andrews" label="Old Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="90204" end="90214" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165914" start="90227" end="90232" title="links (golf)" label="links"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="90494" end="90515" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90611" end="90655" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships#Major championship winners" label="Scottish golfers winning the earliest majors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110222" start="90685" end="90709" title="Golf in Scotland" label="golf courses in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044131" start="90721" end="90731" title="Carnoustie Golf Links" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="Q525841" start="90733" end="90743" title="Gleneagles (Scotland)" label="Gleneagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951987" start="90745" end="90754" title="Muirfield" label="Muirfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q662996" start="90760" end="90771" title="Royal Troon" label="Royal Troon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024926" start="90846" end="90865" title="Murrayfield Stadium" label="Murrayfield Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="90910" end="90938" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scottish national rugby team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555312" start="90971" end="90991" title="1871 Scotland versus England rugby union match" label="their first official"/>
<link wikidata="Q13859879" start="90992" end="91002" title="Test match (rugby union)" label="test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417185" start="91035" end="91048" title="Raeburn Place" label="Raeburn Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="91087" end="91098" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421857" start="91202" end="91206" title="1999 Five Nations Championship" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124960" start="91358" end="91378" title="2023 Rugby World Cup" label="2023 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026396" start="91443" end="91455" title="Calcutta Cup" label="Calcutta Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q429399" start="91635" end="91649" title="Highland games" label="Highland games"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="91651" end="91658" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="91663" end="91669" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="91674" end="91680" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398357" start="91729" end="91741" title="Ken Buchanan" label="Ken Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q818065" start="91743" end="91754" title="Benny Lynch" label="Benny Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178965" start="91759" end="91767" title="Jim Watt (boxer)" label="Jim Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="91806" end="91816" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="91834" end="91845" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="91872" end="91887" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137" start="91889" end="91898" title="Jim Clark" label="Jim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q82768" start="91900" end="91913" title="Paul Di Resta" label="Paul Di Resta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="91919" end="91933" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="91938" end="91945" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q388732" start="91947" end="91963" title="Dario Franchitti" label="Dario Franchitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="91986" end="92013" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar world championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="92047" end="92065" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883023" start="92158" end="92187" title="List of Commonwealth Games venues" label="hosted the Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q919076" start="92253" end="92257" title="1970 British Commonwealth Games" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116471" start="92262" end="92266" title="1986 Commonwealth Games" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="92286" end="92293" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116999" start="92297" end="92301" title="2014 Commonwealth Games" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806406" start="92350" end="92373" title="2026 Commonwealth Games" label="2026 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178281" start="92439" end="92471" title="2000 Commonwealth Youth Games" label="Commonwealth Youth Games in 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112444" start="92492" end="92511" title="Outline of Scotland" label="Outline of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335087" start="93311" end="93329" title="Hugh Trevor-Roper" label="Trevor-Roper, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179549" start="93554" end="93568" title="Jenny Wormald" label="Wormald, Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="93850" end="93869" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26995" wikidata="Q662296" url="?curid=26995" title="Shire">
<text>Shire () is a traditional term for an administrative division of land in Great Britain and some other English-speaking countries. It is generally synonymous with county (such as Cheshire and Worcestershire). British counties are among the oldest extant national divisions in the world.

It was first used in Wessex from the beginning of Anglo-Saxon settlement, and spread to most of the rest of England in the 10th century. Today, 23 counties bear the &quot;-shire&quot; suffix in England, 23 in Scotland, and 10 in Wales. 

In some rural parts of Australia, a shire is a local government area; however, in Australia, it is not synonymous with a &quot;county&quot;, which is a lands administrative division.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;shire&quot; derives from the Old English , from the Proto-Germanic (), denoting an &#x27;official charge&#x27; a &#x27;district under a governor&#x27;, and a &#x27;care&#x27;. In the UK, &quot;shire&quot; became synonymous with &quot;county&quot;, an administrative term introduced to England through the Norman Conquest in the later part of the eleventh century. In contemporary British usage, the word &quot;counties&quot; also refers to shires, mainly in places such as Shire Hall.

In regions with rhotic pronunciation, such as Scotland, the word &quot;shire&quot; is pronounced ; in areas of non-rhotic pronunciation, the final &quot;R&quot; is silent, unless the next word begins in a vowel sound. In England and Wales, when &quot;shire&quot; is a place-name suffix, the vowel is unstressed and usually shortened (monophthongized); the pronunciations include and , with the final &quot;R&quot; pronunciation depending on rhoticity. The vowel is normally reduced to a single schwa, as in &quot;Leicestershire&quot; or and &quot;Berkshire&quot; or .

==Origins==
The system was first used in the kingdom of Wessex from the beginning of Anglo-Saxon settlement, and spread to most of the rest of England in the 10th century, along with the West Saxon kingdom&#x27;s political domination. In Domesday (1086) the city of York was divided into shires. The first shires of Scotland were created in English-settled areas such as Lothian and the Borders, in the 9th century. King David I more consistently created shires and appointed sheriffs across lowland &quot;shores&quot; of Scotland.

The shire in early days was governed by an &quot;ealdorman&quot; and in the later Anglo-Saxon period by a royal official known as a &quot;shire reeve&quot; or sheriff. The shires were divided into hundreds or wapentakes, although other less common sub-divisions existed. An alternative name for a shire was a &quot;sheriffdom&quot; until sheriff court reforms separated the two concepts. The phrase &quot;shire county&quot; applies, unofficially, to non-metropolitan counties in England, specifically those that are not local unitary authority areas. In Scotland the word &quot;county&quot; was not adopted for the shires. Although &quot;county&quot; appears in some texts, &quot;shire&quot; was the normal name until counties for statutory purposes were created in the 19th century. In Ireland &quot;shire&quot; was not used for the counties.

In most cases, the &quot;shire town&quot; is the seat of the shire&#x27;s government, or was historically. Sometimes the nomenclature exists even where &quot;county&quot; is used in place of &quot;shire&quot; as in, for instance, Kentville in Nova Scotia.

== Shires in the United Kingdom ==
&quot;Shire&quot; also refers, in a narrower sense, to ancient counties with names that ended in &quot;shire&quot;. These counties are typically (though not always) named after their county town. The suffix &quot;-shire&quot; is attached to most of the names of English, Scottish and Welsh counties. It tends not to be found in the names of shires that were pre-existing divisions. Essex, Kent, and Sussex, for example, have never borne a &quot;-shire&quot;, as each represents a former Anglo-Saxon kingdom. Similarly Cornwall was a British kingdom before it became an English county. The term &quot;shire&quot; is not used in the names of the six traditional counties of Northern Ireland.

===Shire names in England===

Counties in England bearing the &quot;-shire&quot; suffix are:

These counties, on their historical boundaries, cover a little more than half the area of England. The counties that do not use &quot;-shire&quot; are mainly in three areas, in the south-east, south-west and far north of England. Several of these counties no longer exist as administrative units, or have had their administrative boundaries reduced by local government reforms. Several of the successor authorities retain the &quot;-shire&quot; county names, such as North Yorkshire, East Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, and South Gloucestershire.

The county of Devon was historically known as Devonshire, although this is no longer the official name. Indeed, it was retained by the Devonshire and Dorset Regiment until amalgamation in 2007. Similarly, Dorset, Rutland and Somerset were formerly known as Dorsetshire, Rutlandshire and Somersetshire, but these terms are no longer official, and are rarely used outside the local populations.

Hexhamshire was a county in the north-east of England from the early 12th century until 1572, when it was incorporated into Northumberland.

===Shire names in Scotland===
Scotland was barely affected by the Norman conquest of England, and the word &quot;shire&quot; prevailed over &quot;county&quot; until the 19th century. Earliest sources have the same usage of the &quot;-shire&quot; suffix as in England (although in Scots this was most often ). Later, &quot;Shire&quot; appears as a separate word.

&quot;Shire&quot; names in Scotland are:

In Scotland four shires have alternative names with the &quot;-shire&quot; suffix: Angus (Forfarshire), East Lothian (Haddingtonshire), Midlothian (Edinburghshire) and West Lothian (Linlithgowshire).

Sutherland is occasionally still referred to as Sutherlandshire. Similarly, Argyllshire, Buteshire, Caithness-shire and Fifeshire are sometimes found. Also, Morayshire was previously called Elginshire. There is debate about whether Argyllshire was ever really used.

===Shire names in Wales===
Shires in Wales bearing the &quot;-shire&quot; suffix ( preceding the name in Welsh) are:

The counties of Merioneth and Glamorgan are occasionally referred to with the &quot;shire&quot; suffix. The only traditional Welsh county that never takes &quot;shire&quot; in English is Anglesey; in Welsh it is called .

===Non-county &quot;shires&quot;===
====England====
Historically, the suffix &quot;-shire&quot; could be a generalised term referring to a district. It did not acquire the strong association with county until later. Other than these, the term was used for several other districts. Bedlingtonshire, Craikshire, Norhamshire and Islandshire were exclaves of County Durham, and were incorporated into Northumberland or Yorkshire in 1844. The suffix was also used for many hundreds, wapentakes and liberties such as:

Also carrying the &quot;shire&quot; suffix were counties corporate such as Hullshire, and other districts such as Applebyshire, Bamburghshire, Carlisleshire, Coldinghamshire, Cravenshire, Hallamshire, Mashamshire and Yetholmshire.
Richmondshire was, from 1974 to 2023, the name of a local government district of North Yorkshire.
====Scotland====
Non-county shires were very common in Scotland. Kinross-shire and Clackmannanshire are arguably survivals from such districts. Non-county &quot;shires&quot; in Scotland include Coldinghamshire and Yetholmshire.

===&quot;The Shires&quot;===
Colloquially, the term &quot;the Shires&quot; has become used to refer to those counties, particularly of the southern Midlands, which are still largely rural and which are stereotypically thought of as places where a more bucolic lifestyle is possible.

==Shires in the United States==
===New York and New England===
Before the Province of New York was granted county subdivisions and a greater royal presence in 1683, the early ducal colony consisted of York Shire, as well as Albany and Ulster, after the three titles held by Prince James: Duke of York, Duke of Albany, Earl of Ulster. While these were basically renamed Dutch core settlements, they were quickly converted to English purposes, while the Dutch remained within the colony, as opposed to later practice of the Acadian Expulsion. Further Anglo-Dutch synthesis occurred when Prince James enacted the Dominion of New England and later when William III of England took over through the Glorious Revolution.

The word also survives in the name of the state of New Hampshire, whose co-founder, John Mason, named his Province of New Hampshire after the English county of Hampshire.

Vermont has 14 counties – each has one county seat or Shire, except the Shire Towns of Southwestern Vermont where there is a South Shire – Bennington and a North Shire – Manchester.

===Virginia===
In 1634, eight &quot;shires&quot; were created in the Virginia Colony by order of Charles I, King of England. They were renamed as counties only a few years later. They were:

* Accomac Shire (since 1642 Northampton County, Virginia)
* Charles City Shire (since 1637 Charles City County, Virginia)
* Charles River Shire (since 1643 York County, Virginia)
* Elizabeth City Shire (became Elizabeth City County, Virginia in 1643)
* Henrico Shire (later became Henrico County, Virginia)
* James City Shire (about 1642-43 James City County, Virginia)
* Warwick River Shire (became consolidated with the City of Newport News, Virginia)
* Warrosquyoake Shire (became Isle of Wight County, Virginia)

Today, the concept of a &quot;Shire&quot; still exists in Virginia code. It is defined as a semi-autonomous subdivision of a consolidated City-County. Currently no Shires exist in the commonwealth and the administrative provision is largely unknown.

== Shires in Australia ==
&quot;Shire&quot; is the most common word in Australia for rural local government areas (LGAs). New South Wales, the Northern Territory, Queensland, Victoria, and Western Australia, use the term &quot;shire&quot; for this unit; the territories of the Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands are also shires. In contrast, South Australia uses district and region for its rural LGA units, while Tasmania uses municipality. Shires are generally functionally indistinguishable from towns, boroughs, municipalities, or cities.

Three LGAs in outer metropolitan Sydney and four in outer metropolitan Melbourne have populations exceeding that of towns or municipalities, but retain significant bushlands and/or semi-rural areas, and most have continued to use &quot;shire&quot; in their titles whilst others have dropped it from theirs. These &quot;city-shires&quot; are:

Melbourne:

* Shire of Cardinia
* Shire of Mornington Peninsula (which is locally known as &quot;The Peninsula&quot;)
* Shire of Nillumbik (&quot;The Green Wedge Shire&quot;)
* Shire of Pakenham (1862–1994)
* Shire of Yarra Ranges

Sydney:

* Hornsby Shire (&quot;The Bushland Shire&quot;)
* Sutherland Shire (which is locally referred to as &quot;The Shire&quot;)
* The Hills Shire (&quot;The Garden Shire&quot;, previously &quot;Baulkham Hills Shire&quot;)

==See also==
* Comarca
* Comarcas of Spain
** Comarques of Catalonia
* Counties of the United Kingdom
** Counties of England
** Historic counties of Wales
** Shires of Scotland
* Gau

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="0" end="5" title="Shire" label="Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="73" end="86" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="162" end="168" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="178" end="186" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="191" end="205" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="308" end="314" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="337" end="359" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="395" end="402" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="496" end="504" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="516" end="521" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="548" end="557" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215166" start="677" end="706" title="lands administrative divisions of Australia" label="lands administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="767" end="778" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="790" end="804" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="972" end="978" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1043" end="1058" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177802" start="1211" end="1221" title="Shire Hall" label="Shire Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="1240" end="1246" title="Rhoticity in English" label="rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1270" end="1278" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423916" start="1558" end="1573" title="monophthongized" label="monophthongized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="1718" end="1723" title="schwa" label="schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="1737" end="1751" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="1771" end="1780" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="1849" end="1855" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="1878" end="1900" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="2031" end="2039" title="Domesday" label="Domesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="2059" end="2063" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="2164" end="2171" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="2180" end="2187" title="Scottish Borders" label="Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="2209" end="2221" title="David I of Scotland" label="King David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="2269" end="2276" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="2375" end="2384" title="ealdorman" label="ealdorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q553041" start="2470" end="2475" title="Reeve (England)" label="reeve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2485" end="2492" title="Sheriff#Term" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="2523" end="2531" title="hundred (county subdivision)" label="hundreds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2535" end="2545" title="hundred (country subdivision)#Wapentake" label="wapentakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494979" start="2664" end="2677" title="sheriff court" label="sheriff court"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="2776" end="2801" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="2852" end="2869" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q992432" start="3401" end="3410" title="Kentville" label="Kentville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="3414" end="3425" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="3646" end="3657" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="3845" end="3850" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="3852" end="3856" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="3862" end="3868" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q237945" start="3950" end="3969" title="Heptarchy" label="Anglo-Saxon kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="3981" end="3989" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="3996" end="4003" title="Britons (historical)" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317848" start="4107" end="4131" title="Counties of Northern Ireland" label="six traditional counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="4135" end="4151" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="4273" end="4294" title="Historic counties of England" label="historical boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="4715" end="4720" title="North Yorkshire" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="4721" end="4730" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="4732" end="4736" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="4737" end="4746" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="4748" end="4753" title="South Yorkshire" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="4754" end="4763" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="4765" end="4769" title="West Yorkshire" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="4770" end="4779" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369280" start="4785" end="4806" title="South Gloucestershire" label="South Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="4823" end="4828" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835161" start="4944" end="4974" title="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment" label="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="5014" end="5020" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="5022" end="5029" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="5034" end="5042" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q22950131" start="5203" end="5214" title="Hexhamshire" label="Hexhamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="5327" end="5341" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="5410" end="5436" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="5832" end="5837" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="5853" end="5865" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206934" start="5885" end="5895" title="Midlothian" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q67317108" start="5917" end="5929" title="West Lothian (historic)" label="West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="5950" end="5960" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="6026" end="6037" title="Argyllshire" label="Argyllshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q544009" start="6039" end="6048" title="Buteshire" label="Buteshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="6050" end="6065" title="Caithness-shire" label="Caithness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="6070" end="6079" title="Fifeshire" label="Fifeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="6254" end="6259" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q577711" start="6351" end="6360" title="Merioneth" label="Merioneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="6365" end="6374" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="6522" end="6530" title="Isle of Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="6753" end="6759" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249694" start="6838" end="6853" title="Bedlingtonshire" label="Bedlingtonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183043" start="6855" end="6865" title="Craikshire" label="Craikshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051200" start="6867" end="6878" title="Norhamshire" label="Norhamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228870" start="6883" end="6894" title="Islandshire" label="Islandshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="6900" end="6907" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177107" start="6936" end="6989" title="Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844" label="incorporated into Northumberland or Yorkshire in 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="7025" end="7032" title="hundred (division)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="7035" end="7044" title="wapentake" label="wapentake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883346" start="7050" end="7059" title="Liberty (division)" label="liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998917" start="7118" end="7136" title="county corporate" label="counties corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936115" start="7145" end="7154" title="Hullshire" label="Hullshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q621540" start="7184" end="7196" title="Applebyshire" label="Applebyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="7198" end="7211" title="Bamburghshire" label="Bamburghshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="7213" end="7226" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisleshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011149" start="7228" end="7243" title="Coldinghamshire" label="Coldinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828348" start="7245" end="7256" title="Cravenshire" label="Cravenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126045" start="7258" end="7269" title="Hallamshire" label="Hallamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330678" start="7271" end="7282" title="Mashamshire" label="Mashamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415554" start="7287" end="7299" title="Yetholmshire" label="Yetholmshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683013" start="7301" end="7314" title="Richmondshire" label="Richmondshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="7353" end="7378" title="Districts of England" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="7382" end="7397" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q784746" start="7464" end="7477" title="Kinross-shire" label="Kinross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="7482" end="7498" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011149" start="7593" end="7608" title="Coldinghamshire" label="Coldinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415554" start="7613" end="7625" title="Yetholmshire" label="Yetholmshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="7776" end="7784" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="7880" end="7887" title="bucolic" label="bucolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="7986" end="8006" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055546" start="8113" end="8123" title="Yorkshire County, New York" label="York Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="8136" end="8142" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56152" start="8147" end="8153" title="Ulster County, New York" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8186" end="8198" title="James II of England" label="Prince James"/>
<link wikidata="Q337222" start="8200" end="8212" title="Duke of York" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264490" start="8214" end="8228" title="Duke of Albany" label="Duke of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q644800" start="8230" end="8244" title="Earl of Ulster" label="Earl of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="8434" end="8451" title="Acadian Expulsion" label="Acadian Expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="8522" end="8545" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="8561" end="8583" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="8606" end="8625" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="8670" end="8675" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="8679" end="8692" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247061" start="8712" end="8722" title="John Mason (governor)" label="John Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="8734" end="8759" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="Province of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="8788" end="8797" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="9052" end="9067" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="9080" end="9089" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="9129" end="9137" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672680" start="9176" end="9189" title="Accomac Shire" label="Accomac Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49290" start="9202" end="9230" title="Northampton County, Virginia" label="Northampton County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076276" start="9234" end="9252" title="Charles City Shire" label="Charles City Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337348" start="9265" end="9294" title="Charles City County, Virginia" label="Charles City County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082085" start="9298" end="9317" title="Charles River Shire" label="Charles River Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="9330" end="9351" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362586" start="9355" end="9375" title="Elizabeth City Shire" label="Elizabeth City Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688168" start="9384" end="9415" title="Elizabeth City County, Virginia" label="Elizabeth City County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="9427" end="9440" title="Henrico Shire" label="Henrico Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="9455" end="9479" title="Henrico County, Virginia" label="Henrico County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131350" start="9483" end="9499" title="James City Shire" label="James City Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="9515" end="9542" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971185" start="9546" end="9565" title="Warwick River Shire" label="Warwick River Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="9604" end="9626" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970850" start="9630" end="9649" title="Warrosquyoake Shire" label="Warrosquyoake Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q338052" start="9658" end="9688" title="Isle of Wight County, Virginia" label="Isle of Wight County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="10013" end="10022" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="10033" end="10062" title="local government in Australia" label="local government areas (LGAs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10064" end="10079" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="10085" end="10103" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="10105" end="10115" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="10117" end="10125" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="10131" end="10148" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084186" start="10219" end="10235" title="Shire of Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105471" start="10244" end="10267" title="Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="10298" end="10313" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="10319" end="10327" title="district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="10332" end="10338" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="10370" end="10378" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="10384" end="10396" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="10455" end="10459" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="10462" end="10469" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="10472" end="10486" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="10491" end="10497" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="10533" end="10539" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="10571" end="10580" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035752" start="10857" end="10874" title="Shire of Cardinia" label="Shire of Cardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q684708" start="10877" end="10906" title="Shire of Mornington Peninsula" label="Shire of Mornington Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q175701" start="10963" end="10981" title="Shire of Nillumbik" label="Shire of Nillumbik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498476" start="11020" end="11037" title="Shire of Pakenham" label="Shire of Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q188422" start="11052" end="11073" title="Yarra Ranges Shire" label="Shire of Yarra Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q115549" start="11086" end="11099" title="Hornsby Shire" label="Hornsby Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818997" start="11135" end="11151" title="Sutherland Shire" label="Sutherland Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q115553" start="11210" end="11225" title="The Hills Shire" label="The Hills Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829" start="11318" end="11325" title="Comarca" label="Comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345234" start="11328" end="11345" title="Comarcas of Spain" label="Comarcas of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q937876" start="11349" end="11371" title="Comarques of Catalonia" label="Comarques of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379030" start="11374" end="11404" title="Counties of the United Kingdom" label="Counties of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="11408" end="11427" title="Counties of England" label="Counties of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857731" start="11431" end="11457" title="Historic counties of Wales" label="Historic counties of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="11461" end="11479" title="Shires of Scotland" label="Shires of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="11482" end="11485" title="Gau (territory)" label="Gau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26997" wikidata="Q901" url="?curid=26997" title="Scientist">
<text>A scientist is a person who researches to advance knowledge in an area of the natural sciences.

In classical antiquity, there was no real ancient analog of a modern scientist. Instead, philosophers engaged in the philosophical study of nature called natural philosophy, a precursor of natural science. Though Thales ( 624–545 BC) was arguably the first scientist for describing how cosmic events may be seen as natural, not necessarily caused by gods, it was not until the 19th century that the term &quot;scientist&quot; came into regular use after it was coined by the theologian, philosopher, and historian of science William Whewell in 1833.

==History==





The roles of &quot;scientists&quot;, and their predecessors before the emergence of modern scientific disciplines, have evolved considerably over time. Scientists of different eras (and before them, natural philosophers, mathematicians, natural historians, natural theologians, engineers, and others who contributed to the development of science) have had widely different places in society, and the social norms, ethical values, and epistemic virtues associated with scientists—and expected of them—have changed over time as well. Accordingly, many different historical figures can be identified as early scientists, depending on which characteristics of modern science are taken to be essential.

Some historians point to the Scientific Revolution that began in 16th century as the period when science in a recognizably modern form developed. It was not until the 19th century that sufficient socioeconomic changes had occurred for scientists to emerge as a major profession.

===Classical antiquity===
Knowledge about nature in classical antiquity was pursued by many kinds of scholars. Greek contributions to science—including works of geometry and mathematical astronomy, early accounts of biological processes and catalogs of plants and animals, and theories of knowledge and learning—were produced by philosophers and physicians, as well as practitioners of various trades. These roles, and their associations with scientific knowledge, spread with the Roman Empire and, with the spread of Christianity, became closely linked to religious institutions in most European countries. Astrology and astronomy became an important area of knowledge, and the role of astronomer/astrologer developed with the support of political and religious patronage. By the time of the medieval university system, knowledge was divided into the &quot;trivium&quot;—philosophy, including natural philosophy—and the &quot;quadrivium&quot;—mathematics, including astronomy. Hence, the medieval analogs of scientists were often either philosophers or mathematicians. Knowledge of plants and animals was broadly the province of physicians.

===Middle Ages===
Science in medieval Islam generated some new modes of developing natural knowledge, although still within the bounds of existing social roles such as philosopher and mathematician. Many proto-scientists from the Islamic Golden Age are considered polymaths, in part because of the lack of anything corresponding to modern scientific disciplines. Many of these early polymaths were also religious priests and theologians: for example, Alhazen and al-Biruni were mutakallimiin; the physician Avicenna was a hafiz; the physician Ibn al-Nafis was a hafiz, muhaddith and ulema; the botanist Otto Brunfels was a theologian and historian of Protestantism; the astronomer and physician Nicolaus Copernicus was a priest. During the Italian Renaissance scientists like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Galileo Galilei and Gerolamo Cardano have been considered the most recognizable polymaths.

===Renaissance===
During the Renaissance, Italians made substantial contributions in science. Leonardo da Vinci made significant discoveries in paleontology and anatomy. The Father of modern Science,
Galileo Galilei, made key improvements on the thermometer and telescope which allowed him to observe and clearly describe the solar system. Descartes was not only a pioneer of analytic geometry but formulated a theory of mechanics and advanced ideas about the origins of animal movement and perception. Vision interested the physicists Young and Helmholtz, who also studied optics, hearing and music. Newton extended Descartes&#x27;s mathematics by inventing calculus (at the same time as Leibniz). He provided a comprehensive formulation of classical mechanics and investigated light and optics. Fourier founded a new branch of mathematics — infinite, periodic series — studied heat flow and infrared radiation, and discovered the greenhouse effect. Girolamo Cardano, Blaise Pascal Pierre de Fermat, Von Neumann, Turing, Khinchin, Markov and Wiener, all mathematicians, made major contributions to science and probability theory, including the ideas behind computers, and some of the foundations of statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics. Many mathematically inclined scientists, including Galileo, were also musicians.

There are many compelling stories in medicine and biology, such as the development of ideas about the circulation of blood from Galen to Harvey. Some scholars and historians attributes Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution.

===Age of Enlightenment===
During the age of Enlightenment, Luigi Galvani, the pioneer of bioelectromagnetics, discovered animal electricity. He discovered that a charge applied to the spinal cord of a frog could generate muscular spasms throughout its body. Charges could make frog legs jump even if the legs were no longer attached to a frog. While cutting a frog leg, Galvani&#x27;s steel scalpel touched a brass hook that was holding the leg in place. The leg twitched. Further experiments confirmed this effect, and Galvani was convinced that he was seeing the effects of what he called animal electricity, the life force within the muscles of the frog. At the University of Pavia, Galvani&#x27;s colleague Alessandro Volta was able to reproduce the results, but was sceptical of Galvani&#x27;s explanation.

Lazzaro Spallanzani is one of the most influential figures in experimental physiology and the natural sciences. His investigations have exerted a lasting influence on the medical sciences. He made important contributions to the experimental study of bodily functions and animal reproduction.

Francesco Redi discovered that microorganisms can cause disease.

===19th century===
Until the late 19th or early 20th century, scientists were still referred to as &quot;natural philosophers&quot; or &quot;men of science&quot;.

English philosopher and historian of science William Whewell coined the term &quot;scientist&quot; in 1833, and it first appeared in print in Whewell&#x27;s anonymous 1834 review of Mary Somerville&#x27;s &quot;On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences&quot; published in the &quot;Quarterly Review&quot;. Whewell wrote of &quot;an increasing proclivity of separation and dismemberment&quot; in the sciences; while highly specific terms proliferated—chemist, mathematician, naturalist—the broad term &quot;philosopher&quot; was no longer satisfactory to group together those who pursued science, without the caveats of &quot;natural&quot; or &quot;experimental&quot; philosopher. Whewell compared these increasing divisions with Somerville&#x27;s aim of &quot;[rendering] a most important service to science&quot; &quot;by showing how detached branches have, in the history of science, united by the discovery of general principles.&quot; Whewell reported in his review that members of the British Association for the Advancement of Science had been complaining at recent meetings about the lack of a good term for &quot;students of the knowledge of the material world collectively.&quot; Alluding to himself, he noted that &quot;some ingenious gentleman proposed that, by analogy with &quot;artist&quot;, they might form [the word] &quot;scientist&quot;, and added that there could be no scruple in making free with this term since we already have such words as &quot;economist&quot;, and &quot;atheist&quot;—but this was not generally palatable&quot;.

Whewell proposed the word again more seriously (and not anonymously) in his 1840 &quot;The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences&quot;:

He also proposed the term &quot;physicist&quot; at the same time, as a counterpart to the French word &quot;physicien&quot;. Neither term gained wide acceptance until decades later; &quot;scientist&quot; became a common term in the late 19th century in the United States and around the turn of the 20th century in Great Britain. By the twentieth century, the modern notion of science as a special brand of information about the world, practiced by a distinct group and pursued through a unique method, was essentially in place.

===20th century===
Marie Curie became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize and the first person to win it twice. Her efforts led to the development of nuclear energy and Radiotherapy for the treatment of cancer. In 1922, she was appointed a member of the International Commission on Intellectual Co-operation by the Council of the League of Nations. She campaigned for scientist&#x27;s right to patent their discoveries and inventions. She also campaigned for free access to international scientific literature and for internationally recognized scientific symbols.

==Profession==
As a profession, the scientist of today is widely recognized. However, there is no formal process to determine who is a scientist and who is not a scientist. Anyone can be a scientist in some sense. Some professions have legal requirements for their practice (e.g. licensure) and some scientists are independent scientists meaning that they practice science on their own, but to practice science there are no known licensure requirements.

===Education===
In modern times, many professional scientists are trained in an academic setting (e.g., universities and research institutes), mostly at the level of graduate schools. Upon completion, they would normally attain an academic degree, with the highest degree being a doctorate such as a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD). Although graduate education for scientists varies among institutions and countries, some common training requirements include specializing in an area of interest, publishing research findings in peer-reviewed scientific journals and presenting them at scientific conferences, giving lectures or teaching, and defending a thesis (or dissertation) during an oral examination. To aid them in this endeavor, graduate students often work under the guidance of a mentor, usually a senior scientist, which may continue after the completion of their doctorates whereby they work as postdoctoral researchers.

===Career===
After the completion of their training, many scientists pursue careers in a variety of work settings and conditions. In 2017, the British scientific journal &quot;Nature&quot; published the results of a large-scale survey of more than 5,700 doctoral students worldwide, asking them which sectors of the economy they would like to work in. A little over half of the respondents wanted to pursue a career in academia, with smaller proportions hoping to work in industry, government, and nonprofit environments.

Other motivations are recognition by their peers and prestige. The Nobel Prize, a widely regarded prestigious award, is awarded annually to those who have achieved scientific advances in the fields of medicine, physics, and chemistry.

Some scientists have a desire to apply scientific knowledge for the benefit of people&#x27;s health, the nations, the world, nature, or industries (academic scientist and industrial scientist). Scientists tend to be less motivated by direct financial reward for their work than other careers. As a result, scientific researchers often accept lower average salaries when compared with many other professions which require a similar amount of training and qualification.

====Research interests====
Scientists include experimentalists who mainly perform experiments to test hypotheses, and theoreticians who mainly develop models to explain existing data and predict new results. There is a continuum between the two activities and the division between them is not clear-cut, with many scientists performing both tasks.

Those considering science as a career often look to the frontiers. These include cosmology and biology, especially molecular biology and the human genome project. Other areas of active research include the exploration of matter at the scale of elementary particles as described by high-energy physics, and materials science, which seeks to discover and design new materials. Others choose to study brain function and neurotransmitters, which is considered by many to be the &quot;final frontier&quot;. There are many important discoveries to make regarding the nature of the mind and human thought, much of which still remains unknown.

===By specialization===

====Natural science====
=====Physical science=====
=====Life science=====

====Social science====
====Formal science====
====Applied====
====Interdisciplinary====
===By employer===
* Academic
* Independent scientist
* Industrial/applied scientist
* Citizen scientist
* Government scientist

==Demography==

=== By country ===
The number of scientists is vastly different from country to country. For instance, there are only four full-time scientists per 10,000 workers in India, while this number is 79 for the United Kingdom, and 85 for the United States.
==== United States ====
According to the National Science Foundation, 4.7 million people with science degrees worked in the United States in 2015, across all disciplines and employment sectors. The figure included twice as many men as women. Of that total, 17% worked in academia, that is, at universities and undergraduate institutions, and men held 53% of those positions. 5% of scientists worked for the federal government, and about 3.5% were self-employed. Of the latter two groups, two-thirds were men. 59% of scientists in the United States were employed in industry or business, and another 6% worked in non-profit positions.

=== By gender ===

Scientist and engineering statistics are usually intertwined, but they indicate that women enter the field far less than men, though this gap is narrowing. The number of science and engineering doctorates awarded to women rose from a mere 7 percent in 1970 to 34 percent in 1985 and in engineering alone the numbers of bachelor&#x27;s degrees awarded to women rose from only 385 in 1975 to more than 11000 in 1985. 

==See also==
* Engineers
* Inventor
* Researcher
* Fields Medal
* Hippocratic Oath for Scientists
* History of science
* Intellectual
* Independent scientist
* Licensure
* Mad scientist
* Natural science
* Nobel Prize
* Protoscience
* Normative science
* Pseudoscience
* Scholar
* Science
* Social science

; Related lists
* List of engineers
* List of mathematicians
* List of Nobel laureates in Physics
* List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry
* List of Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine
* List of Russian scientists
* List of Roman Catholic cleric-scientists

==References==
==External articles==
; Further reading
* Alison Gopnik, &quot;Finding Our Inner Scientist&quot; , Daedalus, Winter 2004.
* Charles George Herbermann, The Catholic Encyclopedia. &quot;Science and the Church&quot;. The Encyclopedia press, 1913. v.13. Page 598.
* Thomas Kuhn, &quot;The Structure of Scientific Revolutions&quot;, 1962.
* Arthur Jack Meadows. &quot;The Victorian Scientist: The Growth of a Profession&quot;, 2004. .
* Science, &quot;The Relation of Pure Science to Industrial Research&quot;. American Association for the Advancement of Science. Page 511 onwards.

; Websites
* For best results, add a little inspiration – The Telegraph about &quot;What Inspired You?&quot;, a survey of key thinkers in science, technology and medicine
* Peer Review Journal Science on amateur scientists
* The philosophy of the inductive sciences, founded upon their history (1847) – Complete Text

; Audio-Visual
* &quot;The Scientist&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Gribbin, Patricia Fara and Hugh Pennington (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, Oct. 24, 2002)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="2" end="11" title="Scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="28" end="38" title="Scientific method" label="researches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="66" end="70" title="Branches of science" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="78" end="93" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="100" end="119" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="186" end="197" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="251" end="269" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="286" end="301" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="310" end="316" title="Thales" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601596" start="474" end="486" title="19th century in science" label="19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="572" end="582" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="584" end="595" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q333922" start="622" end="637" title="William Whewell" label="William Whewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="1065" end="1077" title="social norms" label="social norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="1079" end="1093" title="ethical values" label="ethical values"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383593" start="1099" end="1116" title="epistemic virtues" label="epistemic virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="1393" end="1414" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317376" start="1670" end="1715" title="History of science in classical antiquity" label="Knowledge about nature in classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1755" end="1760" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1973" end="1984" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1990" end="1999" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2125" end="2137" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2152" end="2174" title="History of Christianity#Roman Empire" label="spread of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="2252" end="2261" title="Astrology" label="Astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2266" end="2275" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="2407" end="2416" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="2437" end="2456" title="medieval university" label="medieval university"/>
<link wikidata="Q205186" start="2502" end="2509" title="Trivium (education)" label="trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="2538" end="2556" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273822" start="2571" end="2581" title="quadrivium" label="quadrivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="2805" end="2830" title="Science in medieval Islam" label="Science in medieval Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="3017" end="3035" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="3051" end="3059" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="3126" end="3147" title="scientific discipline" label="scientific discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="3200" end="3206" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="3212" end="3223" title="Theology" label="theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="3238" end="3245" title="Alhazen" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="3250" end="3259" title="Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="3265" end="3278" title="Kalam" label="mutakallimiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="3294" end="3302" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q625163" start="3309" end="3314" title="Hafiz (Quran)" label="hafiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319146" start="3330" end="3342" title="Ibn al-Nafis" label="Ibn al-Nafis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172458" start="3356" end="3365" title="muhaddith" label="muhaddith"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="3370" end="3375" title="ulema" label="ulema"/>
<link wikidata="Q63206" start="3390" end="3403" title="Otto Brunfels" label="Otto Brunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="3482" end="3501" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="3527" end="3546" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="3563" end="3580" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="3582" end="3594" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="3596" end="3611" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="3616" end="3632" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3717" end="3728" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3730" end="3738" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="3782" end="3799" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="3888" end="3903" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="4028" end="4037" title="René Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="4064" end="4081" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="4099" end="4105" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="4109" end="4118" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="4159" end="4174" title="muscle contraction" label="animal movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="4179" end="4189" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="4191" end="4197" title="Visual perception" label="Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="4213" end="4222" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="4224" end="4229" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="4234" end="4243" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="4262" end="4268" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="4270" end="4277" title="Hearing (sense)" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="4282" end="4287" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="4289" end="4295" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="4347" end="4355" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="4377" end="4384" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="4430" end="4449" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4467" end="4472" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772" start="4485" end="4492" title="Joseph Fourier" label="Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="4531" end="4556" title="Fourier series" label="infinite, periodic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="4567" end="4571" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4572" end="4576" title="flux#Flux definition and theorems" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4581" end="4599" title="infrared" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="4620" end="4637" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="4639" end="4655" title="Girolamo Cardano" label="Girolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="4657" end="4670" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="4671" end="4687" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="4689" end="4700" title="John von Neumann" label="Von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="4702" end="4708" title="Alan Turing" label="Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q723638" start="4710" end="4718" title="Aleksandr Khinchin" label="Khinchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176659" start="4720" end="4726" title="Andrey Markov" label="Markov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178577" start="4731" end="4737" title="Norbert Wiener" label="Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="4799" end="4817" title="probability" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="4846" end="4854" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="4888" end="4909" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="4914" end="4931" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="4984" end="4991" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="5003" end="5011" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="5052" end="5060" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="5065" end="5072" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="5132" end="5137" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="5143" end="5148" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93128" start="5152" end="5158" title="William Harvey" label="Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5200" end="5212" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="5254" end="5275" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589" start="5338" end="5351" title="Luigi Galvani" label="Luigi Galvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119288" start="5368" end="5387" title="bioelectromagnetics" label="bioelectromagnetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="5944" end="5963" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680" start="5990" end="6006" title="Alessandro Volta" label="Alessandro Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q213351" start="6092" end="6111" title="Lazzaro Spallanzani" label="Lazzaro Spallanzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q311187" start="6385" end="6399" title="Francesco Redi" label="Francesco Redi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="6416" end="6429" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="6441" end="6448" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="6556" end="6576" title="Natural philosophy" label="natural philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q333922" start="6660" end="6675" title="William Whewell" label="William Whewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q268702" start="6797" end="6812" title="Mary Somerville" label="Mary Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307984" start="6826" end="6867" title="On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences" label="On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="6897" end="6913" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="7605" end="7655" title="British Association for the Advancement of Science" label="British Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="8084" end="8093" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="8111" end="8118" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8620" end="8633" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="8854" end="8865" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075804" start="9684" end="9693" title="licensure" label="licensure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015326" start="9719" end="9740" title="independent scientist" label="independent scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075804" start="9834" end="9843" title="licensure" label="licensure"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="9939" end="9955" title="Academy" label="academic setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="9963" end="9975" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="9980" end="9998" title="research institute" label="research institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="10025" end="10040" title="graduate school" label="graduate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="10090" end="10105" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="10139" end="10148" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="10159" end="10179" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="10196" end="10214" title="Postgraduate education" label="graduate education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671303" start="10313" end="10325" title="Academic specialization" label="specializing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="10332" end="10336" title="Branches of science" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="10382" end="10395" title="Peer review" label="peer-reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="10396" end="10414" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020153" start="10439" end="10461" title="Academic conference" label="scientific conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q603773" start="10470" end="10477" title="lecture" label="lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="10482" end="10490" title="Teacher" label="teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="10508" end="10532" title="Thesis" label="thesis (or dissertation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099387" start="10543" end="10552" title="oral exam" label="oral exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="10644" end="10650" title="Mentorship" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="10761" end="10784" title="postdoctoral researcher" label="postdoctoral researcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="10939" end="10957" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="10964" end="10970" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="11089" end="11111" title="Economic sector" label="sectors of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="11378" end="11389" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="11512" end="11520" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="11522" end="11529" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="11535" end="11544" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="11718" end="11738" title="industrial scientist" label="industrial scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="12063" end="12073" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="12135" end="12148" title="Scientific theory" label="theoreticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116876" start="12168" end="12174" title="Scientific modelling" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q282049" start="12397" end="12403" title="career" label="career"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="12447" end="12456" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="12461" end="12468" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="12481" end="12498" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="12507" end="12519" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="12587" end="12593" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="12610" end="12629" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="12647" end="12666" title="particle physics" label="high-energy physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="12672" end="12689" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="12764" end="12769" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="12783" end="12799" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="12941" end="12945" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="12950" end="12955" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="12956" end="12963" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="13211" end="13219" title="Academic" label="Academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015326" start="13222" end="13243" title="Independent scientist" label="Independent scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="13246" end="13274" title="Applied science" label="Industrial/applied scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093434" start="13277" end="13294" title="Citizen scientist" label="Citizen scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589427" start="13297" end="13317" title="Government scientist" label="Government scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="13627" end="13654" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13710" end="13723" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="14672" end="14681" title="Engineers" label="Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="14684" end="14692" title="Inventor" label="Inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="14695" end="14705" title="Researcher" label="Researcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="14708" end="14720" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768434" start="14723" end="14754" title="Hippocratic Oath for Scientists" label="Hippocratic Oath for Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="14757" end="14775" title="History of science" label="History of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="14778" end="14790" title="Intellectual" label="Intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015326" start="14793" end="14814" title="Independent scientist" label="Independent scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075804" start="14817" end="14826" title="Licensure" label="Licensure"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="14829" end="14842" title="Mad scientist" label="Mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="14845" end="14860" title="Natural science" label="Natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="14863" end="14874" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q375843" start="14877" end="14889" title="Protoscience" label="Protoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999851" start="14892" end="14909" title="Normative science" label="Normative science"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="14912" end="14925" title="Pseudoscience" label="Pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="14928" end="14935" title="Scholar" label="Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="14938" end="14945" title="Science" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="14948" end="14962" title="Social science" label="Social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q337064" start="14982" end="14999" title="List of engineers" label="List of engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66777993" start="15002" end="15024" title="List of mathematicians" label="List of mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="15027" end="15061" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="List of Nobel laureates in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564201" start="15064" end="15100" title="List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry" label="List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450499" start="15103" end="15152" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine" label="List of Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984686" start="15155" end="15181" title="List of Russian scientists" label="List of Russian scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115122" start="15184" end="15224" title="List of Roman Catholic cleric-scientists" label="List of Roman Catholic cleric-scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647225" start="15283" end="15296" title="Alison Gopnik" label="Alison Gopnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270415" start="15340" end="15348" title="Daedalus (journal)" label="Daedalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184980" start="15503" end="15514" title="Thomas Samuel Kuhn" label="Thomas Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q951060" start="15522" end="15561" title="The Structure of Scientific Revolutions" label="The Structure of Scientific Revolutions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27000" wikidata="Q169994" url="?curid=27000" title="Smog">
<text>Smog, or smoke fog, is a type of intense air pollution. The word &quot;smog&quot; was coined in the early 20th century, and is a portmanteau of the words &quot;smoke&quot; and &quot;fog&quot; to refer to smoky fog due to its opacity, and odour. The word was then intended to refer to what was sometimes known as pea soup fog, a familiar and serious problem in London from the 19th century to the mid-20th century, where it was commonly known as a London particular or London fog. This kind of visible air pollution is composed of nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxide, ozone, smoke and other particulates. Man-made smog is derived from coal combustion emissions, vehicular emissions, industrial emissions, forest and agricultural fires and photochemical reactions of these emissions.

Smog is often categorized as being either summer smog or winter smog. Summer smog is primarily associated with the photochemical formation of ozone. During the summer season when the temperatures are warmer and there is more sunlight present, photochemical smog is the dominant type of smog formation. During the winter months when the temperatures are colder, and atmospheric inversions are common, there is an increase in coal and other fossil fuel usage to heat homes and buildings. These combustion emissions, together with the lack of pollutant dispersion under inversions, characterize winter smog formation. Smog formation in general relies on both primary and secondary pollutants. Primary pollutants are emitted directly from a source, such as emissions of sulfur dioxide from coal combustion. Secondary pollutants, such as ozone, are formed when primary pollutants undergo chemical reactions in the atmosphere.

Photochemical smog, as found for example in Los Angeles, is a type of air pollution derived from vehicular emission from internal combustion engines and industrial fumes. These pollutants react in the atmosphere with sunlight to form secondary pollutants that also combine with the primary emissions to form photochemical smog. In certain other cities, such as Delhi, smog severity is often aggravated by stubble burning in neighboring agricultural areas since the 1980s. The atmospheric pollution levels of Los Angeles, Beijing, Delhi, Lahore, Mexico City, Tehran and other cities are often increased by an inversion that traps pollution close to the ground. The developing smog is usually toxic to humans and can cause severe sickness, a shortened life span, or premature death.

== Etymology ==
Coinage of the term &quot;smog&quot; has been attributed to Henry Antoine Des Voeux in his 1905 paper, &quot;Fog and Smoke&quot; for a meeting of the Public Health Congress. The 26 July 1905 edition of the London newspaper &quot;Daily Graphic&quot; quoted Des Voeux, &quot;He said it required no science to see that there was something produced in great cities which was not found in the country, and that was smoky fog, or what was known as &#x27;smog&#x27;.&quot; The following day the newspaper stated that &quot;Dr. Des Voeux did a public service in coining a new word for the London fog.&quot;

However, the term appeared twenty-five years earlier than Voeux&#x27;s paper, in the Santa Cruz &amp; Monterey Illustrated Handbook published in 1880 and also appears in print in a column quoting from the book in the 3 July 1880, Santa Cruz Weekly Sentinel. On 17 December 1881, in the publication &quot;Sporting Times,&quot; the author claims to have invented the word: &quot;The &#x27;Smog&#x27;a word I have invented, combined of smoke and fog, to designate the London atmosphere...&quot;

==Anthropogenic causes==
===Coal===
Coal fire can emit significant clouds of smoke that contribute to the formation of winter smog. Coal fires can be used to heat individual buildings or to provide energy in a power-producing plant. Air pollution from this source has been reported in England since the Middle Ages. London, in particular, was notorious up through the mid-20th century for its coal-caused smogs, which were nicknamed &quot;pea-soupers&quot;. Air pollution of this type is still a problem in areas that generate significant smoke from burning coal. The emissions from coal combustion are one of the main causes of air pollution in China. Especially during autumn and winter when coal-fired heating ramps up, the amount of produced smoke at times forces some Chinese cities to close down roads, schools or airports. One prominent example for this was China&#x27;s Northeastern city of Harbin in 2013.

===Transportation emissions===
Traffic emissions – such as from trucks, buses, and automobiles – also contribute to the formation of smog. Airborne by-products from vehicle exhaust systems and air conditioning cause air pollution and are a major ingredient in the creation of smog in some large cities.

The major culprits from transportation sources are carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2) and volatile organic compounds including hydrocarbons (hydrocarbons are the main component of petroleum fuels such as gasoline and diesel fuel). Transportation emissions also include sulfur dioxides and particulate matter but in much smaller quantities than the pollutants mentioned previously. The nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds can undergo a series of chemical reactions with sunlight, heat, ammonia, moisture, and other compounds to form the noxious vapors, ground level ozone, and particles that comprise smog.

== Photochemical smog ==
Photochemical smog, often referred to as &quot;summer smog&quot;, is the chemical reaction of sunlight, nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds in the atmosphere, which leaves airborne particles and ground-level ozone. Photochemical smog depends on primary pollutants as well as the formation of secondary pollutants. These primary pollutants include nitrogen oxides, particularly nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and volatile organic compounds. The relevant secondary pollutants include peroxylacyl nitrates (PAN), tropospheric ozone, and aldehydes. An important secondary pollutant for photochemical smog is ozone, which is formed when hydrocarbons (HC) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) combine in the presence of sunlight; nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which is formed as nitric oxide (NO) combines with oxygen (O2) in the air. In addition, when SO2 and NOx are emitted they eventually are oxidized in the troposphere to nitric acid and sulfuric acid, which, when mixed with water, form the main components of acid rain. All of these harsh chemicals are usually highly reactive and oxidizing. Photochemical smog is therefore considered to be a problem of modern industrialization. It is present in all modern cities, but it is more common in cities with sunny, warm, dry climates and a large number of motor vehicles. Because it travels with the wind, it can affect sparsely populated areas as well.
The composition and chemical reactions involved in photochemical smog were not understood until the 1950s. In 1948, flavor chemist Arie Haagen-Smit adapted some of his equipment to collect chemicals from polluted air, and identified ozone as a component of Los Angeles smog. Haagen-Smit went on to discover that nitrogen oxides from automotive exhausts and gaseous hydrocarbons from cars and oil refineries, exposed to sunlight, were key ingredients in the formation of ozone and photochemical smog. Haagen-Smit worked with Arnold Beckman, who developed various equipment for detecting smog, ranging from an &quot;Apparatus for recording gas concentrations in the atmosphere&quot; patented on 7 October 1952, to &quot;air quality monitoring vans&quot; for use by government and industry.

=== Formation and reactions ===
During the morning rush hour, a high concentration of nitric oxide and hydrocarbons are emitted to the atmosphere, mostly via on-road traffic but also from industrial sources. Some hydrocarbons are rapidly oxidized by OH· and form peroxy radicals, which convert nitric oxide (NO) to nitrogen dioxide (NO2).

:(1) 

:(2) 

:(3) 

Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and nitric oxide (NO) further react with ozone (O3) in a series of chemical reactions:

:(4) λ &lt; 400 nm

:(5) 

:(6) 

This series of equations is referred to as the photostationary state (PSS). However, because of the presence of Reaction 2 and 3, NOx and ozone are not in a perfectly steady state. By replacing Reaction 6 with Reaction 2 and Reaction 3, the O3 molecule is no longer destroyed. Therefore, the concentration of ozone keeps increasing throughout the day. This mechanism can escalate the formation of ozone in smog. Other reactions such as the photooxidation of formaldehyde (HCHO), a common secondary pollutant, can also contribute to the increased concentration of ozone and NO2. Photochemical smog is more prevalent during summer days since incident solar radiation fluxes are high, which favors the formation of ozone (reactions 4 and 5). The presence of a temperature inversion layer is another important factor. That is because it prevents the vertical convective mixing of the air and thus allows the pollutants, including ozone, to accumulate near the ground level, which again favors the formation of photochemical smog.

There are certain reactions that can limit the formation of O3 in smog. The main limiting reaction in polluted areas is:

:(7) 

This reaction removes NO2 which limits the amount of O3 that can be produced from its photolysis (reaction 4). HNO3, nitric acid, is a sticky compound that can easily be removed onto surfaces (dry deposition) or dissolved in water and be rained out (wet deposition). Both ways are common in the atmosphere and can efficiently remove radicals and nitrogen dioxide.

===Natural causes===
====Volcanoes====
An erupting volcano can emit high levels of sulfur dioxide along with a large quantity of particulate matter; two key components to the creation of smog. However, the smog created as a result of a volcanic eruption is often known as vog to distinguish it as a natural occurrence. The chemical reactions that form smog following a volcanic eruption are different than the reactions that form photochemical smog. The term smog encompasses the effect when a large number of gas-phase molecules and particulate matter are emitted to the atmosphere, creating a visible haze. The event causing a large number of emissions can vary but still result in the formation of smog.

====Plants====
Plants are a natural source of hydrocarbons that can undergo reactions in the atmosphere and produce smog. Globally both plants and soil contribute a substantial amount to the production of hydrocarbons, mainly by producing isoprene and terpenes. Hydrocarbons released by plants can often be more reactive than man-made hydrocarbons. For example when plants release isoprene, the isoprene reacts very quickly in the atmosphere with hydroxyl radicals. These reactions produce hydroperoxides which increase ozone formation.

== Health effects ==
Smog is a serious problem in many cities and continues to harm human health. Ground-level ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide are especially harmful for senior citizens, children, and people with heart and lung conditions such as emphysema, bronchitis, and asthma. It can inflame breathing passages, decrease the lungs&#x27; working capacity, cause shortness of breath, pain when inhaling deeply, wheezing, and coughing. It can cause eye and nose irritation and it dries out the protective membranes of the nose and throat and interferes with the body&#x27;s ability to fight infection, increasing susceptibility to illness. Hospital admissions and respiratory deaths often increase during periods when ozone levels are high.

There is a lack of knowledge on the long-term effects of air pollution exposure and the origin of asthma. An experiment was carried out using intense air pollution similar to that of the 1952 Great Smog of London. The results from this experiment concluded that there is a link between early-life pollution exposure that leads to the development of asthma, proposing the ongoing effect of the Great Smog.
Modern studies continue to find links between mortality and the presence of smog. One study, published in Nature magazine, found that smog episodes in the city of Jinan, a large city in eastern China, during 2011–15, were associated with a 5.87% (95% CI 0.16–11.58%) increase in the rate of overall mortality. This study highlights the effect of exposure to air pollution on the rate of mortality in China. A similar study in Xi&#x27;an found an association between ambient air pollution and increased mortality associated with respiratory diseases.

===Levels of unhealthy exposure===
The U.S. EPA has developed an air quality index to help explain air pollution levels to the general public. 8 hour average ozone concentrations of 85 to 104 ppbv are described as &quot;Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups&quot;, 105 ppbv to 124 ppbv as &quot;unhealthy&quot; and 125 ppb to 404 ppb as &quot;very unhealthy&quot;. The &quot;very unhealthy&quot; range for some other pollutants are: 355 μg m−3 – 424 μg m−3 for PM10; 15.5 ppm – 30.4ppm for CO and 0.65 ppm – 1.24 ppm for NO2.

===Premature deaths due to cancer and respiratory disease===
In 2016, the Ontario Medical Association announced that smog is responsible for an estimated 9,500 premature deaths in the province each year.

A 20-year American Cancer Society study found that cumulative exposure also increases the likelihood of premature death from respiratory disease, implying the 8-hour standard may be insufficient.

===Alzheimer risk===
Tiny magnetic particles from air pollution have for the first time been discovered to be lodged in human brains– and researchers think they could be a possible cause of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease.
Researchers at Lancaster University found abundant magnetite nanoparticles in the brain tissue from 37 individuals aged three to 92-years-old who lived in Mexico City and Manchester. This strongly magnetic mineral is toxic and has been implicated in the production of reactive oxygen species (free radicals) in the human brain, which is associated with neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer&#x27;s disease.

===Risk of certain birth defects===
A study examining 806 women who had babies with birth defects between 1997 and 2006, and 849 women who had healthy babies, found that smog in the San Joaquin Valley area of California was linked to two types of neural tube defects: spina bifida (a condition involving, among other manifestations, certain malformations of the spinal column), and anencephaly (the underdevelopment or absence of part or all of the brain, which if not fatal usually results in profound impairment). An emerging cohort study in China linked early-life smog exposure to an increased risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes, in particular oxidative stress.

===Low birth weight===
According to a study published in The Lancet, even a very small (5 μg) change in PM2.5 exposure was associated with an increase (18%) in risk of a low birth weight at delivery, and this relationship held even below the current accepted safe levels.

== Other negative effects ==
Although severe health effects caused by smog are the chief issue, intense air pollution caused by haze from air pollution, dust storm particles, and bush fire smoke, cause a reduction in irradiance that hurts both solar photovoltaic production as well as agricultural yield.

== Areas affected ==
Smog can form in almost any climate where industries or cities release large amounts of air pollution, such as smoke or gases. However, it is worse during periods of warmer, sunnier weather when the upper air is warm enough to inhibit vertical circulation. It is especially prevalent in geologic basins encircled by hills or mountains. It often stays for an extended period of time over densely populated cities or urban areas and can build up to dangerous levels.

=== Asia ===
==== India ====
For the past few years, cities in northern India have been covered in a thick layer of winter smog. The situation has turned quite drastic in the national capital, Delhi. This smog is caused by the collection of particulate matter (a very fine type of dust and toxic gases) in the air due to stagnant movement of air during winters. Moreover, during the post-monsoon to winter transition, air quality in the Indo-Gangetic Plain (IGP) worsens significantly due to shifts in weather patterns, such as changes in wind, temperature, and boundary layer mixing. The impact of emissions from both biomass burning and urban activities has intensified, leading to a rise in aerosols mainly particulate matters. The nearby Himalayan region is also affected, where mountainous topography trap air pollutants and increase the air quality issues specifically in northern India.

Delhi is the most polluted city in the world and according to one estimate, air pollution causes the death of about 10,500 people in Delhi every year. During 2013–14, peak levels of fine particulate matter (PM) in Delhi increased by about 44%, primarily due to high vehicular and industrial emissions, construction work and crop burning in adjoining states. Delhi has the highest level of the airborne particulate matter, PM2.5 considered most harmful to health, with 153 micrograms. Rising air pollution level has significantly increased lung-related ailments (especially asthma and lung cancer) among Delhi&#x27;s children and women. The dense smog in Delhi during winter season results in major air and rail traffic disruptions every year. According to Indian meteorologists, the average maximum temperature in Delhi during winters has declined notably since 1998 due to rising air pollution.
Environmentalists have criticized the Delhi government for not doing enough to curb air pollution and to inform people about air quality issues. Most of Delhi&#x27;s residents are unaware of alarming levels of air pollution in the city and the health risks associated with it. Since the mid-1990s, Delhi has undertaken some measures to curb air pollution – Delhi has the third highest quantity of trees among Indian cities and the Delhi Transport Corporation operates the world&#x27;s largest fleet of environmentally friendly compressed natural gas (CNG) buses. In 1996, the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) started a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court of India that ordered the conversion of Delhi&#x27;s fleet of buses and taxis to run on CNG and banned the use of leaded petrol in 1998. In 2003, Delhi won the United States Department of Energy&#x27;s first &#x27;Clean Cities International Partner of the Year&#x27; award for its &quot;bold efforts to curb air pollution and support alternative fuel initiatives&quot;. The Delhi Metro has also been credited for significantly reducing air pollutants in the city.

However, according to several authors, most of these gains have been lost, especially due to stubble burning, rise in market share of diesel cars and a considerable decline in bus ridership. According to CUE and System of Air Quality Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFER), burning of agricultural waste in nearby Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh regions results in severe intensification of smog over Delhi. The state government of adjoining Uttar Pradesh is considering imposing a ban on crop burning to reduce pollution in Delhi NCR and an environmental panel has appealed to India&#x27;s Supreme Court to impose a 30% cess on diesel cars.

==== China ====

Joint research between American and Chinese researchers in 2006 concluded that much of Beijing&#x27;s pollution comes from surrounding cities and provinces. On average 35–60% of the ozone can be traced to sources outside the city. Shandong Province and Tianjin Municipality have a &quot;significant influence on Beijing&#x27;s air quality&quot;, partly due to the prevailing south/southeasterly flow during the summer and the mountains to the north and northwest.

==== Iran ====
In December 2005, schools and public offices were forced to close in Tehran and 1,600 people were taken to hospital, in a severe smog blamed largely on unfiltered car exhaust.

==== Mongolia ====
In the late 1990s, massive immigration to Ulaanbaatar from the countryside began. An estimated 150,000 households, mainly living in traditional Mongolian gers on the outskirts of Ulaanbaatar, burn wood and coal (some poor families burn even car tires and trash) to heat themselves during the harsh winter, which lasts from October to April, since these outskirts are not connected to the city&#x27;s central heating system. A temporary solution to decrease smog was proposed in the form of stoves with improved efficiency, although with no visible results.

Coal-fired ger stoves release high levels of ash and other particulate matter (PM). When inhaled, these particles can settle in the lungs and respiratory tract and cause health problems. At two to 10 times above Mongolian and international air quality standards, Ulaanbaatar&#x27;s PM rates are among the worst in the world, according to a December 2009 World Bank report. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) estimates that health costs related to this air pollution account for as much as 4 percent of Mongolia&#x27;s GDP.

==== Southeast Asia ====
Smog is a regular problem in Southeast Asia caused by land and forest fires in Indonesia, especially Sumatra and Kalimantan, although the term haze is preferred in describing the problem. Farmers and plantation owners are usually responsible for the fires, which they use to clear tracts of land for further plantings. Those fires mainly affect Brunei, Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, and occasionally Guam and Saipan. The economic losses of the fires in 1997 have been estimated at more than US$9 billion. This includes damages in agriculture production, destruction of forest lands, health, transportation, tourism, and other economic endeavours. Not included are social, environmental, and psychological problems and long-term health effects. The second-latest bout of haze to occur in Malaysia, Singapore and the Malacca Straits is in October 2006, and was caused by smoke from fires in Indonesia being blown across the Straits of Malacca by south-westerly winds. A similar haze has occurred in June 2013, with the PSI setting a new record in Singapore on 21 June at 12pm with a reading of 401, which is in the &quot;Hazardous&quot; range.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) reacted. In 2002, the Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution was signed between all ASEAN nations. ASEAN formed a Regional Haze Action Plan (RHAP) and established a co-ordination and support unit (CSU). RHAP, with the help of Canada, established a monitoring and warning system for forest/vegetation fires and implemented a Fire Danger Rating System (FDRS). The Malaysian Meteorological Department (MMD) has issued a daily rating of fire danger since September 2003. Indonesia has been ineffective at enforcing legal policies on errant farmers.

==== Pakistan ====
Since the start of the winter season, heavy smog loaded with pollutants covered major parts of Punjab, especially the city of Lahore, causing breathing problems and disrupting normal traffic. A recent study from 2022 shows that the primary cause of pollution in Lahore is from traffic-related PM (both exhausts and non exhaust sources). Air quality in the Punjab, Pakistan deteriorates markedly during the post-monsoon to winter transition, driven by shifts in weather patterns like alterations in wind, temperature, and boundary layer mixing. In post-moonsoon, anthropogenic emissions from sources like vehicle exhaust, industrial activities, and crop burning impact air quality across Punjab, Pakistan, affecting the region by 90–100%.

Doctors advised residents to stay indoors and wear facemasks outside.

=== United Kingdom ===
====London====
In 1306, concerns over air pollution were sufficient for Edward I to (briefly) ban coal fires in London. In 1661, John Evelyn&#x27;s &quot;Fumifugium&quot; suggested burning fragrant wood instead of mineral coal, which he believed would reduce coughing. The &quot;&quot; the same year describes how the smoke &quot;does our lungs and spirits choke, Our hanging spoil, and rust our iron.&quot;

Severe episodes of smog continued in the 19th and 20th centuries, mainly in the winter, and were nicknamed &quot;pea-soupers,&quot; from the phrase &quot;as thick as pea soup&quot;. The Great Smog of 1952 darkened the streets of London and killed approximately 4,000 people in the short time of four days (a further 8,000 died from its effects in the following weeks and months). Initially, a flu epidemic was blamed for the loss of life.

In 1956 the Clean Air Act started legally enforcing smokeless zones in the capital. There were areas where no soft coal was allowed to be burned in homes or in businesses, only coke, which produces no smoke. Because of the smokeless zones, reduced levels of sooty particulates eliminated the intense and persistent London smog.

It was after this that the great clean-up of London began. One by one, historical buildings which, during the previous two centuries had gradually completely blackened externally, had their stone facades cleaned and restored to their original appearance. Victorian buildings whose appearance changed dramatically after cleaning included the British Museum of Natural History. A more recent example was the Palace of Westminster, which was cleaned in the 1980s. A notable exception to the restoration trend was 10 Downing Street, whose bricks upon cleaning in the late 1950s proved to be naturally &quot;yellow&quot;; the smog-derived black color of the façade was considered so iconic that the bricks were painted black to preserve the image. Smog caused by traffic pollution, however, does still occur in modern London.

====Other areas====

Other areas of the United Kingdom were affected by smog, especially heavily industrialised areas.

The cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh, in Scotland, suffered smoke-laden fogs in 1909. Des Voeux, commonly credited with creating the &quot;smog&quot; moniker, presented a paper in 1911 to the Manchester Conference of the Smoke Abatement League of Great Britain about the fogs and resulting deaths.

One Birmingham resident described near black-out conditions in the 1900s before the Clean Air Act, with visibility so poor that cyclists had to dismount and walk to stay on the road.

On 29 April 2015, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the government must take immediate action to cut air pollution, following a case brought by environmental lawyers at ClientEarth.

=== Latin America ===
==== Mexico ====

Due to its location in a highland &quot;bowl&quot;, cold air sinks down onto the urban area of Mexico City, trapping industrial and vehicle pollution underneath, and turning it into the most infamously smog-plagued city of Latin America. Within one generation, the city has changed from being known for some of the cleanest air of the world into one with some of the worst pollution, with pollutants like nitrogen dioxide being double or even triple international standards.
==== Chile ====
Similar to Mexico City, the air pollution of the Santiago valley in Chile, located between the Andes and the Chilean Coast Range, turn it into the most infamously smog-plagued city of South America. Other aggravates of the situation reside in its high latitude (31 degrees South) and dry weather during most of the year.

=== North America ===
==== Canada ====
According to the Canadian Science Smog Assessment published in 2012, smog is responsible for detrimental effects on human and ecosystem health, as well as socioeconomic well-being across the country. It was estimated that the province of Ontario sustains $201 million in damages annually for selected crops, and an estimated tourism revenue degradation of $7.5 million in Vancouver and $1.32 million in The Fraser Valley due to decreased visibility. Air pollution in British Columbia is of particular concern, especially in the Fraser Valley, because of a meteorological effect called inversion which decreases air dispersion and leads to smog concentration.

==== United States ====

Smog was brought to the attention of the general U.S. public in 1933 with the publication of the book &quot;Stop That Smoke&quot;, by Henry Obermeyer, a New York public utility official, in which he pointed out the effect on human life and even the destruction of of a farmer&#x27;s spinach crop. Since then, the United States Environmental Protection Agency has designated over 300 U.S. counties to be non-attainment areas for one or more pollutants tracked as part of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. These areas are largely clustered around large metropolitan areas, with the largest contiguous non-attainment zones in California and the Northeast. Various U.S. and Canadian government agencies collaborate to produce real-time air quality maps and forecasts. To combat smog conditions, localities may declare &quot;smog alert&quot; days, such as in the Spare the Air program in the San Francisco Bay Area. By 1970, Congress enacted the Clean Air Act to regulate air pollutant emissions.

In the United States, smog pollution kills 24,000 Americans every year. The U.S. is among the dirtier countries in terms of smog, ranked 123 out of 195 countries measured, where 1 is cleanest and 195 is most smog polluted.

=====Los Angeles and the San Joaquin Valley=====
Because of their locations in low basins surrounded by mountains, Los Angeles and the San Joaquin Valley are notorious for their smog. Heavy automobile traffic, combined with the additional effects of the San Francisco Bay and Los Angeles/Long Beach port complexes, frequently contribute to further air pollution.

Los Angeles, in particular, is strongly predisposed to the accumulation of smog, because of the peculiarities of its geography and weather patterns. Los Angeles is situated in a flat basin with the ocean on one side and mountain ranges on three sides. A nearby cold ocean current depresses surface air temperatures in the area, resulting in an inversion layer: a phenomenon where air temperature increases, instead of decreasing, with altitude, suppressing thermals and restricting vertical convection. All taken together, this results in a relatively thin, enclosed layer of air above the city that cannot easily escape out of the basin and tends to accumulate pollution.

Los Angeles was one of the best-known cities suffering from transportation smog for much of the 20th century, so much so that it was sometimes said that &quot;Los Angeles&quot; was a synonym for &quot;smog.&quot; In 1970, when the Clean Air Act was passed, Los Angeles was the most polluted basin in the country, and California was unable to create a State Implementation Plan that would enable it to meet the new air quality standards. However, ensuing strict regulations by state and federal government agencies overseeing this problem (such as the California Air Resources Board and the United States Environmental Protection Agency), including tight restrictions on allowed emissions levels for all new cars sold in California and mandatory regular emission tests of older vehicles, resulted in significant improvements in air quality. For example, air concentrations of volatile organic compounds declined by a factor of 50 between 1962 and 2012. Concentrations of air pollutants such as nitrous oxides and ozone declined by 70% to 80% over the same period of time.

===== Major incidents in the U.S. =====
* 26 July 1943, Los Angeles, California: A smog so sudden and severe that &quot;Los Angeles residents believe the Japanese are attacking them with chemical warfare.&quot;
* 30-31 October 1948, Donora, Pennsylvania: 20 died, 600 hospitalized, thousands more stricken. Lawsuits were not settled until 1951.
* 24 November 1966, New York City, New York: Smog kills at least 169 people.

== Pollution index ==

The severity of smog is often measured using automated optical instruments such as nephelometers, as haze is associated with visibility and traffic control in ports. Haze, however, can also be an indication of poor air quality, though this is often better reflected using accurate purpose-built air indexes such as the American Air Quality Index, the Malaysian API (Air Pollution Index), and the Singaporean Pollutant Standards Index.

In hazy conditions, it is likely that the index will report the suspended particulate level. The disclosure of the responsible pollutant is mandated in some jurisdictions.

The Malaysian API does not have a capped value. Hence, its most hazardous readings can go above 500. When the reading goes above 500, a state of emergency is declared in the affected area. Usually, this means that non-essential government services are suspended, and all ports in the affected area are closed. There may also be prohibitions on private sector commercial and industrial activities in the affected area excluding the food sector. So far, the state of emergency rulings due to hazardous API levels was applied to the Malaysian towns of Port Klang, Kuala Selangor, and the state of Sarawak during 1997 Southeast Asian haze and the 2005 Malaysian haze.

== Cultural references ==
* The London &quot;pea-soupers&quot; earned the capital the nickname of &quot;The Smoke&quot;. Similarly, Edinburgh was known as &quot;Auld Reekie&quot;. The smogs feature in many London novels as a motif indicating hidden danger or a mystery, perhaps most overtly in Margery Allingham&#x27;s &quot;The Tiger in the Smoke&quot; (1952), but also in Dickens&#x27;s &quot;Bleak House&quot; (1852) and T.S. Eliot&#x27;s &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;.
* In the 1957 Warner Brothers cartoon, &quot;What&#x27;s Opera, Doc&quot;, Elmer Fudd called for various calamities to befall Bugs Bunny, ending in a screamed &quot;SMOG!!&quot;
* The 1970 made-for-TV movie &quot;A Clear and Present Danger&quot; was one of the first American television network entertainment programs to warn about the problem of smog and air pollution, as it dramatized a man&#x27;s efforts toward clean air after emphysema killed his friend.
* The history of smog in LA is detailed in &quot;Smogtown&quot; by Chip Jacobs and William J. Kelly.

== See also ==

* Smog tower 
* Asian brown cloud
* 1997 Southeast Asian haze
* 2005 Malaysian haze
* 2006 Southeast Asian haze
* 2013 Eastern China smog
* 2013 Northeastern China smog
* 2013 Southeast Asian haze
* 2015 Southeast Asian haze
* Atmospheric chemistry
* CityTrees
* Contrail
* Criteria air contaminants
* Emission standard
* Great Smog of London
* Haze
* Inversion (meteorology)
* List of least polluted cities by particulate matter concentration
* Nitric oxide
* Ozone
* Umweltzone
* Vog
==References==

* Upadhyay, Harikrishna (2016-11-07)&quot;All You Need To Know About Delhi Smog / Air Pollution – 10 Questions Answered&quot;, Dainik Bhaskar. Retrieved on 7 November 2016.

== Further reading ==
* Brimblecombe, Peter. &quot;History of air pollution.&quot; in &quot;Composition, Chemistry and Climate of the Atmosphere&quot; (Van Nostrand Reinhold (1995): 1–18
* Brimblecombe, Peter, and László Makra. &quot;Selections from the history of environmental pollution, with special attention to air pollution. Part 2*: From medieval times to the 19th century.&quot; &quot;International Journal of environment and pollution&quot; 23.4 (2005): 351–367.
* Corton, Christine L. &quot;London Fog: The Biography&quot; (2015)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="0" end="4" title="Smog" label="Smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="9" end="18" title="Smog" label="smoke fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="41" end="54" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="129" end="140" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="160" end="165" title="smoke" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="182" end="185" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q15602372" start="312" end="324" title="pea soup fog" label="pea soup fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="360" end="366" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="447" end="464" title="Smog" label="London particular"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="468" end="478" title="Smog" label="London fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="530" end="544" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q601852" start="547" end="559" title="sulfur oxide" label="sulfur oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="561" end="566" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="584" end="596" title="Particulate matter" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="819" end="830" title="summer smog" label="summer smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="1142" end="1164" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="atmospheric inversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q778187" start="1327" end="1337" title="Atmospheric dispersion modeling" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="1543" end="1557" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="1796" end="1814" title="vehicular emission" label="vehicular emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="1820" end="1846" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="2007" end="2025" title="photochemical smog" label="photochemical smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q13461160" start="2104" end="2119" title="stubble burning" label="stubble burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2207" end="2218" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2220" end="2227" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="2229" end="2234" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="2236" end="2242" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="2244" end="2255" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="2257" end="2263" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="2390" end="2395" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2557" end="2580" title="Henry Antoine Des Voeux" label="Henry Antoine Des Voeux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2647" end="2669" title="Public Health Congress" label="Public Health Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3893" end="3904" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15602372" start="4029" end="4040" title="Pea soup fog" label="pea-soupers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="4219" end="4241" title="air pollution in China" label="air pollution in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098885" start="4489" end="4503" title="2013 Harbin smog" label="Harbin in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="4570" end="4575" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="4578" end="4581" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="4589" end="4599" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="4654" end="4664" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q683005" start="4679" end="4693" title="exhaust system" label="exhaust system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="4722" end="4735" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="4861" end="4876" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="4883" end="4898" title="nitrogen oxides" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="4900" end="4902" title="Nitric oxide" label="NO"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="4907" end="4910" title="NO2" label="NO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="4953" end="4965" title="hydrocarbons" label="hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="5006" end="5021" title="petroleum fuels" label="petroleum fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="5030" end="5038" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="5043" end="5054" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="5095" end="5110" title="sulfur dioxides" label="sulfur dioxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="5322" end="5329" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="5389" end="5407" title="ground level ozone" label="ground level ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="5573" end="5588" title="nitrogen oxides" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="5593" end="5618" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="5652" end="5670" title="Atmospheric particulate matter" label="airborne particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="5675" end="5693" title="Tropospheric ozone" label="ground-level ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="5827" end="5841" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="5857" end="5869" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="5879" end="5895" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="5907" end="5932" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q411000" start="5977" end="5997" title="Peroxyacyl nitrates" label="peroxylacyl nitrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="6005" end="6023" title="tropospheric ozone" label="tropospheric ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="6029" end="6037" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="6400" end="6411" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="6416" end="6429" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q358296" start="7010" end="7026" title="Arie Jan Haagen-Smit" label="Arie Haagen-Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q695886" start="7403" end="7417" title="Arnold Beckman" label="Arnold Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187910" start="8221" end="8242" title="photostationary state" label="photostationary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="9778" end="9792" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896842" start="9967" end="9970" title="vog" label="vog"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="10298" end="10302" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q271943" start="10642" end="10650" title="isoprene" label="isoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="10655" end="10662" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="11039" end="11057" title="tropospheric ozone" label="Ground-level ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="11059" end="11073" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="11075" end="11091" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="11096" end="11111" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="11216" end="11225" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="11227" end="11237" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="11243" end="11249" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="12224" end="12239" title="Nature magazine" label="Nature magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="12708" end="12716" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364111" start="12734" end="12751" title="air quality index" label="air quality index"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="12861" end="12865" title="parts per notation" label="ppbv"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="13123" end="13127" title="PM10" label="PM10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094835" start="13263" end="13290" title="Ontario Medical Association" label="Ontario Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="13404" end="13427" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="13858" end="13867" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="13868" end="13880" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="14406" end="14424" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="14433" end="14443" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q548213" start="14471" end="14489" title="neural tube defect" label="neural tube defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="14492" end="14504" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="14586" end="14599" title="spinal column" label="spinal column"/>
<link wikidata="Q529292" start="14606" end="14617" title="anencephaly" label="anencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="14949" end="14959" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="14996" end="15001" title="PM2.5" label="PM2.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="15293" end="15297" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="15303" end="15316" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="15318" end="15328" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="15344" end="15353" title="Wildfire" label="bush fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="15382" end="15392" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="15415" end="15427" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="15450" end="15468" title="Crop yield" label="agricultural yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="15580" end="15593" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16030" end="16035" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="16074" end="16080" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="16151" end="16156" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="16199" end="16217" title="particulate matter" label="particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="16395" end="16414" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457430" start="16577" end="16584" title="Biomass (energy)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="16597" end="16602" title="Urbanization" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="16652" end="16660" title="Aerosol" label="aerosols"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="16700" end="16716" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="16769" end="16783" title="Air pollution" label="air pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="17040" end="17051" title="Particle" label="particulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="17275" end="17280" title="PM2.5" label="PM2.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595653" start="18180" end="18207" title="Delhi Transport Corporation" label="Delhi Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="18276" end="18298" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062570" start="18325" end="18359" title="Centre for Science and Environment" label="Centre for Science and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="18410" end="18432" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="18584" end="18618" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13461160" start="18982" end="18997" title="stubble burning" label="stubble burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q336041" start="19023" end="19034" title="diesel exhaust" label="diesel cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="19640" end="19647" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="19735" end="19740" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="19784" end="19792" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="19806" end="19813" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="20102" end="20108" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="20271" end="20282" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="20383" end="20387" title="Yurt" label="gers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="21363" end="21377" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="21388" end="21409" title="wildfire" label="land and forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21413" end="21422" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="21435" end="21442" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="21447" end="21457" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="21477" end="21481" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="21679" end="21685" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21687" end="21696" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21698" end="21709" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="21711" end="21719" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="21721" end="21730" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="21735" end="21743" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="21762" end="21766" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="21771" end="21777" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861425" start="22110" end="22136" title="2006 Southeast Asian haze" label="second-latest bout of haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="22149" end="22157" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="22159" end="22168" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="22177" end="22192" title="Malacca Straits" label="Malacca Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="22251" end="22260" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22393" end="22403" title="Pollutant Standards Index#PSI in Singapore" label="new record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="22509" end="22547" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189826" start="22578" end="22619" title="ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution" label="Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22785" end="22791" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="23147" end="23160" title="Winter" label="winter season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="23219" end="23225" title="Punjab, Pakistan" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="23250" end="23256" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q683005" start="23426" end="23434" title="Exhaust system" label="exhausts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="23535" end="23542" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949906" start="23645" end="23659" title="Boundary-Layer Meteorology" label="boundary layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="23728" end="23743" title="Exhaust gas" label="vehicle exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187948" start="23772" end="23784" title="crop burning" label="crop burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="24029" end="24037" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q342712" start="24086" end="24097" title="John Evelyn" label="John Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508560" start="24111" end="24121" title="Fumifugium" label="Fumifugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q913640" start="24552" end="24570" title="Great Smog of 1952" label="Great Smog of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="24759" end="24762" title="flu" label="flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="24763" end="24771" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130457" start="24818" end="24831" title="Clean Air Act 1956" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130457" start="24858" end="24872" title="smokeless zone" label="smokeless zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="24983" end="24987" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="25476" end="25509" title="British Museum of Natural History" label="British Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="25541" end="25562" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="25645" end="25662" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="26379" end="26389" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="26581" end="26597" title="UK Supreme Court" label="UK Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="26875" end="26886" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="27185" end="27201" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="27320" end="27328" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="27366" end="27371" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174761" start="27380" end="27399" title="Chilean Coast Range" label="Chilean Coast Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="27870" end="27877" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="28004" end="28013" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554074" start="28039" end="28052" title="Fraser Valley" label="Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698352" start="28082" end="28115" title="Air pollution in British Columbia" label="Air pollution in British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="28217" end="28226" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="28630" end="28675" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970339" start="28791" end="28829" title="National Ambient Air Quality Standards" label="National Ambient Air Quality Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970863" start="29080" end="29089" title="Air pollution forecasting" label="forecasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573570" start="29185" end="29206" title="Spare the Air program" label="Spare the Air program"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="29214" end="29236" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="29659" end="29670" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="29679" end="29697" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="29798" end="29815" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="29832" end="29842" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="30252" end="30267" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q752823" start="30365" end="30373" title="thermals" label="thermals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026794" start="31133" end="31163" title="California Air Resources Board" label="California Air Resources Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="31172" end="31217" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="31710" end="31733" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566250" start="31867" end="31885" title="1948 Donora smog" label="30-31 October 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134745" start="31887" end="31907" title="Donora, Pennsylvania" label="Donora, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26832721" start="32001" end="32017" title="1966 New York City smog" label="24 November 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="32019" end="32042" title="New York City, New York" label="New York City, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133588" start="32183" end="32195" title="nephelometer" label="nephelometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364111" start="32428" end="32445" title="Air quality index" label="Air Quality Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q708545" start="32508" end="32533" title="Pollutant Standards Index" label="Pollutant Standards Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592792" start="33318" end="33343" title="1997 Southeast Asian haze" label="1997 Southeast Asian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604538" start="33352" end="33371" title="2005 Malaysian haze" label="2005 Malaysian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15602372" start="33419" end="33430" title="Pea soup fog" label="pea-soupers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="33506" end="33515" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q266205" start="33668" end="33685" title="Margery Allingham" label="Margery Allingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="33748" end="33755" title="Charles Dickens" label="Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q883305" start="33769" end="33780" title="Bleak House" label="Bleak House"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="33798" end="33808" title="T.S. Eliot" label="T.S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247005" start="33822" end="33857" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="33879" end="33894" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635222" start="33910" end="33932" title="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc" label="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc"/>
<link wikidata="Q844904" start="33940" end="33950" title="Elmer Fudd" label="Elmer Fudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="33991" end="34001" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="34054" end="34071" title="made-for-TV movie" label="made-for-TV movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q98123035" start="34393" end="34404" title="Chip Jacobs" label="Chip Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767354" start="34446" end="34456" title="Smog tower" label="Smog tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528157" start="34460" end="34477" title="Asian brown cloud" label="Asian brown cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592792" start="34480" end="34505" title="1997 Southeast Asian haze" label="1997 Southeast Asian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604538" start="34508" end="34527" title="2005 Malaysian haze" label="2005 Malaysian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q861425" start="34530" end="34555" title="2006 Southeast Asian haze" label="2006 Southeast Asian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284962" start="34558" end="34581" title="2013 Eastern China smog" label="2013 Eastern China smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098885" start="34584" end="34612" title="2013 Northeastern China smog" label="2013 Northeastern China smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q13503130" start="34615" end="34640" title="2013 Southeast Asian haze" label="2013 Southeast Asian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972187" start="34643" end="34668" title="2015 Southeast Asian haze" label="2015 Southeast Asian haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q287919" start="34671" end="34692" title="Atmospheric chemistry" label="Atmospheric chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509727" start="34695" end="34704" title="CityTrees" label="CityTrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q207546" start="34707" end="34715" title="Contrail" label="Contrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970339" start="34718" end="34743" title="Criteria air contaminants" label="Criteria air contaminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="34746" end="34763" title="Emission standard" label="Emission standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q913640" start="34766" end="34786" title="Great Smog of London" label="Great Smog of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="34789" end="34793" title="Haze" label="Haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="34796" end="34819" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="Inversion (meteorology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715898" start="34822" end="34887" title="List of least polluted cities by particulate matter concentration" label="List of least polluted cities by particulate matter concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="34890" end="34902" title="Nitric oxide" label="Nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="34905" end="34910" title="Ozone" label="Ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q647266" start="34913" end="34923" title="Umweltzone" label="Umweltzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896842" start="34926" end="34929" title="Vog" label="Vog"/>
<link wikidata="Q51186298" start="35144" end="35163" title="Peter Brimblecombe" label="Brimblecombe, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51186298" start="35309" end="35328" title="Peter Brimblecombe" label="Brimblecombe, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28050026" start="35334" end="35346" title="László Makra" label="László Makra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27001" wikidata="Q130768" url="?curid=27001" title="Smoke">
<text>Smoke is a suspension of airborne particulates and gases emitted when a material undergoes combustion or pyrolysis, together with the quantity of air that is entrained or otherwise mixed into the mass. It is commonly an unwanted by-product of fires (including stoves, candles, internal combustion engines, oil lamps, and fireplaces), but may also be used for pest control (fumigation), communication (smoke signals), defensive and offensive capabilities in the military (smoke screen), cooking, or smoking (tobacco, cannabis, etc.). It is used in rituals where incense, sage, or resin is burned to produce a smell for spiritual or magical purposes. It can also be a flavoring agent and preservative.

Smoke inhalation is the primary cause of death in victims of indoor fires. The smoke kills by a combination of thermal damage, poisoning and pulmonary irritation caused by carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide and other combustion products.

Smoke is an aerosol (or mist) of solid particles and liquid droplets that are close to the ideal range of sizes for Mie scattering of visible light.

==Chemical composition==
The composition of smoke depends on the nature of the burning fuel and the conditions of combustion. Fires with high availability of oxygen burn at a high temperature and with a small amount of smoke produced; the particles are mostly composed of ash, or with large temperature differences, of condensed aerosol of water. High temperature also leads to production of nitrogen oxides. Sulfur content yields sulfur dioxide, or in case of incomplete combustion, hydrogen sulfide. Carbon and hydrogen are almost completely oxidized to carbon dioxide and water. Fires burning with lack of oxygen produce a significantly wider palette of compounds, many of them toxic. Partial oxidation of carbon produces carbon monoxide, while nitrogen-containing materials can yield hydrogen cyanide, ammonia, and nitrogen oxides. Hydrogen gas can be produced instead of water. Contents of halogens such as chlorine (e.g. in polyvinyl chloride or brominated flame retardants) may lead to the production of hydrogen chloride, phosgene, dioxin, and chloromethane, bromomethane and other halocarbons. Hydrogen fluoride can be formed from fluorocarbons, whether fluoropolymers subjected to fire or halocarbon fire suppression agents. Phosphorus and antimony oxides and their reaction products can be formed from some fire retardant additives, increasing smoke toxicity and corrosivity. Pyrolysis of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), e.g. from burning older transformer oil, and to lower degree also of other chlorine-containing materials, can produce 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, a potent carcinogen, and other polychlorinated dibenzodioxins. Pyrolysis of fluoropolymers, e.g. teflon, in presence of oxygen yields carbonyl fluoride (which hydrolyzes readily to HF and CO2); other compounds may be formed as well, e.g. carbon tetrafluoride, hexafluoropropylene, and highly toxic perfluoroisobutene (PFIB).

Pyrolysis of burning material, especially incomplete combustion or smoldering without adequate oxygen supply, also results in production of a large amount of hydrocarbons, both aliphatic (methane, ethane, ethylene, acetylene) and aromatic (benzene and its derivates, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; e.g. benzo[a]pyrene, studied as a carcinogen, or retene), terpenes. It also results in the emission of a range of smaller oxygenated volatile organic compounds (methanol, acetic acid, hydroxy acetone, methyl acetate and ethyl formate) which are formed as combustion by products as well as less volatile oxygenated organic species such as phenolics, furans and furanones. Heterocyclic compounds may be also present. Heavier hydrocarbons may condense as tar; smoke with significant tar content is yellow to brown. Combustion of solid fuels can result in the emission of many hundreds to thousands of lower volatility organic compounds in the aerosol phase. Presence of such smoke, soot, and/or brown oily deposits during a fire indicates a possible hazardous situation, as the atmosphere may be saturated with combustible pyrolysis products with concentration above the upper flammability limit, and sudden inrush of air can cause flashover or backdraft.

Presence of sulfur can lead to formation of gases like hydrogen sulfide, carbonyl sulfide, sulfur dioxide, carbon disulfide, and thiols; especially thiols tend to get adsorbed on surfaces and produce a lingering odor even long after the fire. Partial oxidation of the released hydrocarbons yields in a wide palette of other compounds: aldehydes (e.g. formaldehyde, acrolein, and furfural), ketones, alcohols (often aromatic, e.g. phenol, guaiacol, syringol, catechol, and cresols), carboxylic acids (formic acid, acetic acid, etc.).

The visible particulate matter in such smokes is most commonly composed of carbon (soot). Other particulates may be composed of drops of condensed tar, or solid particles of ash. The presence of metals in the fuel yields particles of metal oxides. Particles of inorganic salts may also be formed, e.g. ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, or sodium chloride. Inorganic salts present on the surface of the soot particles may make them hydrophilic. Many organic compounds, typically the aromatic hydrocarbons, may be also adsorbed on the surface of the solid particles. Metal oxides can be present when metal-containing fuels are burned, e.g. solid rocket fuels containing aluminium. Depleted uranium projectiles after impacting the target ignite, producing particles of uranium oxides. Magnetic particles, spherules of magnetite-like ferrous ferric oxide, are present in coal smoke; their increase in deposits after 1860 marks the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. (Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles can be also produced in the smoke from meteorites burning in the atmosphere.) Magnetic remanence, recorded in the iron oxide particles, indicates the strength of Earth&#x27;s magnetic field when they were cooled beyond their Curie temperature; this can be used to distinguish magnetic particles of terrestrial and meteoric origin. Fly ash is composed mainly of silica and calcium oxide. Cenospheres are present in smoke from liquid hydrocarbon fuels. Minute metal particles produced by abrasion can be present in engine smokes. Amorphous silica particles are present in smokes from burning silicones; small proportion of silicon nitride particles can be formed in fires with insufficient oxygen. The silica particles have about 10 nm size, clumped to 70–100 nm aggregates and further agglomerated to chains. Radioactive particles may be present due to traces of uranium, thorium, or other radionuclides in the fuel; hot particles can be present in case of fires during nuclear accidents (e.g. Chernobyl disaster) or nuclear war.

Smoke particulates, like other aerosols, are categorized into three modes based on particle size:
* nuclei mode, with geometric mean radius between 2.5 and 20 nm, likely forming by condensation of carbon moieties.
* accumulation mode, ranging between 75 and 250 nm and formed by coagulation of nuclei mode particles
* coarse mode, with particles in micrometer range
Most of the smoke material is primarily in coarse particles. Those undergo rapid dry precipitation, and the smoke damage in more distant areas outside of the room where the fire occurs is therefore primarily mediated by the smaller particles.

Aerosol of particles beyond visible size is an early indicator of materials in a preignition stage of a fire.

Burning of hydrogen-rich fuel produces water vapor; this results in smoke containing droplets of water. In absence of other color sources (nitrogen oxides, particulates...), such smoke is white and cloud-like.

Smoke emissions may contain characteristic trace elements. Vanadium is present in emissions from oil fired power plants and refineries; oil plants also emit some nickel. Coal combustion produces emissions containing aluminium, arsenic, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, mercury, selenium, and uranium.

Traces of vanadium in high-temperature combustion products form droplets of molten vanadates. These attack the passivation layers on metals and cause high temperature corrosion, which is a concern especially for internal combustion engines. Molten sulfate and lead particulates also have such effect.

Some components of smoke are characteristic of the combustion source. Guaiacol and its derivatives are products of pyrolysis of lignin and are characteristic of wood smoke; other markers are syringol and derivates, and other methoxy phenols. Retene, a product of pyrolysis of conifer trees, is an indicator of forest fires. Levoglucosan is a pyrolysis product of cellulose. Hardwood vs softwood smokes differ in the ratio of guaiacols/syringols. Markers for vehicle exhaust include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, hopanes, steranes, and specific nitroarenes (e.g. 1-nitropyrene). The ratio of hopanes and steranes to elemental carbon can be used to distinguish between emissions of gasoline and diesel engines.

Many compounds can be associated with particulates; whether by being adsorbed on their surfaces, or by being dissolved in liquid droplets. Hydrogen chloride is well absorbed in the soot particles.

Inert particulate matter can be disturbed and entrained into the smoke. Of particular concern are particles of asbestos.

Deposited hot particles of radioactive fallout and bioaccumulated radioisotopes can be reintroduced into the atmosphere by wildfires and forest fires; this is a concern in e.g. the Zone of alienation containing contaminants from the Chernobyl disaster.

Polymers are a significant source of smoke. Aromatic side groups, e.g. in polystyrene, enhance generation of smoke. Aromatic groups integrated in the polymer backbone produce less smoke, likely due to significant charring. Aliphatic polymers tend to generate the least smoke, and are non-self-extinguishing. However presence of additives can significantly increase smoke formation. Phosphorus-based and halogen-based flame retardants decrease production of smoke. Higher degree of cross-linking between the polymer chains has such effect too.

===Visible and invisible particles of combustion===

The naked eye detects particle sizes greater than 7 μm (micrometres). Visible particles emitted from a fire are referred to as smoke. Invisible particles are generally referred to as gas or fumes. This is best illustrated when toasting bread in a toaster. As the bread heats up, the products of combustion increase in size. The fumes initially produced are invisible but become visible if the toast is burnt.

An ionization chamber type smoke detector is technically a product of combustion detector, not a smoke detector. Ionization chamber type smoke detectors detect particles of combustion that are invisible to the naked eye. This explains why they may frequently false alarm from the fumes emitted from the red-hot heating elements of a toaster, before the presence of visible smoke, yet they may fail to activate in the early, low-heat smoldering stage of a fire.

Smoke from a typical house fire contains hundreds of different chemicals and fumes. As a result, the damage caused by the smoke can often exceed that caused by the actual heat of the fire. In addition to the physical damage caused by the smoke of a fire – which manifests itself in the form of stains – is the often even harder to eliminate problem of a smoky odor. Just as there are contractors that specialize in rebuilding/repairing homes that have been damaged by fire and smoke, fabric restoration companies specialize in restoring fabrics that have been damaged in a fire.

==Dangers==
Smoke from oxygen-deprived fires contains a significant concentration of compounds that are flammable. A cloud of smoke, in contact with atmospheric oxygen, therefore has the potential of being ignited – either by another open flame in the area, or by its own temperature. This leads to effects like backdraft and flashover. Smoke inhalation is also a danger of smoke that can cause serious injury and death.

Many compounds of smoke from fires are highly toxic and/or irritating. The most dangerous is carbon monoxide leading to carbon monoxide poisoning, sometimes with the additive effects of hydrogen cyanide and phosgene. Smoke inhalation can therefore quickly lead to incapacitation and loss of consciousness. Sulfur oxides, hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride in contact with moisture form sulfuric, hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acid, which are corrosive to both lungs and materials. 
Cigarette smoke is a major modifiable risk factor for lung disease, heart disease, and many cancers. Smoke can also be a component of ambient air pollution due to the burning of coal in power plants, forest fires or other sources, although the concentration of pollutants in ambient air is typically much less than that in cigarette smoke. One day of exposure to PM2.5 at a concentration of 880 μg/m3, such as occurs in Beijing, China, is the equivalent of smoking one or two cigarettes in terms of particulate inhalation by weight. The analysis is complicated, however, by the fact that the organic compounds present in various ambient particulates may have a higher carcinogenicity than the compounds in cigarette smoke particulates. Secondhand tobacco smoke is the combination of both sidestream and mainstream smoke emissions from a burning tobacco product. These emissions contain more than 50 carcinogenic chemicals. According to the United States Surgeon General&#x27;s 2006 report on the subject, exposures to secondhand tobacco smoke can activate platelets causing increased clotting and increased risk of thrombus and potentially damage the lining of blood vessels, decrease coronary flow velocity reserves, and reduce heart rate variability, potentially increasing the risk of a heart attack. The chances of these effects occurring increase with increased exposure and time of exposure. The American Cancer Society lists &quot;heart disease, lung infections, increased asthma attacks, middle ear infections, and low birth weight&quot; as ramifications of smoker&#x27;s emission.
 
Smoke can obscure visibility, impeding occupant exiting from fire areas. In fact, the poor visibility due to the smoke that was in the Worcester Cold Storage Warehouse fire in Worcester, Massachusetts was the reason why the trapped rescue firefighters could not evacuate the building in time. Because of the striking similarity that each floor shared, the dense smoke caused the firefighters to become disoriented.

===Corrosion===
Smoke can contain a wide variety of chemicals, many of them aggressive in nature. Examples are hydrochloric acid and hydrobromic acid, produced from halogen-containing plastics and fire retardants, hydrofluoric acid released by pyrolysis of fluorocarbon fire suppression agents, sulfuric acid from burning of sulfur-containing materials, nitric acid from high-temperature fires where nitrous oxide gets formed, phosphoric acid and antimony compounds from P and Sb based fire retardants, and many others. Such corrosion is not significant for structural materials, but delicate structures, especially microelectronics, are strongly affected. Corrosion of circuit board traces, penetration of aggressive chemicals through the casings of parts, and other effects can cause an immediate or gradual deterioration of parameters or even premature (and often delayed, as the corrosion can progress over long time) failure of equipment subjected to smoke. Many smoke components are also electrically conductive; deposition of a conductive layer on the circuits can cause crosstalks and other deteriorations of the operating parameters or even cause short circuits and total failures. Electrical contacts can be affected by corrosion of surfaces, and by deposition of soot and other conductive particles or nonconductive layers on or across the contacts. Deposited particles may adversely affect the performance of optoelectronics by absorbing or scattering the light beams.

Corrosivity of smoke produced by materials is characterized by the corrosion index (CI), defined as material loss rate (angstrom/minute) per amount of material gasified products (grams) per volume of air (m3). It is measured by exposing strips of metal to flow of combustion products in a test tunnel. Polymers containing halogen and hydrogen (polyvinyl chloride, polyolefins with halogenated additives, etc.) have the highest CI as the corrosive acids are formed directly with water produced by the combustion, polymers containing halogen only (e.g. polytetrafluoroethylene) have lower CI as the formation of acid is limited to reactions with airborne humidity, and halogen-free materials (polyolefins, wood) have the lowest CI. However, some halogen-free materials can also release significant amount of corrosive products.

Smoke damage to electronic equipment can be significantly more extensive than the fire itself. Cable fires are of special concern; low smoke zero halogen materials are preferable for cable insulation.

When smoke comes into contact with the surface of any substance or structure, the chemicals contained in it are transferred to it. The corrosive properties of the chemicals cause the substance or structure to decompose at a rapid rate. Certain materials or structures absorb these chemicals, which is why clothing, unsealed surfaces, potable water, piping, wood, etc., are replaced in most cases of structural fires.

===Health effects of wood smoke===

Wood smoke is a major source of air pollution, especially particulate pollution, pollution by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)&lt;ref name=&quot;10.5194/acp-21-17865-2021&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as formaldehyde.

In the United Kingdom domestic combustion, especially for industrial uses, is the largest single source of PM2.5 annually. In some towns and cities in New South Wales, wood smoke may be responsible for 60% of fine particle air pollution in the winter. A year-long sampling campaign in Athens, Greece found a third (31%) of PAH urban air pollution to be caused by wood-burning, roughly as much as that of diesel and oil (33%) and gasoline (29%). It also found that wood-burning is responsible for nearly half (43%) of annual PAH lung cancer-risk compared to the other sources and that wintertime PAH levels were 7 times higher than in other seasons, presumably due to an increased use of fireplaces and heaters. The largest exposure events are periods during the winter with reduced atmospheric dispersion to dilute the accumulated pollution, in particular due to the low wind speeds. Research conducted about biomass burning in 2015, estimated that 38% of European total particulate pollution emissions are composed of domestic wood burning.

Wood smoke (for example from wildfires or wood ovens) can cause lung damage, artery damage and DNA damage leading to cancer, other respiratory and lung disease and cardiovascular disease. Air pollution, particulate matter and wood smoke may also cause brain damage because of particulates breaching the cardiovascular system and into the brain, which can increase the risk of developmental disorders, neurodegenerative disorders mental disorders, and suicidal behavior, although studies on the link between depression and some air pollutants are not consistent. At least one study has identified &quot;the abundant presence in the human brain of magnetite nanoparticles that match precisely the high-temperature magnetite nanospheres, formed by combustion and/or friction-derived heating, which are prolific in urban, airborne particulate matter (PM).&quot; Air pollution has also been linked to a range of other psychosocial problems.

==Measurement==

As early as the 15th century Leonardo da Vinci commented at length on the difficulty of assessing smoke, and distinguished between black smoke (carbonized particles) and white &#x27;smoke&#x27; which is not a smoke at all but merely a suspension of harmless water particulates.

Smoke from heating appliances is commonly measured in one of the following ways:

In-line capture. A smoke sample is simply sucked through a filter which is weighed before and after the test and the mass of smoke found. This is the simplest and probably the most accurate method, but can only be used where the smoke concentration is slight, as the filter can quickly become blocked.

The ASTM smoke pump is a simple and widely used method of in-line capture where a measured volume of smoke is pulled through a filter paper and the dark spot so formed is compared with a standard.

Filter/dilution tunnel. A smoke sample is drawn through a tube where it is diluted with air, the resulting smoke/air mixture is then pulled through a filter and weighed. This is the internationally recognized method of measuring smoke from combustion.

Electrostatic precipitation. The smoke is passed through an array of metal tubes which contain suspended wires. A (huge) electrical potential is applied across the tubes and wires so that the smoke particles become charged and are attracted to the sides of the tubes. This method can over-read by capturing harmless condensates, or under-read due to the insulating effect of the smoke. However, it is the necessary method for assessing volumes of smoke too great to be forced through a filter, i.e., from bituminous coal.

Ringelmann scale. A measure of smoke color. Invented by Professor Maximilian Ringelmann in Paris in 1888, it is essentially a card with squares of black, white and shades of gray which is held up and the comparative grayness of the smoke judged. Highly dependent on light conditions and the skill of the observer it allocates a grayness number from 0 (white) to 5 (black) which has only a passing relationship to the actual quantity of smoke. Nonetheless, the simplicity of the Ringelmann scale means that it has been adopted as a standard in many countries.

Optical scattering. A light beam is passed through the smoke. A light detector is situated at an angle to the light source, typically at 90°, so that it receives only light reflected from passing particles. A measurement is made of the light received which will be higher as the concentration of smoke particles becomes higher.

Optical obscuration. A light beam is passed through the smoke and a detector opposite measures the light. The more smoke particles are present between the two, the less light will be measured.

Combined optical methods. There are various proprietary optical smoke measurement devices such as the &#x27;nephelometer&#x27; or the &#x27;aethalometer&#x27; which use several different optical methods, including more than one wavelength of light, inside a single instrument and apply an algorithm to give a good estimate of smoke. It has been claimed that these devices can differentiate types of smoke and so their probable source can be inferred, though this is disputed.

Inference from carbon monoxide. Smoke is incompletely burned fuel, carbon monoxide is incompletely burned carbon, therefore it has long been assumed that measurement of CO in flue gas (a cheap, simple and very accurate procedure) will provide a good indication of the levels of smoke. Indeed, several jurisdictions use CO measurement as the basis of smoke control. However it is far from clear how accurate the correspondence is.

==Medicinal smoking==

Throughout recorded history, humans have used the smoke of medicinal plants to cure illness. A sculpture from Persepolis shows Darius the Great (522–486 BC), the king of Persia, with two censers in front of him for burning Peganum harmala and/or sandalwood Santalum album, which was believed to protect the king from evil and disease. More than 300 plant species in 5 continents are used in smoke form for different diseases. As a method of drug administration, smoking is important as it is a simple, inexpensive, but very effective method of extracting particles containing active agents. More importantly, generating smoke reduces the particle size to a microscopic scale thereby increasing the absorption of its active chemical principles.

==See also==
* Air purifier
* Bonfire
* Great Smog of London
* Health impacts of sawdust
* Inversion (meteorology)
* Joss paper
* Open burning of waste
* Smog
* Ultrafine particle

==References==
==Sources==

==External links==

*&#x27;Fire inversions&#x27; lock smoke in valleys
*Burning Issues wood smoke Site
*Shedding new light on wood smoke
*7 things you need to know about smoke detectors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="0" end="5" title="Smoke" label="Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="34" end="46" title="particulates" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="51" end="54" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="91" end="101" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="105" end="114" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380657" start="158" end="167" title="entrainment (engineering)" label="entrained"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="229" end="239" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q203789" start="260" end="265" title="stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="268" end="274" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="277" end="303" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q821952" start="306" end="314" title="oil lamp" label="oil lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="321" end="330" title="fireplace" label="fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="359" end="371" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q60915" start="373" end="383" title="fumigation" label="fumigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q659892" start="401" end="413" title="smoke signal" label="smoke signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="471" end="483" title="smoke screen" label="smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="486" end="493" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="498" end="505" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="507" end="514" title="tobacco smoking" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="516" end="524" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="561" end="568" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="570" end="574" title="Salvia officinalis" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="579" end="584" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="618" end="627" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="631" end="638" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133097" start="701" end="717" title="Smoke inhalation" label="Smoke inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="769" end="773" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="828" end="834" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="842" end="851" title="lung" label="pulmonary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="873" end="888" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="890" end="906" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="951" end="958" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192196" start="963" end="967" title="mist" label="mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q901737" start="1055" end="1069" title="Mie theory" label="Mie scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1073" end="1086" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q152079" start="1361" end="1364" title="ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="1481" end="1495" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="1520" end="1534" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="1573" end="1589" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1645" end="1659" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q451467" start="1777" end="1794" title="Partial oxidation" label="Partial oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="1814" end="1829" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="1877" end="1893" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="1895" end="1902" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1925" end="1933" title="Hydrogen" label="Hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="1984" end="1992" title="halogens" label="halogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="2001" end="2009" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="2019" end="2037" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="polyvinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723553" start="2041" end="2067" title="brominated flame retardant" label="brominated flame retardant"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="2100" end="2117" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="2119" end="2127" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="2129" end="2135" title="Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422709" start="2141" end="2154" title="chloromethane" label="chloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421758" start="2156" end="2168" title="bromomethane" label="bromomethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q387914" start="2179" end="2189" title="halocarbon" label="halocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="2192" end="2209" title="Hydrogen fluoride" label="Hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="2229" end="2241" title="fluorocarbon" label="fluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818706" start="2252" end="2265" title="fluoropolymer" label="fluoropolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354051" start="2299" end="2321" title="fire suppression agent" label="fire suppression agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="2324" end="2334" title="Phosphorus" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="2339" end="2347" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354051" start="2407" end="2421" title="fire retardant" label="fire retardant"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="2476" end="2485" title="Pyrolysis" label="Pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="2489" end="2513" title="polychlorinated biphenyl" label="polychlorinated biphenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q901418" start="2546" end="2561" title="transformer oil" label="transformer oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q52822" start="2640" end="2672" title="2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin" label="2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="2683" end="2693" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="2705" end="2735" title="polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="polychlorinated dibenzodioxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="2771" end="2777" title="teflon" label="teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q251793" start="2808" end="2825" title="carbonyl fluoride" label="carbonyl fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q423055" start="2912" end="2932" title="carbon tetrafluoride" label="carbon tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417982" start="2934" end="2953" title="hexafluoropropylene" label="hexafluoropropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q410562" start="2972" end="2990" title="perfluoroisobutene" label="perfluoroisobutene"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="3042" end="3063" title="incomplete combustion" label="incomplete combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q902760" start="3067" end="3077" title="smoldering" label="smoldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="3158" end="3170" title="hydrocarbons" label="hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="3177" end="3186" title="aliphatic" label="aliphatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="3188" end="3195" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52858" start="3197" end="3203" title="ethane" label="ethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="3205" end="3213" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q133145" start="3215" end="3224" title="acetylene" label="acetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="3230" end="3238" title="aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="3240" end="3247" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="3267" end="3298" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501961" start="3306" end="3320" title="benzopyrene" label="benzo[a]pyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316667" start="3350" end="3356" title="retene" label="retene"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="3359" end="3366" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="3434" end="3460" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="3462" end="3470" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="3472" end="3483" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20236702" start="3485" end="3500" title="Hydroxyacetone" label="hydroxy acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q414189" start="3502" end="3516" title="methyl acetate" label="methyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422777" start="3521" end="3534" title="ethyl formate" label="ethyl formate"/>
<link wikidata="Q243992" start="3650" end="3655" title="furan" label="furan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596886" start="3661" end="3669" title="furanone" label="furanone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193430" start="3672" end="3693" title="Heterocyclic compound" label="Heterocyclic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q186209" start="3753" end="3756" title="tar" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899502" start="4175" end="4193" title="flammability limit" label="flammability limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q748962" start="4230" end="4239" title="flashover" label="flashover"/>
<link wikidata="Q504481" start="4243" end="4252" title="backdraft" label="backdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q412371" start="4328" end="4344" title="carbonyl sulfide" label="carbonyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q243354" start="4362" end="4378" title="carbon disulfide" label="carbon disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="4384" end="4389" title="thiol" label="thiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="4590" end="4598" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="4606" end="4618" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q342790" start="4620" end="4628" title="acrolein" label="acrolein"/>
<link wikidata="Q412429" start="4634" end="4642" title="furfural" label="furfural"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="4654" end="4662" title="alcohols" label="alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="4685" end="4691" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q412403" start="4693" end="4701" title="guaiacol" label="guaiacol"/>
<link wikidata="Q421420" start="4703" end="4711" title="syringol" label="syringol"/>
<link wikidata="Q282440" start="4713" end="4721" title="catechol" label="catechol"/>
<link wikidata="Q413524" start="4727" end="4733" title="cresol" label="cresol"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="4737" end="4752" title="carboxylic acid" label="carboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="4755" end="4766" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="4768" end="4779" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="4801" end="4819" title="Atmospheric particulate matter" label="particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="4864" end="4870" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="4872" end="4876" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="5029" end="5034" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="5060" end="5065" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191831" start="5091" end="5107" title="ammonium sulfate" label="ammonium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="5109" end="5125" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="5130" end="5145" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="5222" end="5233" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="5273" end="5293" title="aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="5308" end="5314" title="adsorb" label="adsorb"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="5429" end="5441" title="solid rocket" label="solid rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="5459" end="5468" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698" start="5470" end="5486" title="Depleted uranium" label="Depleted uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500122" start="5557" end="5570" title="uranium oxide" label="uranium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="5573" end="5581" title="Magnetic" label="Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="5606" end="5615" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411235" start="5621" end="5641" title="ferrous ferric oxide" label="ferrous ferric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="5779" end="5791" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="5832" end="5841" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150950" start="5880" end="5889" title="remanence" label="remanence"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="5891" end="5899" title="paleomagnetism" label="recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="6018" end="6035" title="Curie temperature" label="Curie temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="6124" end="6131" title="Fly ash" label="Fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="6154" end="6160" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="6165" end="6178" title="calcium oxide" label="calcium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058880" start="6180" end="6190" title="Cenosphere" label="Cenosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819233" start="6279" end="6287" title="abrasion (mechanical)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="6321" end="6337" title="Amorphous silica" label="Amorphous silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="6383" end="6391" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q413828" start="6414" end="6429" title="silicon nitride" label="silicon nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="6655" end="6662" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="6664" end="6671" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="6682" end="6694" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910794" start="6709" end="6721" title="hot particle" label="hot particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620824" start="6762" end="6778" title="nuclear accident" label="nuclear accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="6786" end="6804" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="6809" end="6820" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="6941" end="6955" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23005640" start="7027" end="7035" title="Moiety (chemistry)" label="moieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="7039" end="7056" title="accumulation mode" label="accumulation mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="7141" end="7152" title="coarse mode" label="coarse mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191713" start="7270" end="7287" title="dry precipitation" label="dry precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="7583" end="7594" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="7742" end="7747" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="7814" end="7822" title="Vanadium" label="Vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="7852" end="7855" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="7879" end="7889" title="Oil refinery" label="refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="7917" end="7923" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7941" end="7959" title="Fossil fuel power plant#Environmental impacts" label="produces emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="7971" end="7980" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7982" end="7989" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="7991" end="7999" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="8001" end="8007" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="8009" end="8015" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="8017" end="8021" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="8023" end="8030" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="8032" end="8040" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="8046" end="8053" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q426228" start="8139" end="8147" title="vanadate" label="vanadate"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="8167" end="8184" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493450" start="8206" end="8232" title="high temperature corrosion" label="high temperature corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="8268" end="8294" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="8304" end="8311" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="8316" end="8320" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q412403" start="8428" end="8436" title="Guaiacol" label="Guaiacol"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="8486" end="8492" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="8519" end="8523" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q421420" start="8549" end="8557" title="syringol" label="syringol"/>
<link wikidata="Q899597" start="8583" end="8590" title="methoxy" label="methoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="8591" end="8597" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316667" start="8600" end="8606" title="Retene" label="Retene"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="8634" end="8641" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="8668" end="8679" title="forest fire" label="forest fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535767" start="8682" end="8694" title="Levoglucosan" label="Levoglucosan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="8721" end="8730" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="8732" end="8740" title="Hardwood" label="Hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="8744" end="8752" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="8840" end="8871" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898987" start="8874" end="8880" title="hopane" label="hopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q418830" start="8883" end="8890" title="sterane" label="sterane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545799" start="8924" end="8937" title="1-nitropyrene" label="1-nitropyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="9141" end="9149" title="adsorption" label="adsorbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="9381" end="9389" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910794" start="9402" end="9414" title="hot particle" label="hot particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="9419" end="9438" title="radioactive fallout" label="radioactive fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="9515" end="9523" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="9529" end="9540" title="forest fire" label="forest fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050926" start="9573" end="9591" title="Zone of alienation" label="Zone of alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="9625" end="9643" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162367" start="9699" end="9709" title="side group" label="side group"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="9720" end="9731" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086659" start="9859" end="9867" title="charring" label="charring"/>
<link wikidata="Q902863" start="10063" end="10078" title="flame retardant" label="flame retardant"/>
<link wikidata="Q898597" start="10127" end="10137" title="cross-link" label="cross-link"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="10247" end="10256" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="10299" end="10310" title="micrometres" label="micrometres"/>
<link wikidata="Q654068" start="10313" end="10320" title="Visibility" label="Visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q762018" start="10377" end="10386" title="Invisibility" label="Invisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128" start="10470" end="10475" title="Toast (food)" label="toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q640610" start="10656" end="10674" title="ionization chamber" label="ionization chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q565858" start="10680" end="10694" title="smoke detector" label="smoke detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364844" start="10912" end="10923" title="false alarm" label="false alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q902760" start="11086" end="11096" title="smoldering" label="smoldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="11364" end="11368" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23924332" start="11599" end="11617" title="fabric restoration" label="fabric restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q504481" start="12007" end="12016" title="backdraft" label="backdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q748962" start="12021" end="12030" title="flashover" label="flashover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133097" start="12032" end="12048" title="Smoke inhalation" label="Smoke inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="12210" end="12225" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="12237" end="12262" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="12303" end="12319" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="12324" end="12332" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="12508" end="12516" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="12518" end="12530" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="12535" end="12552" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386268" start="12604" end="12619" title="Cigarette smoke" label="Cigarette smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="12658" end="12670" title="lung disease" label="lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="12672" end="12685" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="12696" end="12702" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434880" start="13558" end="13573" title="Surgeon General of the United States" label="Surgeon General"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716050" start="14331" end="14368" title="Worcester Cold Storage Warehouse fire" label="Worcester Cold Storage Warehouse fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="14372" end="14396" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="14723" end="14740" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q423245" start="14745" end="14761" title="hydrobromic acid" label="hydrobromic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="14777" end="14784" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="14796" end="14803" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354051" start="14809" end="14823" title="fire retardant" label="fire retardant"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="14826" end="14843" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="14856" end="14865" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="14869" end="14881" title="fluorocarbon" label="fluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354051" start="14882" end="14904" title="fire suppression agent" label="fire suppression agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="14907" end="14920" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="14937" end="14943" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="14966" end="14977" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="15012" end="15025" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="15039" end="15054" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="15059" end="15067" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="15137" end="15146" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175403" start="15228" end="15244" title="microelectronics" label="microelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="15282" end="15295" title="circuit board" label="circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="15606" end="15629" title="electrically conductive" label="electrically conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q230187" start="15690" end="15699" title="crosstalk" label="crosstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="15803" end="15821" title="Electrical contact" label="Electrical contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="15886" end="15890" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193091" start="16033" end="16048" title="optoelectronics" label="optoelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="16428" end="16436" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="16438" end="16456" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="polyvinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q424370" start="16458" end="16468" title="polyolefin" label="polyolefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="16645" end="16668" title="polytetrafluoroethylene" label="polytetrafluoroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="16798" end="16802" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="17016" end="17021" title="Electrical cable" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975024" start="17052" end="17074" title="low smoke zero halogen" label="low smoke zero halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="17609" end="17622" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140516" start="17635" end="17656" title="particulate pollution" label="particulate pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="17671" end="17703" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="17781" end="17807" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="17823" end="17835" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="17845" end="17859" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="17945" end="17950" title="PM2.5" label="PM2.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="17989" end="18004" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="18242" end="18248" title="Diesel locomotive" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="18253" end="18256" title="Crude oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="18267" end="18275" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="18525" end="18534" title="fireplace" label="fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="18709" end="18713" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="18910" end="18918" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="19388" end="19398" title="Depression (clinical)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="19864" end="19881" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233590" start="19966" end="19977" title="black carbon" label="black smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579085" start="20503" end="20518" title="ASTM smoke pump" label="ASTM smoke pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="20937" end="20947" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="21455" end="21470" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334848" start="21473" end="21489" title="Ringelmann scale" label="Ringelmann scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21539" end="21560" title="Maximilian Ringelmann" label="Maximilian Ringelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133588" start="22664" end="22676" title="nephelometer" label="nephelometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001977" start="22696" end="22708" title="aethalometer" label="aethalometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="23048" end="23063" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="23094" end="23098" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556360" start="23208" end="23216" title="flue gas" label="flue gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284445" start="23383" end="23396" title="smoke control" label="smoke control"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="23546" end="23561" title="medicinal plant" label="medicinal plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="23597" end="23607" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="23614" end="23630" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="23657" end="23663" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264081" start="23674" end="23680" title="censer" label="censer"/>
<link wikidata="Q94857" start="23710" end="23725" title="Peganum harmala" label="Peganum harmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="23733" end="23743" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q210858" start="23744" end="23758" title="Santalum album" label="Santalum album"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="23928" end="23947" title="drug administration" label="drug administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196206" start="24247" end="24259" title="Air purifier" label="Air purifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="24262" end="24269" title="Bonfire" label="Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913640" start="24272" end="24292" title="Great Smog of London" label="Great Smog of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q123134583" start="24295" end="24320" title="Health impacts of sawdust" label="Health impacts of sawdust"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="24323" end="24346" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="Inversion (meteorology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630552" start="24349" end="24359" title="Joss paper" label="Joss paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q120737826" start="24362" end="24383" title="Open burning of waste" label="Open burning of waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="24386" end="24390" title="Smog" label="Smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880535" start="24393" end="24411" title="Ultrafine particle" label="Ultrafine particle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27002" wikidata="Q104526" url="?curid=27002" title="Tobacco pipe">
<text>A tobacco pipe, often called simply a pipe, is a device specifically made to smoke tobacco. It comprises a chamber (the bowl) for the tobacco from which a thin hollow stem (shank) emerges, ending in a mouthpiece. Pipes can range from very simple machine-made briar models to highly prized hand-made artisanal implements made by renowned pipemakers, which are often very expensive collector&#x27;s items. 

==History==


Some cultures of the indigenous peoples of the Americas smoke tobacco in ceremonial pipes, and have done so since long before the arrival of Europeans. For instance the Lakota people use a ceremonial pipe called čhaŋnúŋpa. Other cultures of the indigenous peoples of the Americas smoke tobacco socially. The tobacco plant is native to South America but spread into North America long before Europeans arrived. Tobacco was introduced to Europe from the Americas in the 16th century and spread around the world rapidly.

As tobacco was not introduced to the Old World until the 16th century, the older pipes outside of the Americas were usually used to smoke various other substances, including hashish, a rare and expensive substance outside areas of the Middle East, Central Asia and India, where it was then produced. 

==Workings of a tobacco pipe==
===Principle===
A pipe&#x27;s fundamental function is to provide a relatively safe, manipulable volume in which to incompletely combust a smokable substance. Typically this is accomplished by connecting a refractory &#x27;bowl&#x27; to some sort of &#x27;stem&#x27; which extends and may also cool the smoke mixture drawn through the combusting organic mass (see below).

===Parts===
The broad anatomy of a pipe typically comprises mainly the bowl and the stem. The &quot;bowl&quot; (1) which is the cup-like outer shell, the part hand-held while packing, holding and smoking a pipe, is also the part &quot;knocked&quot; top-down to loosen and release impacted spent tobacco. On being sucked, the general stem delivers the smoke from the bowl to the user&#x27;s mouth.

Inside the bowl is an inner &quot;chamber&quot; (2) space holding tobacco pressed into it. This &quot;draught hole&quot; (3), is for air flow where air has travelled through the tobacco in the chamber, taking the smoke with it, up the &quot;shank&quot; (4). At the end of the shank, the pipe&#x27;s &quot;mortise&quot; (5) and &quot;tenon&quot; (6) joint is an air-tight, simple connection of two detachable parts where the mortise is a hole met by the tenon, a tight-fitting &quot;tongue&quot; at the start of the &quot;stem&quot; (7). Known as the &quot;bore&quot; (10), the inner shaft of this second section stays uniform throughout while the outer stem tapers down to the mouthpiece or &quot;bit&quot; (8) held in the smoker&#x27;s teeth, and finally ends in the &quot;lip&quot; (9), attenuated for comfort.

===Materials===
The bowls of tobacco pipes are commonly made of briar wood, meerschaum, corncob, pear-wood, rose-wood or clay. Less common materials include other dense-grained woods such as cherry, olive, maple, mesquite, oak, and bog-wood. Minerals such as catlinite and soapstone have also been used. Pipe bowls are sometimes decorated by carving, and moulded clay pipes often had simple decoration in the mould.

Unusual pipe materials include gourds (as in the famous calabash pipe) and pyrolytic graphite. Metal and glass, seldom used for tobacco pipes, are common for pipes intended for other substances, such as cannabis.
The stem needs a long channel of constant position and diameter running through it for a proper draw, although filter pipes have varying diameters and can be successfully smoked even without filters or adapters. Because it is molded rather than carved, clay may make up the entire pipe or just the bowl; pipes made of most other materials have stems constructed separately and detachable. Stems and bits of tobacco pipes are usually made of moldable materials like Ebonite, Lucite, Bakelite, or soft plastic. Less common are stems made of reeds, bamboo, or hollowed-out pieces of wood. Expensive pipes once had stems made of amber, though this is rare now.

==Types==

===Pipe shapes===

* Apple. Subtypes: Apple, Author, Diplomat, Egg, Hawkbill, Prince, Tomatoe (Ball).
* Billiard. Subtypes: Billiard, Brandy, Chimney, Panel, Oom Paul, Pot, Nose Warmer.
* Bulldog. Subtypes: Bulldog, Bull Moose, Bullcap, Rhodesian, Ukulele.
* Calabash. Subtypes: Calabash, Reverse Calabash.
* Canadian. Subtypes: Canadian, Liverpool, Lovat, Lumberman.
* Cavalier. Subtypes: Cavalier, Pseudo-cavalier.
* Churchwarden (Reading pipe). – Pipe with a long stem. 
* Dublin. Subtypes: Dublin, Acorn (Pear), Cutty, Devil Anse, Zulu.
* Freehand. Subtypes: Freehand, Blowfish, Horn, Nautilus, Tomahawk, Volcano.
* Sitter. Subtypes: Sitter, Cherrywood, Duke (Don), (Stand Up) Poker, Tankard.
* Tyrolean pipe.
* Vest Pocket.

====Calabash====

Calabash gourds (usually with meerschaum or porcelain bowls set inside them) have long made prized pipes, but they are labour-intensive and, today, quite expensive. Because of this expense, pipes with bodies made of wood (usually mahogany) instead of gourd, but with the same classic shape, are sold as calabashes. Both wood and gourd pipes are functionally the same (with the important exception that the dried gourd, usually being noticeably lighter, sits more comfortably in the mouth). They consist of a downward curve that ends with an upcurve where the bowl sits. Beneath the bowl is an air chamber which serves to cool, dry, and mellow the smoke. There are also briar pipes being sold as calabashes. These typically do not have an air chamber and are so named only because of their external shape.

A calabash pipe is rather large and easy to recognize as a pipe when used on a stage in dramatic productions. Although a British newspaper cartoon of the early 1900s depicts the British actor H. A. Saintsbury as the Great Detective smoking what may be a calabash pipe, its now-stereotypical identification with Sherlock Holmes remains a mystery.

Some commentators have erroneously associated the calabash with William Gillette, the first actor to become universally recognized as the embodiment of the detective. Gillette actually introduced the curving or bent pipe for use by Holmes, but his pipe was an ornate briar. Gillette chose a bent pipe, more easily clenched in the teeth when delivering lines.

While there are promotional stills of Basil Rathbone smoking calabash pipes as Holmes for other projects, most notably his radio show, in his first two outings as Holmes produced by 20th Century-Fox as taking place in the Victorian era, Rathbone smoked an apple-bowled, black briar with a half bend, made by Dunhill, the company known for making the best pipes at that time. In the next dozen films, the series produced by Universal Studios, with Holmes and Watson updated to the 1940s, Rathbone smokes a much less expensive Peterson half bend with a billiard-shaped bowl. A calabash is introduced in &quot;The Spider Woman&quot; but Holmes does not smoke it. 

In the original chronicles, such as &quot;The Adventure of the Copper Beeches&quot;, Sherlock Holmes is described as smoking a long-stemmed cherrywood, which he favored &quot;when in a disputatious, rather than a meditative mood.&quot; Holmes smokes an old briar-root pipe on occasion, for example in &quot;The Sign of the Four&quot;, and an &quot;unsavory&quot; and &quot;disreputable&quot; black and oily clay pipe in several stories, notably in &quot;The Red-Headed League&quot;. Dr Watson declares it to be the detective&#x27;s preferred pipe: &quot;It was to him as a counsellor&quot; (&quot;A Case of Identity&quot;), the &quot;companion of his deepest meditations&quot; (&quot;The Valley of Fear&quot;)..
====Pipes with removable bowl====
Bowls are made of varying shapes and materials to allow the smoker to try different characteristics or to dedicate particular bowls for particular tobaccos. Bowls are not interchangeable between manufacturers.

====Hookahs====

A &quot;hookah&quot;, &quot;ghelyan&quot;, or &quot;narghile&quot;, is a Middle Eastern water pipe that cools the smoke by filtering it through a water chamber. Often ice, cough-drops, milk, or fruit juice is added to the water. Traditionally, the tobacco is mixed with a sweetener, such as honey or molasses. Fruit flavors have also become popular. Modern hookah smokers, especially in the US, smoke &quot;me&#x27;assel&quot;, &quot;moassel&quot;, &quot;molasses&quot; or &quot;shisha&quot;, all names for the same wet mixture of tobacco, molasses/honey, glycerine, and often, flavoring. This style of tobacco is smoked in a bowl with foil or a screen (metal or glass) on top of the bowl. More traditional tobaccos are &quot;tombiek&quot; (a dry unflavored tobacco, which the user moistens in water, squeezes out the extra liquid, and places coals directly on top) or &quot;jarak&quot; (more of a paste of tobacco with fruit to flavor the smoke).

===Bowl materials===
North American natives along the East coast traditionally made their tobacco pipes from clay or from a type of pot-stone (&quot;lapis ollaris&quot;), or else serpentine stone. In the Upper Midwest they made use of the red pipestone or catlinite for the same, a fine-grained easily worked stone of a rich red color of the Coteau des Prairies. Today, other construction materials used for the bowl may include any of the following:
* Briar – root of &quot;Erica arborea&quot;, prevalent material.
* Meerschaum – mineral sepiolite called &quot;sea foam&quot;.
* Gourd
* Porcelain
* Synthetics
* Ebony (&quot;Zappi&quot;)
* Cherry wood
* Beechwood
* Corn cob
* Metal – used by Japanese kiseru and Arabian midwakh.

====Briar====

The majority of pipes sold today, whether handmade or machine-made, are fashioned from briar. Briar is a particularly well suited wood for pipe making for a number of reasons. The first and most important characteristic is its natural resistance to fire. The second is its inherent ability to absorb moisture. The burl absorbs water in nature to supply the tree in the dry times and likewise will absorb the moisture that is a byproduct of combustion. Briar is cut from the root burl of the tree heath (&quot;Erica arborea&quot;), which is native to the rocky and sandy soils of the Mediterranean region. Briar burls are cut into two types of blocks; ebauchon and plateaux. Ebauchon is taken from the heart of the burl while plateaux is taken from the outer part of the burl. While both types of blocks can produce pipes of the highest quality, most artisan pipemakers prefer to use plateaux because of their superior graining.

====Clay====
Ceramic pipes, made of moulded and then fired clay, were used almost universally by Europeans between the introduction of tobacco in the 16th century, and the introduction of cheap cigarettes at the end of the nineteenth. Contrary to popular belief, the stems were not broken off for the next patron when shared in taverns, as the understanding of germs at the time would not have prompted this behavior.

The material is not very strong and the early varieties had long thin stems, so they frequently broke, but were cheap to replace. It has been claimed that this fragility was somewhat intentional as it was utilized by Colonial American tavern keepers, for example, in renting the clay pipes to patrons. It is known that communal pipes used in taverns were cleansed by being heated in an oven on special iron racks.

In England clay pipes were sold in bundles of dozens or twenties, and were often free in taverns, where the tobacco was sold. They were made out of a ball clay. 

Forming the pipe involved making them in moulds with the bore created by pushing an oiled wire inside the stem. The preferred material was pipeclay or &quot;tobacco pipe clay&quot;, which fires to a white colour and is found in only certain locations. In North America, many clay pipes were historically made from more typical terracotta-coloured clays. According to one British writer in 1869, the French preferred old pipes and the English new, the middle class preferred long stems and the working class preferred short. Short stemmed pipes, sometimes called &quot;cuttys&quot; or &quot;nose warmers&quot; in England, were preferred by manual laborers as they could be gripped between the teeth, leaving both of the smoker&#x27;s hands free.

Later low-quality clay pipes were made by slip casting in a mould. Higher quality pipes are made in a labour-intensive hand shaping process. Traditionally, clay pipes are unglazed. Clays burn &quot;hot&quot; in comparison to other types of pipes, so they are often difficult for most pipe-smokers to use. Their proponents claim that, unlike other materials, a well-made clay pipe gives a &quot;pure&quot; smoke with no flavour addition from the pipe bowl. In addition to aficionados, reproductions of historical clay styles are used by some historical re-enactors. Clay pipes were once very popular in Ireland, where they were called


Broken fragments of clay pipe can be useful as dating evidence for archaeologists. English specialists can date a pipe to around a 20-year period. In the 1950s, the American archaeologist J. C. Harrington noted that the bore of pipe stems decreased over time, so a late sixteenth or early seventeenth centuries pipe would have a stem bore diameter of around , but a late eighteenth century pipe would have a bore diameter of around . The size of bowls also increased over time as tobacco became a cheaper commodity, and later pipes tend to be more decorated.

====Corncob====

Made from corncobs, these pipes are cheap and effective at absorbing heat and moisture. After being dried for two years, the cobs are hollowed out to form a bowl shape, then either dipped in a plaster-based mixture or varnished or lacquered on the outside. Shanks made from birch wood are then inserted into the bowls. 

The world&#x27;s oldest and largest manufacturer of corncob pipes is Missouri Meerschaum, located in Washington, Missouri, where the company has produced the pipes since 1869. General Douglas MacArthur and Mark Twain were perhaps the most famous historical smokers of corncob pipes, as well as fictional cartoon characters Popeye and Frosty the Snowman.

Corncob pipes remain popular because they are inexpensive and require no &quot;break-in&quot; period like briar pipes, which means acquiring a layer of carbon in the pipe bowl. Owing to these factors, corncob pipes are often recommended as a &quot;beginner&#x27;s pipe&quot; However, many seasoned pipe smokers enjoy the absorbing effect of the corn cob pipe, keeping tobaccos high in sugar like Virginias cool throughout the smoke. Additionally, pipesmokers who wish to sample different tobaccos and blends might keep a stock of corncobs on hand to permit them to try new flavors without &quot;carryover&quot; from an already-used pipe, sometimes called &quot;ghosting,&quot; or to prevent a potentially bad-tasting tobacco from adding its flavor to a more expensive or favored pipe.

====Meerschaum====
Meerschaum (hydrated magnesium silicate), a mineral found in small shallow deposits mainly around the city of Eskişehir in central Turkey, is prized for the properties which allow it to be carved into finely detailed decorative and figural shapes. It has been used since the 17th century and, with clay pipes, represented the most common medium for pipes before the introduction of briar as the material of choice in the 19th century. The word &quot;meerschaum&quot; means &quot;sea foam&quot; in German, alluding to its natural white color and its surprisingly low weight. Meerschaum is a very porous mineral that absorbs the tars and oils during the smoking process, and gradually changes color to a golden brown. Old, well-smoked meerschaum pipes are valued by collectors for their distinctive coloring.

Meerschaum pipes can either be carved from a block of meerschaum, or pressed from meerschaum dust collected after carving and mixed with an adhesive. The pressed meerschaum pipes are far less absorbent, color in blotches, and lack the smoking quality of the block carved pipe.

====Synthetics====
A variety of other materials may also be used for pipes. The Redmanol corporation manufactured pipes with translucent stems in the 1920s and a series of pipes were manufactured and distributed by the Tar Gard (later Venturi) Corporation of San Francisco from 1965 to 1975. Marketed under names such as &quot;the pipe&quot;, &quot;The Smoke&quot; and &quot;Venturi&quot;, they used materials such as pyrolytic graphite, phenolic resin, nylon, Bakelite and other synthetics, allowing for higher temperatures in the bowl, reduced tar, and aesthetic variations of color and style.
After Venturi stopped making pipes, several companies continue to make pipes from Brylon, a composite of nylon and wood flour, as a cheaper substitute for briar.

===Types and shapes of pipe parts===

====Briar bowl finish types====

* Brushed
* Carved
* Rustic
* Sandblast
* Smooth

====Corn cob bowl finish types====

* Natural
* Stained
* Varnished (Polished)

====Chamber types====
* Important is size – diameter and depth.
* Chamber can be lined with other material, usually meerschaum or metal.

====Tenon shapes====

* Army – Enables the pipe smoker to remove the stem from the shank while hot without fear of warping. Is often seen with a metal band around the shank.
* Screw – Also allows for the immediate removal of the stem from the shank for cleaning while still hot. Often seen on pipes with stingers, allowing the pipe smoker to clean the stinger while still hot, making the task much easier.
* Standard

====Filter types====
* None
* Cooler (Stinger)
* 6 mm
* 9 mm
* Other, e.g. Falcon dry ring.

====Stem materials====

* Acrylic
* Amber
* Bakelite
* Cumberland (Brindle)
* Ebonite
* Horn (Keratin)
* Plastic
* Metal, e.g. Aluminium. Metal stem serves as a heat sink.

====Stem shapes====

* Combination
* Saddle
* Tapered

====Stem curvatures====
* Straight
* Slightly bent (semi-straight, half bent)
* Bent

====Bit shapes====

* Denture
* Fishtail
* P-lip
* Standard

====Bit sizes====
* Regular (single bore)
* Double bore
* Wide comfort
* Double comfort

==Accessories==

===Filters===
Used to absorb moisture, tar and nicotine. Made of:
* Paper
* Balsa wood
* Meerschaum
* Charcoal (activated carbon)
* Other, e.g. Falcon dry ring or Denicool filter crystals.

Filters can be single- or double-sided. Double-sided filter has both ends ceramic that can withstand hot smoke. Single-sided filter has ceramic end to the bowl and plastic end to the stem.

==Use==
Smoking a pipe involves more equipment and technique than smoking cigarettes or cigars. In addition to the pipe and a source of ignition like matches or a pipe lighter, pipe smokers typically use a pipe tool for packing, adjusting, and emptying tobacco from the bowl, along with a regular supply of pipe cleaners to maintain the pipe. In 18th-century North America, smokers used a &quot;tobacco-stopper&quot; to press tobacco into the pipe’s bowl, with some of these stoppers made from bones, such as those extracted from the male anatomy of raccoons, reflecting the resourcefulness of the era’s material culture.

===Tobacco===
Tobacco for smoking in pipes are often carefully treated and blended to achieve flavour nuances not available in other tobacco products. Many of these are blends using staple ingredients of variously cured Burley and Virginia tobaccos which are enhanced by spice tobaccos, among them many Oriental or Balkan varietals, Latakia (a fire-cured spice tobacco of Syrian origin, but now made in other regions, such as, Cyprus and Lebanon), Perique (uniquely grown in St. James Parish, Louisiana) which is also an old method of fermentation, or blends of Virginia and Burley tobaccos of African, Indian, or South American origins. Traditionally, many U.S. blends are made of American Burley with sweeteners and flavorings added to create an &quot;aromatic&quot; flavor, whereas &quot;English&quot; blends are based on natural Virginia tobaccos enhanced with Oriental and other natural tobaccos. There is a growing tendency towards &quot;natural&quot; tobaccos which derive their aromas from artful blending with selected spice tobaccos only and careful, often historically-based, curing processes.

Pipe tobacco can be purchased in several forms, which vary both in flavour (leading to many blends and opportunities for smokers to blend their own tobaccos) and in the physical shape and size to which the tobacco has been reduced. Most pipe tobaccos are less mild than cigarette tobacco, substantially more moist and cut much more coarsely. Too finely cut tobacco does not allow enough air to flow through the pipe, and overly dry tobacco burns too quickly with little flavour. Pipe tobacco must be kept in an airtight container, such as a canning jar or sealed tin, to keep from drying out.

Some pipe tobaccos are cut into long narrow ribbons. Some are pressed into flat plugs which are sliced into flakes. Others are tightly wound into long ropes, then sliced into discs. Plug tobacco is maintained in its pressed block form and sold in small blocks. The plug will be sliced into thin flakes by the smoker and then prepared in a similar fashion to flake tobacco. It is considered that plug tobacco holds its flavor better than rubbed or flake tobacco. Flake tobacco (sliced cakes or ropes) may be prepared in several ways. Generally it is rubbed out with the fingers and palms until it is loose enough to pack. It can also be crumbled or simply folded and stuffed into a pipe. Some people also prefer to dice up very coarse tobaccos before using them, making them easier to pack.

===Packing===

In the most common method of packing, tobacco is added to the bowl of the pipe in several batches, each one pressed down until the mixture has a uniform density that optimizes airflow (something that it is difficult to gauge without practice). This can be done with a finger or thumb, but if the tobacco needs to be repacked later, while it is burning, the tamper on a pipe tool is sometimes used. If it needs to be loosened, the reamer, or any similar long pin can be used. A traditional way of packing the pipe is to fill the bowl and then pack gently to about full, fill again and pack slightly more firmly to about full, and then pack more firmly still to the top.

An alternative packing technique called the Frank method involves lightly dropping tobacco in the pipe, after which a large plug is gingerly pushed into the bowl all at once.

===Lighting===


Matches, or separately lit slivers of wood are often considered preferable to lighters because of lower burning temperature. Butane lighters made specifically for pipes 
emit flame sideways or at an angle to make it easier to direct flame into the bowl. Torch-style lighters should never be used to light a pipe because their flames are too hot and can char the rim of the pipe bowl. Matches should be allowed to burn for several seconds to allow the sulfur from the tip to burn away and the match to produce a full flame. A naphtha fueled lighter should also be allowed to burn a few seconds to get rid of stray naphtha vapors that could give a foul taste to the smoke. When a flame has been produced, it is then moved in circles above the rim of the bowl while the smoker puffs to draw the flame down and light the tobacco. Packing method and humidity can affect how often a pipe must be relit.

===Burning prevention===

With care, a briar pipe can last a very long time without burning out. However, due to aggressive (hot) smoking or imperfections in the wood, a hole can be burned in the tobacco chamber of the pipe. There are several methods used to help prevent a wood pipe from burning out. These generally involve coating the chamber with any of a variety of substances, or by gently smoking a new pipe to build up a cake (a mixture of ash, unburned tobacco, oils, sugars, and other residue) on the walls.

These coatings may include honey and water; powdered sugar and water; cigar ash and water; and sour cream, buttermilk, and activated charcoal among many others.

Many modern briar pipes are pre-treated by the manufacturer to resist burning. If smoked correctly, the cake will build up properly on its own. Another technique is to alternate a half-bowl and a full-bowl the first several times the pipe is used to build an even cake. Burley is often recommended to help a new pipe build cake.

The caked layer that helps prevent burning through the bottom or sides of a briar wood pipe may damage other pipes, such as meerschaum or clay. As the cake layer heats up, it expands and may cause cracks or breaks in non-briar pipes.

===Smoking===

Pipe smoke, like cigar smoke, is usually not inhaled. It is merely brought into the mouth, pumped around oral and nasal cavities to permit absorption of nicotine toward the brain through the mucous membranes, and released. It is normal to have to relight a pipe periodically. If it is smoked too slowly, this will happen more often. If it is smoked too quickly, it can produce excess moisture, causing a gurgling sound in the pipe and an uncomfortable sensation on the tongue (referred to as &quot;pipe tongue&quot;, or more commonly, &quot;tongue bite&quot;).

A pipe cleaner can be used to dry out the bowl and, wetted with alcohol, the inner channel. The bowl of the pipe can also become uncomfortably hot, depending on the material and the rate of smoking. For this reason, clay pipes in particular are often held by the stem. Meerschaum pipes are held in a square of chamois leather, with gloves, or else by the stem in order to prevent uneven coloring of the material.
===Cleaning===
The ash and the last bits of unburned tobacco, known as dottle, should be cleaned out with a suitable pipe tool. A soft or bristle pipe cleaner, which may be moistened with strong spirits, is then run through the airways of the stem and shank to remove any moisture, ash, and other residue before the pipe is allowed to dry. A pipe should be allowed to cool before removing the stem to avoid the possibility of warping it.

A cake of ash eventually develops inside the bowl. This is generally considered desirable for controlling overall heat. However, if it becomes too thick, it may expand faster than the bowl of the pipe itself when heated, cracking the bowl. Before reaching this point, it needs to be scraped down with a reamer. It is generally recommended to keep the cake at approximately the thickness of a U.S. dime (about 1/20 of an inch or 1.5 mm), though sometimes the cake is removed entirely as part of efforts to eliminate flavors or aromas.

Cake is considered undesirable in meerschaum pipes because it can easily crack the bowl or interfere with the mineral&#x27;s natural porosity. Meerschaum also softens when heated so it is recommended to allow meerschaum pipes to cool before cleaning as people have been known to push pipe cleaners through the walls of heated pipes.

Regardless whether a pipe is cleaned after every smoke, over time there is a buildup of cake in the bowl and tars in the internals of a smoking pipe. The cake can be controlled by gentle reaming, but a buildup of tars in the shank and airway of a pipe is more difficult to deal with. This may require the services of a professional pipe restorer to properly clean and sanitize the pipe.

===Sweetening===

When tobacco is burned, oils from adjoining not yet ignited particles vaporize and condense into the existing cake on the walls of the bowl and shank. Over time, these oils can oxidize and turn rancid, causing the pipe to give a sour or bitter smoke. A purported countermeasure involves filling the bowl with kosher salt and carefully wetting it with strong spirits. It is important to not use iodized salt, as the iodine and other additives may impart an unpleasant flavor. Regularly wiping out the bowl with spirits such as vodka or rum is helpful in preventing souring. Commercial pipe-sweetening products are also available.

==See also==
* Bubble pipe
* Ceremonial pipe
* Churchwarden pipe
* International Pipe Smoking Day
* Kiseru
* List of notable pipe smokers
* Pipe Smoker of the Year
* Pipe tool

==References==
==Further reading==
*Taylor, P.J. (2022) The Origins and Maritime Expansion of the Tobacco Pipe Trade of Southern England: An Archaeological and Historical Study, 1585-1640 http://doi.org/10.17638/03160917

*The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001-05.

==External links==
*Pipedia: Comprehensive Online Pipe &amp; Pipemakers Encyclopedia
*Pipes: Logos &amp; Markings*Hungarian clay tobacco pipes
*Tobacco Pipes at A History of Central Florida Podcast
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="2" end="14" title="Tobacco pipe" label="tobacco pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="38" end="42" title="Tobacco pipe" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="83" end="90" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951041" start="120" end="124" title="bowl (smoking)" label="bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="380" end="401" title="collector&amp;#x27;s item" label="collector&amp;#x27;s item"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="441" end="475" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q253390" start="493" end="508" title="ceremonial pipe" label="ceremonial pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="589" end="602" title="Lakota People" label="Lakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072702" start="632" end="641" title="Chanunpa" label="čhaŋnúŋpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="942" end="949" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="976" end="985" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="1113" end="1120" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q147314" start="2466" end="2473" title="Mortise and tenon" label="mortise"/>
<link wikidata="Q176647" start="2920" end="2925" title="Erica arborea" label="briar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767314" start="2932" end="2942" title="Meerschaum pipe" label="meerschaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885918" start="2944" end="2951" title="corncob" label="corncob"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="2964" end="2973" title="Rosewood" label="rose-wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2977" end="2981" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="3047" end="3053" title="cherry" label="cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="3055" end="3060" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="3062" end="3067" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315767" start="3069" end="3077" title="mesquite" label="mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="3079" end="3082" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q649645" start="3088" end="3096" title="bog-wood" label="bog-wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q931082" start="3115" end="3124" title="catlinite" label="catlinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q707896" start="3129" end="3138" title="soapstone" label="soapstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3329" end="3337" title="#Calabash" label="calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363445" start="3348" end="3366" title="Pyrolytic carbon" label="pyrolytic graphite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3450" end="3466" title="Pipe smoking#Substance-specific pipes" label="other substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="3476" end="3484" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q461714" start="3951" end="3958" title="Ebonite" label="Ebonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="3960" end="3966" title="Poly(methyl methacrylate)" label="Lucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="3968" end="3976" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="3986" end="3993" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734060" start="4025" end="4030" title="Reed (plant)" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="4032" end="4038" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="4111" end="4116" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277255" start="4903" end="4911" title="Calabash" label="Calabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="4912" end="4917" title="gourd" label="gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q414096" start="4933" end="4943" title="meerschaum" label="meerschaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="4947" end="4956" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="5133" end="5141" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127783" start="5901" end="5917" title="H. A. Saintsbury" label="H. A. Saintsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="6020" end="6035" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q983339" start="6120" end="6136" title="William Gillette" label="William Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q336865" start="6454" end="6468" title="Basil Rathbone" label="Basil Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="6598" end="6614" title="20th Century-Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="6638" end="6651" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="6839" end="6856" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170437" start="7023" end="7039" title="The Spider Woman" label="The Spider Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201451" start="7120" end="7155" title="The Adventure of the Copper Beeches" label="The Adventure of the Copper Beeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q500688" start="7385" end="7405" title="The Sign of the Four" label="The Sign of the Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151528" start="7675" end="7693" title="A Case of Identity" label="A Case of Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q863438" start="7762" end="7780" title="The Valley of Fear" label="The Valley of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="8352" end="8360" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q707896" start="9150" end="9163" title="Lapis Ollaris" label="lapis ollaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q737339" start="9180" end="9196" title="Serpentine (stone)" label="serpentine stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="9205" end="9218" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q931082" start="9257" end="9266" title="catlinite" label="catlinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136590" start="9343" end="9362" title="Coteau des Prairies" label="Coteau des Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q414096" start="9519" end="9529" title="Sepiolite" label="Meerschaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="9581" end="9586" title="Gourd" label="Gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885918" start="9668" end="9676" title="Corncob" label="Corn cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483983" start="9704" end="9710" title="kiseru" label="kiseru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843141" start="9723" end="9730" title="midwakh" label="midwakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q176647" start="9835" end="9840" title="briar wood" label="briar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483529" start="10062" end="10066" title="burl" label="burl"/>
<link wikidata="Q176647" start="10239" end="10249" title="tree heath" label="tree heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="10331" end="10351" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="10690" end="10697" title="Ceramic" label="Ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="10736" end="10740" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881035" start="11661" end="11670" title="ball clay" label="ball clay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11813" end="11821" title="Clay#Historical and modern uses" label="pipeclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="12001" end="12011" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920409" start="12462" end="12474" title="Ceramic forming techniques" label="slip casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="12961" end="12983" title="Historical reenactment" label="historical re-enactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103968" start="13244" end="13260" title="J. C. Harrington" label="J. C. Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885918" start="13643" end="13651" title="corncob" label="corncobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="13826" end="13833" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="13851" end="13858" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="13864" end="13871" title="lacquer" label="lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="13907" end="13912" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779984" start="14023" end="14042" title="Missouri Meerschaum" label="Missouri Meerschaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q761885" start="14055" end="14075" title="Washington, Missouri" label="Washington, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="14138" end="14155" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="14160" end="14170" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199796" start="14277" end="14283" title="Popeye" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569914" start="14288" end="14306" title="Frosty the Snowman" label="Frosty the Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q414096" start="15114" end="15124" title="Meerschaum" label="Meerschaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="15158" end="15165" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="15224" end="15233" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="15611" end="15617" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363445" start="16618" end="16636" title="pyrolytic graphite" label="pyrolytic graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="16638" end="16652" title="phenolic resin" label="phenolic resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="16654" end="16659" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="16661" end="16669" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q816713" start="16911" end="16921" title="wood flour" label="wood flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="17970" end="17979" title="heat sink" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="18820" end="18827" title="Match" label="matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="18838" end="18845" title="lighter" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197252" start="18876" end="18885" title="pipe tool" label="pipe tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355092" start="18977" end="18990" title="Pipe cleaner" label="pipe cleaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="19220" end="19228" title="Raccoon" label="raccoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979910" start="19626" end="19633" title="Latakia (tobacco)" label="Latakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071138" start="19741" end="19748" title="Perique" label="Perique"/>
<link wikidata="Q507016" start="19768" end="19795" title="St. James Parish, Louisiana" label="St. James Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999148" start="19868" end="19874" title="Burley (tobacco)" label="Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q620207" start="22067" end="22073" title="finger" label="finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q83360" start="22077" end="22082" title="thumb" label="thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197252" start="22168" end="22177" title="pipe tool" label="pipe tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919499" start="22513" end="22525" title="Frank method" label="Frank method"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="22662" end="22669" title="Matches" label="Matches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22787" end="22802" title="Butane lighters" label="Butane lighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="23113" end="23119" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q898983" start="23187" end="23194" title="naphtha" label="naphtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="24174" end="24184" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="24186" end="24196" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="24202" end="24220" title="activated charcoal" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999148" start="24511" end="24517" title="Burley (tobacco)" label="Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450533" start="25693" end="25708" title="chamois leather" label="chamois leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299516" start="25867" end="25873" title="dottle" label="dottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197252" start="25913" end="25922" title="pipe tool" label="pipe tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355092" start="25942" end="25954" title="pipe cleaner" label="pipe cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="25991" end="25998" title="Distilled beverage" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q756431" start="26632" end="26636" title="Dime (United States coin)" label="dime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116639" start="27819" end="27830" title="kosher salt" label="kosher salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847873" start="28155" end="28166" title="Bubble pipe" label="Bubble pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q253390" start="28169" end="28184" title="Ceremonial pipe" label="Ceremonial pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408838" start="28187" end="28204" title="Churchwarden pipe" label="Churchwarden pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284464" start="28207" end="28237" title="International Pipe Smoking Day" label="International Pipe Smoking Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483983" start="28240" end="28246" title="Kiseru" label="Kiseru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995748" start="28249" end="28277" title="List of notable pipe smokers" label="List of notable pipe smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197231" start="28280" end="28303" title="Pipe Smoker of the Year" label="Pipe Smoker of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197252" start="28306" end="28315" title="Pipe tool" label="Pipe tool"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27003" wikidata="Q4117114" url="?curid=27003" title="Swiss cheese (North America)">
<text>The term &quot;Swiss cheese&quot; is one used of any variety of cheese that resembles Emmental cheese, a yellow, medium-hard cheese that originated in the area around Emmental, Switzerland. It is classified as a Swiss-type or Alpine cheese. The term is generic; it does not imply that the cheese is actually made in Switzerland. Some types of Swiss cheese have a distinctive appearance, as the blocks or rounds of the cheese are riddled with holes known as &quot;eyes&quot;. Cheese without eyes is known as &quot;blind&quot;. 

&quot;Swiss cheese&quot; is now produced in many countries, including the United States, Finland, Estonia, and Ireland. It is sometimes made with pasteurized or part-skim milk, unlike the original from Switzerland made with raw milk. The United States Department of Agriculture uses the terms Swiss cheese and Emmentaler cheese interchangeably. In Australia, both terms are used, along with Swiss-style cheese, in some cases differentiating the two. The term Swiss cheese is sometimes used in India, although it is also often referred to as Emmental.

==Production==
Three types of bacteria are used in the production of Swiss cheese: &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus&quot;, &quot;Lactobacillus&quot; (&quot;L. helveticus&quot; or &quot;L. delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot;), and &quot;Propionibacterium&quot; (&quot;Propionibacterium freudenreichii&quot; subsp. &quot;shermani&quot;). In a late stage of cheese production, the propionibacteria consume the lactic acid excreted by the other bacteria and release acetate, propionic acid, and carbon dioxide gas. The carbon dioxide slowly forms the bubbles that develop the &quot;eyes&quot;. The acetate and propionic acid give Swiss its nutty and sweet flavor. A hypothesis proposed by Swiss researchers in 2015 notes that particulate matter may also play a role in the holes&#x27; development and that modern sanitation, which eliminated debris such as hay dust in the milk, played a role in reduced hole size in Swiss cheeses, or even &quot;blind cheese&quot;. Historically, the holes were seen as a sign of imperfection and cheese makers originally tried to avoid them by pressing during production; the holes only became an identifier of the cheese in modern times.

In general, the larger the eyes in a Swiss cheese, the more pronounced its flavor because a longer fermentation period gives the bacteria more time to act. This poses a problem, because cheese with large eyes does not slice well and comes apart in mechanical slicers. As a result, U.S. industry regulators have reduced the minimum eye size with which Swiss cheese can receive the Grade A stamp.

Typical annual production of Swiss cheese in the United States is approximately .

==Variants==
Baby Swiss and Lacy Swiss are two varieties of American Swiss cheeses. Both have small holes and a mild flavor. Baby Swiss is made from whole milk, and Lacy Swiss is made from low fat milk. Baby Swiss was developed in the mid-1960s outside of Charm, Ohio, by the Guggisberg Cheese Company, owned by Alfred Guggisberg.

==See also==
*Maasdam cheese
*List of Swiss cheeses
==References==
==External links==
* Swiss Cheese Niche microbewiki.kenyon.edu 
* Making Swiss Cheese biology.clc.uc.edu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4117114" start="15" end="27" title="Swiss cheese (North America)" label="Swiss cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="64" end="70" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q932214" start="86" end="101" title="Emmental cheese" label="Emmental cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546121" start="113" end="131" title="medium-hard cheese" label="medium-hard cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q684648" start="167" end="175" title="Emmental" label="Emmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841993" start="212" end="239" title="Swiss-type cheeses" label="Swiss-type or Alpine cheese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="260" title="Trademark distinctiveness#Generic terms" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422794" start="463" end="467" title="Eyes (cheese)" label="eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="674" end="685" title="pasteurized" label="pasteurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352187" start="689" end="703" title="skim milk" label="part-skim milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="766" end="805" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041276" start="1169" end="1195" title="Streptococcus thermophilus" label="Streptococcus thermophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061596" start="1209" end="1222" title="Lactobacillus" label="Lactobacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142378" start="1236" end="1249" title="Lactobacillus helveticus" label="L. helveticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q262677" start="1259" end="1315" title="Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus" label="&amp;quot;L. delbrueckii&amp;quot; subsp. &amp;quot;bulgaricus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309614" start="1328" end="1345" title="Propionibacterium" label="Propionibacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008030" start="1353" end="1425" title="Propionibacter shermani" label="&amp;quot;Propionibacterium freudenreichii&amp;quot; subsp. &amp;quot;shermani&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="1499" end="1510" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="1554" end="1561" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422956" start="1563" end="1577" title="propionic acid" label="propionic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1583" end="1597" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950796" start="2361" end="2373" title="fermentation (food)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12832976" start="2997" end="3008" title="Charm, Ohio" label="Charm, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273732" start="3087" end="3101" title="Maasdam cheese" label="Maasdam cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q285758" start="3103" end="3124" title="List of Swiss cheeses" label="List of Swiss cheeses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27004" wikidata="Q401104" url="?curid=27004" title="Spontaneous combustion (disambiguation)">
<text>Spontaneous combustion is the self-ignition of a mass, for example, a pile of oily rags. Allegedly, humans can also ignite and burn without an obvious cause; this phenomenon is known as spontaneous human combustion.

Spontaneous Combustion is also the name of:
* &quot;Spontaneous Combustion&quot; (album), a 2007 album by Liquid Trio Experiment
* &quot;Spontaneous Combustion&quot; (film), a 1990 film by Tobe Hooper
* &quot;Spontaneous Combustion&quot; (&quot;South Park&quot;), an episode of the South Park television series
* Spontaneous Combustion (American band), US bluegrass/rock fusion band of the 1990s
* Spontaneous Combustion (English band), English progressive rock band of the 1970s
* &quot;Spontaneous Combustion&quot;, a song from Ted Nugent&#x27;s 1981 live album &quot;Intensities in 10 Cities&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="0" end="22" title="Spontaneous combustion" label="Spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q330305" start="186" end="214" title="spontaneous human combustion" label="spontaneous human combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241271" start="263" end="305" title="Spontaneous Combustion (album)" label="&amp;quot;Spontaneous Combustion&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418807" start="348" end="389" title="Spontaneous Combustion (film)" label="&amp;quot;Spontaneous Combustion&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q549357" start="420" end="479" title="Spontaneous Combustion (South Park)" label="&amp;quot;Spontaneous Combustion&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;South Park&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579047" start="530" end="568" title="Spontaneous Combustion (American band)" label="Spontaneous Combustion (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320142" start="615" end="652" title="Spontaneous Combustion (English band)" label="Spontaneous Combustion (English band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153036" start="787" end="811" title="Intensities in 10 Cities" label="Intensities in 10 Cities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27005" wikidata="Q659892" url="?curid=27005" title="Smoke signal">
<text>The smoke signal is one of the oldest forms of long-distance communication. It is a form of visual communication used over a long distance. In general smoke signals are used to transmit news, signal danger, or to gather people to a common area.

==History and usage==
In ancient China, soldiers along the Great Wall sent smoke signals on its beacon towers to warn one another of enemy invasion. The colour of the smoke communicated the size of the invading party. By placing the beacon towers at regular intervals, and situating a soldier in each tower, messages could be transmitted over the entire 7,300 kilometres of the Wall. Smoke signals also warned the inner castles of the invasion, allowing them to coordinate a defense and garrison supporting troops.

During the Kandyan period, soldiers stationed on the mountain peaks alerted each other of impending enemy attack (from English, Dutch or Portuguese people) by signaling from peak to peak. In this way, they could transmit a message to the King in just a few hours.&lt;ref name=&quot;Kandy 1681/2004&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Misuse of the smoke signal is traditionally considered to have contributed to the fall of the Western Zhou dynasty in the 8th century BCE. King You of Zhou was said to have had a habit of fooling his warlords with false warning beacons to amuse Bao Si, his concubine.

North American indigenous peoples also communicated via smoke signal. Each tribe had its own signaling system and understanding. A signaler started a fire on an elevation typically using damp grass, which caused a column of smoke to rise. The grass was taken off as it dried and another bundle was placed on the fire. Reputedly the location of the smoke along the incline conveyed a meaning. If it came from halfway up the hill, it signaled that all was well; but from the top of the hill, it signified danger.

Smoke signals remain in use today. The College of Cardinals uses smoke signals to indicate the selection of a new Pope during a papal conclave. Eligible cardinals conduct a secret ballot until someone receives a vote of two-thirds plus one. The ballots are burned after each vote. Black smoke indicates a failed ballot, and white smoke means a new Pope has been elected.

Colored smoke grenades are commonly used by military forces to mark positions, especially during calls for artillery or air support.

Smoke signals may also refer to smoke-producing devices used to send distress signals.

==Examples==

===Native Americans===

Lewis and Clark&#x27;s journals cite several occasions when they adopted the Native American method of setting the plains on fire to communicate the presence of their party or their desire to meet with local tribes.

====Yámana====
Yámanas of South America used fire to send messages by smoke signals, for instance if a whale drifted ashore. The large amount of meat required notification of many people so that it would not be wasted. They might also have used smoke signals on other occasions—thus it is possible that Magellan saw such fires and was inspired to name the landscape Tierra del Fuego (&quot;Land of Fire&quot;); however, he may have seen the smoke or lights of natural phenomena.

===Noon Gun ===
The Cape Town Noon Gun, specifically the smoke its firing generates, was used to set marine chronometers in Table Bay.

===Aboriginal Australians===
Aboriginal Australians throughout Australia have used smoke signals for various purposes— sometimes to notify others of their presence, particularly when entering lands which were not their own. Sometimes used to describe visiting Whites, smoke signals were the fastest way to send messages. Smoke signals were sometimes used to notify of incursions by hostile tribes, or to arrange meetings between hunting parties of the same tribe. This signal could be from a fixed lookout on a ridge or from a mobile band of tribesman. &quot;Putting up a smoke&quot; often promoted nearby individuals or groups to reply with their own signals. Different colours of smoke (black, white or blue, depending on whether the material being burnt was wet grass, dry grass, reeds or other materials) were used to convert information, as was the smoke&#x27;s shape (a column, ball or ring), allowing a messaging system sophisticated enough to include the names of individual tribesmen. Like other means of communication, signals could be misinterpreted. In one recorded instance, a smoke signal reply translated as &quot;we are coming&quot; was misinterpreted as joining a war party for protection of the tribe, when it was actually to indicate hunting parties coming together after a successful hunt.

===Aviation===
Modern aviation has made skywriting possible.

== See also ==

* Polybius square
* Optical telegraph

==Notes==
==References==
* Translation of the original: Title means: “Stone of sun”; chapter means: “The land of burnt-out fires”. (Leningrad: &quot;Children&#x27;s Literature&quot; Publishing.)

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q659892" start="4" end="16" title="Smoke signal" label="smoke signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899679" start="92" end="112" title="visual communication" label="visual communication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="271" end="284" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="305" end="315" title="Great Wall" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="342" end="348" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764378" start="773" end="787" title="Kandyan period" label="Kandyan period"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="881" end="888" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="890" end="895" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="899" end="916" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="1177" end="1197" title="Western Zhou dynasty" label="Western Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="1217" end="1220" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193397" start="1222" end="1238" title="King You of Zhou" label="King You of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069735" start="1328" end="1334" title="Bao Si" label="Bao Si"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1352" end="1385" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="North American indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="1427" end="1432" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="1903" end="1923" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1924" end="1942" title="Papal_conclave#Fumata" label="uses smoke signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1978" end="1982" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="1992" end="2006" title="papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="2037" end="2050" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067247" start="2244" end="2257" title="smoke grenade" label="smoke grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="2439" end="2454" title="distress signal" label="distress signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q580659" start="2728" end="2735" title="Yamana people" label="Yámanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2739" end="2752" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="3079" end="3095" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="3213" end="3222" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3223" end="3231" title="Noon Gun#Time signalling" label="Noon Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="3294" end="3312" title="marine chronometer" label="marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q531909" start="3317" end="3326" title="Table Bay" label="Table Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="3358" end="3380" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="4662" end="4670" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122474" start="4680" end="4690" title="skywriting" label="skywriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q846324" start="4720" end="4735" title="Polybius square" label="Polybius square"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="4738" end="4755" title="Optical telegraph" label="Optical telegraph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27006" wikidata="Q166039" url="?curid=27006" title="Serendipity">
<text>Serendipity is an unplanned fortunate discovery. The term was coined by Horace Walpole in 1754. 

The concept is often associated with scientific and technological breakthroughs, where accidental discoveries led to new insights or inventions. Many significant discoveries in history were serendipitous, including penicillin, Post-it notes, Popsicles, and the microwave oven, arising from unforeseen circumstances that were then recognized and capitalized upon.

While serendipity in popular usage is often understood as a matter of pure chance, scientific discussions emphasize the crucial role of human agency—recognizing, interpreting, and acting upon unexpected opportunities. This interaction between chance and conscious action has been a key theme in areas such as creativity, leadership, innovation, and entrepreneurship.

Christian Busch views serendipity as &quot;active luck&quot;, where chance encounters and human action come together. A missed flight or a casual walk in the park can lead to new friendships, interests, or even career opportunities.

==Etymology==
The first noted use of &quot;serendipity&quot; was by Horace Walpole on 28 January 1754. In a letter he wrote to his friend Horace Mann, Walpole explained an unexpected discovery he had made about a lost painting of Bianca Cappello by Giorgio Vasari by reference to a Persian fairy tale, &quot;The Three Princes of Serendip&quot;. The princes, he told his correspondent, were &quot;always making discoveries, by accidents and sagacity, of things which they were not in quest of.&quot; The name comes from &quot;Serendip&quot;, an old Persian name for Sri Lanka (Ceylon), hence &quot;Sarandib&quot; by Arab traders. It is derived from the Sanskrit &quot;Siṃhaladvīpaḥ&quot; (Siṃhalaḥ, Sinhalese + dvīpaḥ, island), meaning Isle of the Sinhalas.

The word has been exported into many other languages, with the general meaning of &quot;unexpected discovery&quot; or &quot;fortunate chance&quot;.

== Applications ==

=== Inventions ===
 The term &quot;serendipity&quot; is often applied to inventions made by chance rather than intent. Andrew Smith, editor of &quot;The&quot; &quot;Oxford Companion to American Food and Drink&quot;, has speculated that most everyday products had serendipitous roots, with many early ones related to animals. The origin of cheese, for example, possibly originated in the nomad practice of storing milk in the stomach of a dead camel that was attached to the saddle of a live one, thereby mixing rennet from the stomach with the milk stored within.

Other examples of serendipity in inventions include:
* The Post-It Note, which emerged after 3M scientist Spencer Silver produced a weak adhesive, and a colleague used it to keep bookmarks in place on a church hymnal.
* Silly Putty, which came from a failed attempt at synthetic rubber.
* The use of sensors to prevent automobile air bags from killing children, which came from a chair developed by the MIT Media Lab for a Penn and Teller magic show.
* The microwave oven. Raytheon scientist Percy Spencer first patented the idea behind it after noticing that emissions from radar equipment had melted the candy in his pocket.
* The Velcro hook-and-loop fastener. George de Mestral came up with the idea after a bird hunting trip when he viewed cockleburs stuck to his pants under a microscope and saw that each burr was covered with tiny hooks.
* The Popsicle, whose origins go back to San Francisco where Frank Epperson, age 11, accidentally left a mix of water and soda powder outside to freeze overnight.
* The polymer teflon, which Roy J. Plunkett observed forming a white mass inside a pressure bottle during an effort to make a new CFCs refrigerant. 
*The antibiotic penicillin, which was discovered by Sir Alexander Fleming after returning from a vacation to find that a Petri dish containing staphylococcus culture had been infected by a &quot;Penicillium&quot; mold, and no bacteria grew near it.
*The effect on humans of the psychedelic lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) was discovered by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann in 1943, after unintentionally ingesting an unknown amount, possibly absorbing it through his skin.

=== Discoveries ===

Serendipity contributed to entomologist Shaun Winterton discovering &quot;Semachrysa jade&quot;, a new species of lacewing, which he found not in its native Malaysia, but on the photo-sharing site Flickr. Winterton&#x27;s discovery was aided by Flickr&#x27;s ability to present images that are personalized to a user&#x27;s interests, thereby increasing the odds he would chance upon the photo. Computer scientist Jaime Teevan has argued that serendipitous discovery is promoted by such personalisation, writing that &quot;people don&#x27;t know what to do with random new information. Instead, we want information that is at the fringe of what we already know, because that is when we have the cognitive structures to make sense of the new ideas.&quot;

=== Online activity ===
Serendipity is a design principle for online activity that would present viewpoints that diverge from those participants already hold. Harvard Law professor Cass Sunstein argues that such an &quot;architecture of serendipity&quot; would promote a healthier democracy. Like a great city or university, &quot;a well-functioning information market&quot; provides exposure to new ideas, people, and ways of life. &quot;Serendipity is crucial because it expands your horizons. You need that if you want to be free.&quot; The idea has potential application in the design of social media, information searches, and web browsing.

==Related terms==
Several uncommonly used terms have been derived from the concept and name of serendipity.

William Boyd coined the term zemblanity in the late twentieth century to mean somewhat the opposite of serendipity: &quot;making unhappy, unlucky and expected discoveries occurring by design&quot;. The derivation is speculative, but believed to be from Nova Zembla, a barren archipelago once the site of Russian nuclear testing.

Bahramdipity is derived directly from Bahram Gur as characterized in &quot;The Three Princes of Serendip&quot;. It describes the &quot;suppression&quot; of serendipitous discoveries or research results by powerful individuals.

In addition, Solomon &amp; Bronstein (2018) further distinguish between perceptual and realised pseudo-serendipity and nemorinity.

==See also==
* Browse
* Coincidence
* Felix culpa
* Insight
* Lateral thinking
* Multiple discovery
* Role of chance in scientific discoveries
* &quot;Serendipaceratops&quot;
* Serendipity Sapphire
* Side effect
* Synchronicity

==References==
==Further reading==
* (Manuscript written 1958).
*
*Isabelle Rivoal and Noel B. Salazar (2013). Contemporary ethnographic practice and the value of serendipity, &quot;Social Anthropology,&quot; 21(2): 178–85.

==External links==
* ACM Paper on Creating serendipitous encounters in a geographically distributed community.
* The Serendipity Equations
* Serendipity of Science – a BBC Radio 4 series by Simon Singh
* Video: Are Scientific Discoveries Merely Lucky Shots?, Samantha Copeland, Delft University of Technology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166039" start="0" end="11" title="Serendipity" label="Serendipity"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="72" end="86" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="313" end="323" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181331" start="325" end="338" title="Post-it note" label="Post-it notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270260" start="340" end="349" title="Popsicle (brand)" label="Popsicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="359" end="373" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q112894613" start="830" end="845" title="Christian Busch (management scientist)" label="Christian Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="1132" end="1146" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627895" start="1202" end="1213" title="Sir Horace Mann, 1st Baronet" label="Horace Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140840" start="1277" end="1290" title="Lost artworks" label="lost painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q258111" start="1294" end="1309" title="Bianca Cappello" label="Bianca Cappello"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="1313" end="1327" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563423" start="1372" end="1401" title="The Three Princes of Serendip" label="The Three Princes of Serendip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1589" end="1597" title="Names of Sri Lanka#Serendip" label="Serendip"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1629" end="1638" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="1811" end="1819" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="2378" end="2383" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="2502" end="2508" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181331" start="2615" end="2627" title="Post-It Note" label="Post-It Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="2649" end="2651" title="3M" label="3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576179" start="2662" end="2676" title="Spencer Silver" label="Spencer Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529908" start="2776" end="2787" title="Silly Putty" label="Silly Putty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="2825" end="2841" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="2886" end="2893" title="air bag" label="air bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="2959" end="2972" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q130317" start="2979" end="2994" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller" label="Penn and Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="3013" end="3027" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="3029" end="3037" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q451052" start="3048" end="3061" title="Percy Spencer" label="Percy Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207649" start="3189" end="3195" title="Velcro" label="Velcro"/>
<link wikidata="Q123525" start="3220" end="3237" title="George de Mestral" label="George de Mestral"/>
<link wikidata="Q598601" start="3301" end="3311" title="Xanthium" label="cockleburs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270260" start="3408" end="3416" title="Popsicle (brand)" label="Popsicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="3579" end="3585" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="3695" end="3711" title="Refrigerant" label="CFCs refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="3730" end="3740" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="3766" end="3787" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Sir Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="3857" end="3871" title="staphylococcus" label="staphylococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="4004" end="4036" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="4069" end="4083" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q137743" start="4280" end="4295" title="Semachrysa jade" label="Semachrysa jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q156438" start="4320" end="4328" title="Neuroptera" label="lacewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="4403" end="4409" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036" start="4620" end="4632" title="Jaime Teevan" label="Jaime Teevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956164" start="5142" end="5155" title="Cass Sunstein" label="Cass Sunstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q722103" start="5717" end="5729" title="William Boyd (writer)" label="William Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q80413" start="5970" end="5981" title="Novaya Zemlya" label="Nova Zembla"/>
<link wikidata="Q299271" start="6085" end="6095" title="Bahram V" label="Bahram Gur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563423" start="6122" end="6151" title="The Three Princes of Serendip" label="The Three Princes of Serendip"/>
<link wikidata="Q516508" start="6422" end="6428" title="Browse" label="Browse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308809" start="6431" end="6442" title="Coincidence" label="Coincidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880334" start="6445" end="6456" title="Felix culpa" label="Felix culpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553259" start="6459" end="6466" title="Insight" label="Insight"/>
<link wikidata="Q944461" start="6469" end="6485" title="Lateral thinking" label="Lateral thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645643" start="6488" end="6506" title="Multiple discovery" label="Multiple discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360638" start="6509" end="6549" title="Role of chance in scientific discoveries" label="Role of chance in scientific discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q135287" start="6558" end="6575" title="Serendipaceratops" label="Serendipaceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q108044052" start="6584" end="6604" title="Serendipity Sapphire" label="Serendipity Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="6607" end="6618" title="Side effect" label="Side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121101" start="6621" end="6634" title="Synchronicity" label="Synchronicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7029" end="7040" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q752663" start="7139" end="7169" title="Delft University of Technology" label="Delft University of Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27007" wikidata="Q75698" url="?curid=27007" title="Samuel Morse">
<text>Samuel Finley Breese Morse (April 27, 1791 – April 2, 1872) was an American inventor and painter. After establishing his reputation as a portrait painter, Morse, in his middle age, contributed to the invention of a single-wire telegraph system based on European telegraphs. He was a co-developer of Morse code in 1837 and helped to develop the commercial use of telegraphy.

==Personal life==
Samuel F. B. Morse was born in Charlestown, Boston, Massachusetts, the first child of the pastor Jedidiah Morse, who was also a geographer, and his wife Elizabeth Ann Finley Breese. His father was a great preacher of the Calvinist faith and supporter of the Federalist Party. He thought it helped preserve Puritan traditions (strict observance of Sabbath, among other things), and believed in the Federalist support of an alliance with Britain and a strong central government. Morse strongly believed in education within a Federalist framework, alongside the instillation of Calvinist virtues, morals, and prayers for his first son. His first ancestor in America was Anthony Morse, of Marlborough, Wiltshire, who had emigrated to America in 1635, and settled in Newbury, Massachusetts.

After attending Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, Samuel Morse went on to Yale College to study religious philosophy, mathematics, and science. While at Yale, he attended lectures on electricity from Benjamin Silliman and Jeremiah Day and was a member of the Society of Brothers in Unity. He supported himself by painting. In 1810, he graduated from Yale with Phi Beta Kappa honors.

Morse married Lucretia Pickering Walker on September 29, 1818, in Concord, New Hampshire. She died on February 7, 1825, of a heart attack shortly after the birth of their third child. He married his second wife, Sarah Elizabeth Griswold on August 10, 1848, in Utica, New York and had four children.

==Painting==

Morse expressed some of his Calvinist beliefs in his painting, &quot;Landing of the Pilgrims&quot;, through the depiction of simple clothing as well as the people&#x27;s austere facial features. His image captured the psychology of the Federalists; Calvinists from England brought to North America ideas of religion and government, thus linking the two countries. This work attracted the attention of the notable artist, Washington Allston. Allston wanted Morse to accompany him to England to meet the artist Benjamin West. Allston arranged—with Morse&#x27;s father—a three-year stay for painting study in England. The two men set sail aboard the &quot;Libya&quot; on July 15, 1811.

In England, Morse perfected his painting techniques under Allston&#x27;s watchful eye; by the end of 1811, he gained admittance to the Royal Academy. At the academy, he was moved by the art of the Renaissance and paid close attention to the works of Michelangelo and Raphael. After observing and practicing life drawing and absorbing its anatomical demands, the young artist produced his masterpiece, the &quot;Dying Hercules&quot;. (He first made a sculpture as a study for the painting.)

To some, the &quot;Dying Hercules&quot; seemed to represent a political statement against the British and also the American Federalists. The muscles symbolized the strength of the young and vibrant United States versus the British and British-American supporters. During Morse&#x27;s time in Britain, the Americans and British were engaged in the War of 1812. Both societies were conflicted over loyalties. Anti-Federalist Americans aligned themselves with the French, abhorred the British, and believed a strong central government to be inherently dangerous to democracy.

As the war raged on, Morse&#x27;s letters to his parents became more anti-Federalist in tone. In one such letter, Morse wrote:

I assert ... that the Federalists in the Northern States have done more injury to their country by their violent opposition measures than a French alliance could. Their proceedings are copied into the English papers, read before Parliament, and circulated through their country, and what do they say of them ... they call them [Federalists] cowards, a base set, say they are traitors to their country and ought to be hanged like traitors.


Although Jedidiah Morse did not change Samuel&#x27;s political views, he continued as an influence. Critics believe that the elder Morse&#x27;s Calvinist ideas are integral to Morse&#x27;s &quot;Judgment of Jupiter,&quot; another significant work completed in England. Jupiter is shown in a cloud, accompanied by his eagle, with his hand spread above the parties and he is pronouncing judgment. Marpessa, with an expression of compunction and shame, is throwing herself into the arms of her husband. Idas, who tenderly loved Marpessa, is eagerly rushing forward to receive her while Apollo stares with surprise.

Critics have suggested that Jupiter represents God&#x27;s omnipotence—watching every move that is made. Some call the portrait a moral teaching by Morse on infidelity. Although Marpessa fell victim, she realized that her eternal salvation was important and desisted from her wicked ways. Apollo shows no remorse for what he did but stands with a puzzled look. Many American paintings throughout the early nineteenth century had religious themes, and Morse was an early exemplar of this. &quot;Judgment of Jupiter&quot; allowed Morse to express his support of Anti-Federalism while maintaining his strong spiritual convictions. Benjamin West sought to present the &quot;Jupiter&quot; at another Royal Academy exhibition, but Morse&#x27;s time had run out. He left England on August 21, 1815, to return to the United States and begin his full-time career as a painter.

The decade 1815–1825 marked significant growth in Morse&#x27;s work, as he sought to capture the essence of America&#x27;s culture and life. He painted the Federalist former President John Adams (1816). The Federalists and Anti-Federalists clashed over Dartmouth College. Morse painted portraits of Francis Brown—the college&#x27;s president—and Judge Woodward (1817), who was involved in bringing the Dartmouth case before the U.S. Supreme Court.

Morse also sought commissions among the elite of Charleston, South Carolina. Morse&#x27;s 1818 painting of Mrs. Emma Quash symbolized the opulence of Charleston. The young artist was doing well for himself. Between 1819 and 1821, Morse went through great changes in his life, including a decline in commissions due to the Panic of 1819.

Morse was commissioned to paint President James Monroe in 1820. He embodied Jeffersonian democracy by favoring the common man over the aristocrat.

Morse had moved to New Haven. His commissions for &quot;The House of Representatives&quot; (1821) and a portrait of the Marquis de Lafayette (1825) engaged his sense of democratic nationalism. &quot;The House of Representatives&quot; was designed to capitalize on the success of François Marius Granet&#x27;s &quot;The Capuchin Chapel in Rome,&quot; which toured the United States extensively throughout the 1820s, attracting audiences willing to pay the 25-cent admission fee.

The artist chose to paint the House of Representatives, in a similar way, with careful attention to architecture and dramatic lighting. He also wished to select a uniquely American topic that would bring glory to the young nation. His subject did just that, showing American democracy in action. He traveled to Washington D.C. to draw the architecture of the new Capitol and placed eighty individuals within the painting. He chose to portray a night scene, balancing the architecture of the Rotunda with the figures, and using lamplight to highlight the work. Pairs of people, those who stood alone, individuals bent over their desks working, were each painted simply but with faces of character. Morse chose nighttime to convey that Congress&#x27; dedication to the principles of democracy transcended day.

&quot;The House of Representatives&quot; failed to draw a crowd when exhibited in New York City in 1823. By contrast, John Trumbull&#x27;s &quot;Declaration of Independence&quot; had won popular acclaim a few years earlier. Viewers may have felt that the architecture of &quot;The House of Representatives&quot; overshadows the individuals, making it hard to appreciate the drama of what was happening.

Morse was honored to paint the Marquis de Lafayette, the leading French supporter of the American Revolution. He felt compelled to paint a grand portrait of the man who helped to establish a free and independent America. He features Lafayette against a magnificent sunset. He has positioned Lafayette to the right of three pedestals: one has a bust of Benjamin Franklin, another of George Washington, and the third seems reserved for Lafayette. A peaceful woodland landscape below him symbolized American tranquility and prosperity as it approached the age of fifty. The developing friendship between Morse and Lafayette and their discussions of the Revolutionary War affected the artist after his return to New York City.

In 1826, he helped found the National Academy of Design in New York City. He served as the academy&#x27;s president from 1826 to 1845 and again from 1861 to 1862. Forty-nine of his paintings were exhibited there.

From 1830 to 1832, Morse traveled and studied in Europe to improve his painting skills, visiting Italy, Switzerland, and France. During his time in Paris, he developed a friendship with the writer James Fenimore Cooper. As a project, he painted miniature copies of 38 of the Louvre&#x27;s famous paintings on a single canvas (6 ft. x 9 ft), which he entitled &quot;The Gallery of the Louvre.&quot; He completed the work upon his return to the United States.

In 1832, after his return to the United States, Morse was appointed professor of painting and sculpture at the University of the City of New York, now New York University. This was the first such professorship in the United States.

On a subsequent visit to Paris in 1839, Morse met Louis Daguerre. He became interested in the latter&#x27;s daguerreotype—the first practical means of photography. Morse wrote a letter to the &quot;New York Observer&quot; describing the invention, which was published widely in the American press and provided broad awareness of the new technology. Mathew Brady, one of the earliest photographers in American history, famous for his depictions of the Civil War, initially studied under Morse and later took photographs of him.

Some of Morse&#x27;s paintings and sculptures are on display at his Locust Grove estate in Poughkeepsie, New York.

==Attributed artworks==
==Telegraph==
While returning by ship from Europe in 1832, Morse encountered Charles Thomas Jackson of Boston, a man who was well schooled in electromagnetism. Witnessing various experiments with Jackson&#x27;s electromagnet, Morse developed the concept of a single-wire telegraph. He set aside the painting he had been working on, &quot;The Gallery of the Louvre&quot;. The original Morse telegraph, submitted with his patent application, is part of the collections of the National Museum of American History at the Smithsonian Institution. In time, the Morse code that he developed would become the primary language of telegraphy in the world. It is still the standard for rhythmic transmission of data.

Meanwhile, William Cooke and Professor Charles Wheatstone had learned of the Wilhelm Weber and Carl Gauss electromagnetic telegraph in 1833. They had reached the stage of launching a commercial telegraph prior to Morse, despite starting later. In England, Cooke became fascinated by electrical telegraphy in 1836, four years after Morse. Aided by his greater financial resources, Cooke abandoned his primary subject of anatomy and built a small electrical telegraph within three weeks. Wheatstone also was experimenting with telegraphy and (most importantly) understood that a single large battery would not carry a telegraphic signal over long distances. He theorized that numerous small batteries were far more successful and efficient in this task. (Wheatstone was building on the primary research of Joseph Henry, an American physicist.) Cooke and Wheatstone formed a partnership and patented the electrical telegraph in May 1837, and within a short time had provided the Great Western Railway with a stretch of telegraph. However, within a few years, Cooke and Wheatstone&#x27;s multiple-wire signaling method would be overtaken by Morse&#x27;s cheaper method.

In an 1848 letter to a friend, Morse describes how vigorously he fought to be called the sole inventor of the electromagnetic telegraph despite the previous inventions.

==Relays==
Morse encountered the problem of getting a telegraphic signal to carry over more than a few hundred yards of wire. His breakthrough came from the insights of Professor Leonard Gale, who taught chemistry at New York University (he was a personal friend of Joseph Henry). With Gale&#x27;s help, Morse introduced extra circuits or relays at frequent intervals and was soon able to send a message through of wire. This was the great breakthrough he had been seeking. Morse and Gale were soon joined by Alfred Vail, an enthusiastic young man with excellent skills, insights, and money.

At the Speedwell Ironworks in Morristown, New Jersey on January 11, 1838, Morse and Vail made the first public demonstration of the electric telegraph. Although Morse and Alfred Vail had done most of the research and development in the ironworks facilities, they chose a nearby factory house as the demonstration site. Without the repeater, Morse devised a system of electromagnetic relays. This was the key innovation, as it freed the technology from being limited by distance in sending messages. The range of the telegraph was limited to , and the inventors had pulled of wires inside the factory house through an elaborate scheme. The first public transmission, with the message, &quot;A patient waiter is no loser&quot;, was witnessed by a mostly local crowd.

Morse traveled to Washington, D.C. in 1838 seeking federal sponsorship for a telegraph line but was not successful. He went to Europe, seeking both sponsorship and patents, but in London discovered that Cooke and Wheatstone had already established priority. After his return to the US, Morse finally gained financial backing by Maine congressman Francis Ormand Jonathan Smith. This funding may be the first instance of government support to a private researcher, especially funding for applied (as opposed to basic or theoretical) research.

==Federal support==
Morse made his last trip to Washington, D.C., in December 1842, stringing &quot;wires between two committee rooms in the Capitol, and sent messages back and forth&quot; to demonstrate his telegraph system. Congress appropriated $30,000 () in 1843 for construction of an experimental telegraph line between Washington, D.C., and Baltimore along the right-of-way of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. An impressive demonstration occurred on May 1, 1844, when news of the Whig Party&#x27;s nomination of Henry Clay for U.S. president was telegraphed from the party&#x27;s convention in Baltimore to the Capitol Building in Washington.

On May 24, 1844, the line was officially opened as Morse sent the now-famous words, &quot;,&quot; from the Supreme Court chamber in the basement of the U.S. Capitol building in Washington, D.C., to the B&amp;O&#x27;s Mount Clare Station in Baltimore. Annie Ellsworth chose these words from the Bible (Numbers 23:23); her father, U.S. Patent Commissioner Henry Leavitt Ellsworth, had championed Morse&#x27;s invention and secured early funding for it. His telegraph could transmit thirty characters per minute.
In May 1845, the Magnetic Telegraph Company was formed in order to build telegraph lines from New York City toward Philadelphia, Boston, Buffalo, and the Mississippi. Telegraphic lines rapidly spread throughout the United States in the next few years, with 12,000 miles of wire laid by 1850.

Morse at one time adopted Wheatstone and Carl August von Steinheil&#x27;s idea of broadcasting an electrical telegraph signal through a body of water or down steel railroad tracks or anything conductive. He went to great lengths to win a lawsuit for the right to be called &quot;inventor of the telegraph&quot; and promoted himself as being an inventor. But Alfred Vail also played an important role in the development of the Morse code, which was based on earlier codes for the electromagnetic telegraph.

==Patent==
Morse received a patent for the telegraph in 1847, at the old Beylerbeyi Palace (the present Beylerbeyi Palace was built in 1861–1865 on the same location) in Istanbul, which was issued by Sultan Abdülmecid, who personally tested the new invention. He was elected an Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1849. The original patent went to the Breese side of the family after the death of Samuel Morse.

In 1856, Morse went to Copenhagen and visited the Thorvaldsens Museum, where the sculptor&#x27;s grave is in the inner courtyard. He was received by King Frederick VII, who decorated him with the Order of the Dannebrog for the telegraph. Morse expressed his wish to donate his Thorvaldsen portrait from 1831 in Rome to the king. The Thorvaldsen portrait today belongs to Margrethe II of Denmark.

The Morse telegraphic apparatus was officially adopted as the standard for European telegraphy in 1851. Only the United Kingdom (with its extensive overseas empire) kept the needle telegraph of Cooke and Wheatstone.

In 1858, Morse introduced wired communication to Latin America when he established a telegraph system in Puerto Rico, then a Spanish Colony. Morse&#x27;s oldest daughter, Susan Walker Morse (1819–1885), would often visit her uncle Charles Pickering Walker, who owned the Hacienda Concordia in the town of Guayama. During one of her visits, she met Edward Lind, a Danish merchant who worked in his brother-in-law&#x27;s Hacienda La Henriqueta in the town of Arroyo. They later married. Lind purchased the Hacienda from his sister when she became a widow. Morse, who often spent his winters at the Hacienda with his daughter and son-in-law, set a two-mile telegraph line connecting his son-in-law&#x27;s Hacienda to their house in Arroyo. The line was inaugurated on March 1, 1859, in a ceremony flanked by the Spanish and American flags. The first words transmitted by Samuel Morse that day in Puerto Rico were:

Puerto Rico, beautiful jewel! When you are linked with the other jewels of the Antilles in the necklace of the world&#x27;s telegraph, yours will not shine less brilliantly in the crown of your Queen!

==Political views==
===Anti-Catholic===
Morse was a leader in the anti-Catholic and anti-immigration movement of the mid-19th century. In 1836, he ran unsuccessfully for mayor of New York under the anti-immigrant Nativist Party&#x27;s banner, receiving only 1,496 votes. When Morse visited Rome, he allegedly refused to take his hat off in the presence of the Pope.

Morse worked to unite Protestants against Catholic institutions (including schools), wanted to forbid Catholics from holding public office, and promoted changing immigration laws to limit immigration from Catholic countries. On this topic, he wrote, &quot;We must first stop the leak in the ship through which muddy waters from without threaten to sink us.&quot;

He wrote numerous letters to the New York &quot;Observer&quot; (his brother Sidney was the editor at the time) urging people to fight the perceived Catholic menace. These were widely reprinted in other newspapers. Among other claims, he believed that the Austrian government and Catholic aid organizations were subsidizing Catholic immigration to the United States in order to gain control of the country.

In his &quot;Foreign Conspiracy Against the Liberties of the United States&quot;, Morse wrote:
Surely American Protestants, freemen, have discernment enough to discover beneath them the cloven foot of this subtle foreign heresy. They will see that Popery is now, what it has ever been, a system of the darkest political intrigue and despotism, cloaking itself to avoid attack under the sacred name of religion. They will be deeply impressed with the truth, that Popery is a political as well as a religious system; that in this respect it differs totally from all other sects, from all other forms of religion in the country.

In the same book, published in 1835 under the name of &quot;Brutus&quot;, in speaking of &quot;the foreign Emissaries of Popery re-warded in their own country,&quot; said: &quot;Where is Bishop Kelly of Richmond, Va.? He also sojourns with us until his duties to foreign masters are performed, and then is rewarded by promotion.&quot; (Patrick Kelly was a native of Ireland, and the first bishop of Richmond, Virginia. When after a couple of years, differences regarding questions of jurisdiction arose between him and Ambrose Maréchal, Archbishop of Baltimore, Kelly was offered the recently vacant See of Waterford and Lismore in his homeland.)

===Pro-slavery===
In the 1850s, Morse became well known as a defender of slavery, considering it to be sanctioned by God. In his treatise &quot;An Argument on the Ethical Position of Slavery,&quot; he wrote:

==Later years==
===Litigation over telegraph patent===
In the United States, Morse held his telegraph patent for many years, but it was both ignored and contested. In 1853, &quot;The Telegraph Patent case – O&#x27;Reilly v. Morse&quot; came before the U.S. Supreme Court where, after very lengthy investigation, Chief Justice Roger B. Taney ruled that Morse had been the first to combine the battery, electromagnetism, the electromagnet, and the correct battery configuration into a workable practical telegraph. However, in spite of this clear ruling, Morse still received no official recognition from the United States government.

The Supreme Court did not accept all of Morse&#x27;s claims. The &quot;O&#x27;Reilly v. Morse&quot; case has become widely known among patent lawyers because the Supreme Court explicitly denied Morse&#x27;s claim 8 for any and all use of the electromagnetic force for purposes of transmitting intelligible signals to any distance.

The Supreme Court sustained, however, Morse&#x27;s claim to such telecommunication when effectuated by means of Morse&#x27;s inventive &quot;repeater&quot; apparatus. This was an electrical circuit in which a cascade of many sets comprising a relay and a battery were connected in series, so that when each relay closed, it closed a circuit to cause the next battery to power the succeeding relay, as suggested in the accompanying figure. This caused Morse&#x27;s signal to pass along the cascade without degrading into noise as its amplitude decreased with the distance traveled. (Each time the amplitude of the signal approaches the noise level, the repeater [in effect, a nonlinear amplifier] boosts the signal amplitude well above the noise level.) This use of &quot;repeaters&quot; permitted a message to be sent to great distances, which was previously not feasible.

The Supreme Court thus held that Morse could properly claim a patent monopoly on the system or process of transmitting signals at any distance by means of the repeater circuitry indicated above, but he could not properly claim a monopoly over any and all uses of electromagnetic force to transmit signals. The apparatus limitation in the former type of claim limited the patent monopoly to what Morse taught and gave the world. The lack of that limitation in the latter type of claim (i.e., claim 8) both gave Morse more than was commensurate with what he had contributed to society and discouraged the inventive efforts of others who might come up with different and/or better ways to send signals at a distance using the electromagnetic force.

The problem that Morse faced (the deterioration of the signal with distance) and how he solved it is discussed in more detail in the article &quot;O&#x27;Reilly v. Morse&quot;. In summary, the solution, as the Supreme Court stated, was the repeater apparatus described in the preceding paragraphs.

The importance of this legal precedent in patent law cannot be overstated, as it became the foundation of the law governing the eligibility of computer program-implemented inventions (as well as inventions implementing natural laws) to be granted patents.

===Foreign recognition===
Assisted by the American ambassador in Paris, the governments of Europe were approached about their long neglect of Morse while their countries were using his invention. There was a widespread recognition that something must be done, and in 1858 Morse was awarded the sum of 400,000 French francs (equivalent to about $80,000 at the time) by the governments of France, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, Piedmont, Russia, Sweden, Tuscany, and the Ottoman Empire, each of which contributed a share according to the number of Morse instruments in use in each country. In 1858, he was also elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

===Transatlantic cable===
Morse lent his support to Cyrus West Field&#x27;s ambitious plan to construct the first transoceanic telegraph line. Morse had experimented with underwater telegraph circuits since 1842. He invested $10,000 in Field&#x27;s Atlantic Telegraph Company, took a seat on its board of directors, and was appointed honorary &quot;Electrician&quot;. In 1856, Morse traveled to London to help Charles Tilston Bright and Edward Whitehouse test a 2,000-mile-length of spooled cable.

After the first two cable-laying attempts failed, Field reorganized the project, removing Morse from direct involvement. Though the cable broke three times during the third attempt, it was successfully repaired, and the first transatlantic telegraph messages were sent in 1858. The cable failed after just three months of use. Though Field had to wait out the Civil War, the cable laid in 1866 proved more durable, and the era of reliable transatlantic telegraph service had begun.

In addition to the telegraph, Morse invented a marble-cutting machine that could carve three-dimensional sculptures in marble or stone. He could not patent it, however, because of an existing 1820 Thomas Blanchard design.

===Last years and death===
Samuel Morse gave large sums to charity. He also became interested in the relationship of science and religion and provided the funds to establish a lectureship on &quot;the relation of the Bible to the Sciences&quot;. Though he was rarely awarded any royalties for the later uses and implementations of his inventions, he was able to live comfortably.

Morsemere in Ridgefield, New Jersey, takes its name from Morse, who had bought property there to build a home, but died before its completion.

He died of pneumonia in New York City on April 2, 1872, and was interred at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn. By the time of his death, his estate was valued at some $500,000 ($ today).

In his will he provided an award medal that is presented annually by the New York University to one undergraduate student who shows special ability in physics.

==Honors and awards==
Morse was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1815.

Despite honors and financial awards received from foreign countries, there was no such recognition in the U.S. until he neared the end of his life when on June 10, 1871, a bronze statue of Samuel Morse was unveiled in Central Park, New York City. An engraved portrait of Morse appeared on the reverse side of the United States two-dollar bill silver certificate series of 1896. He was depicted along with Robert Fulton. An example can be seen on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco&#x27;s website in their &quot;American Currency Exhibit&quot;:

A blue plaque was erected to commemorate him at 141 Cleveland Street, London, where he lived from 1812 to 1815.

In 1848, Morse was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society.

According to his &quot;The New York Times&quot; obituary published on April 3, 1872, Morse received respectively the decoration of the Atiq Nishan-i-Iftikhar (English: Order of Glory) [first medal on wearer&#x27;s right depicted in photo of Morse with medals], set in diamonds, from Sultan Abdülmecid of Turkey (c.1847), a &quot;golden snuff box containing the Prussian gold medal for scientific merit&quot; from the King of Prussia (1851); the &quot;Great Gold Medal of Arts and Sciences&quot; from the King of Württemberg (1852); and the &quot;Great Golden Medal of Science and Arts&quot; from Emperor of Austria (1855); a cross of Chevalier in the Légion d&#x27;honneur from the Emperor of France; the &quot;Cross of a Knight&quot; of the Order of the Dannebrog from the King of Denmark (1856); the Cross of Knight Commander of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, from the Queen of Spain, besides being elected member of innumerable scientific and art societies in this [United States] and other countries. Other awards include Order of the Tower and Sword from the kingdom of Portugal (1860), and Italy conferred on him the insignia of chevalier of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus in 1864. Morse&#x27;s telegraph was recognized as an IEEE Milestone in 1988.

In 1975, Morse was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.

On April 1, 2012, Google announced the release of &quot;Gmail Tap&quot;, an April Fools&#x27; Day joke that allowed users to use Morse Code to send text from their mobile phones. Morse&#x27;s great-great-grandnephew Reed Morse—a Google engineer—was instrumental in the prank, which became a real product.

==Patents==
* US Patent 1,647, Improvement in the mode of communicating information by signals by the application of electro-magnetism, June 20, 1840
* US Patent 1,647 (Reissue #79), Improvement in the mode of communicating information by signals by the application of electro-magnetism, January 15, 1846
* US Patent 1,647 (Reissue #117), Improvement in electro-magnetic telegraphs, June 13, 1848
* US Patent 3,316, Method of introducing wire into metallic pipes, October 5, 1843
* US Patent 4,453, Improvement in Electro-magnetic telegraphs, April 11, 1846
* US Patent 4,453 (Reissue #118), Improvement in Electro-magnetic telegraphs, June 13, 1848
* US Patent 6,420, Improvement in electric telegraphs, May 1, 1849

== See also ==
* Daniel Davis Jr.
* Seconds pendulum
* Telegraph in United States history

== Explanatory notes==
==Citations==
== General and cited references==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* — Produced by Carlo Traverso, Richard Prairie, and PG Distributed Proofreaders. This file was produced from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica)
* 
* 
*

Attribution

==Further reading==
* Reinhardt, Joachim, Samuel F. B. Morse (1791–1872), Congo, 1988.
* Mabee, Carleton, &quot;The American Leonardo: A Life of Samuel F. B. Morse&quot;, (1943, reissued 1969); William Kloss, Samuel F. B. Morse (1988); Paul J. Staiti, Samuel F. B. Morse (1989) (Knopf, 1944) (Pulitzer Prize winner for biography for 1944).
* Samuel F. B. Morse, &quot; Foreign Conspiracy Against the Liberties of the United States: The Numbers Under the Signature&quot; (Harvard University Press 1835, 1855)
* Paul J. Staiti, &quot;Samuel F. B. Morse&quot; (Cambridge 1989).
* Lauretta Dimmick, &quot;Mythic Proportion: Bertel Thorvaldsen&#x27;s Influence in America&quot;, &quot;Thorvaldsen: l&#x27;ambiente, l&#x27;influsso, il mito,&quot; ed. P. Kragelund and M. Nykjær, Rome 1991 (Analecta Romana Instituti Danici, Supplementum 18.), pp. 169–191.
*Samuel I. Prime, &quot;Life of S. F. B. Morse&quot; (New York, 1875)
* E. L. Morse (editor), his son, &quot;Samuel Finley Breese Morse, his Letters and Journals&quot; (two volumes, Boston, 1914)
* Andrew Wheen, &quot;DOT-DASH TO DOT.COM: How Modern Telecommunications Evolved from the Telegraph to the Internet&quot; (Springer, 2011) pp. 3–29
* James D. Reid, &quot;The Telegraph in America: Its Founders, Promoters and Noted Men&quot; New York: Arno Press, 1974.
* Robert Luther Thompson, &quot;Wiring A Continent, The History of the Telegraph Industry in the United States 1832–1866&quot; Princeton University Press, 1947.
* 

==External links==

* &quot;Art and the empire city: New York, 1825–1861&quot;, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Morse (see index)
* Speech of Morse given at the National Academy of Design, 1840, regarding the daguerreotype
* Reminiscence by Morse regarding the early days of the daguerreotype
* Locust Grove (official site)
* 
* Jeans, W. T., &quot;The Lives of Electricians&quot;: Professors Tyndall, Wheatstone, and Morse. (1887, Whittaker &amp; Co.)
* Samuel Finley Breese Morse papers at the Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="0" end="26" title="Samuel Morse" label="Samuel Finley Breese Morse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="215" end="243" title="Electrical telegraph#Morse system" label="single-wire telegraph system"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="299" end="309" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="424" end="443" title="Charlestown, Boston" label="Charlestown, Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686158" start="490" end="504" title="Jedidiah Morse" label="Jedidiah Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="614" end="623" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="651" end="667" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="699" end="706" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="740" end="747" title="Christian Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="1078" end="1100" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough, Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302285" start="1155" end="1177" title="Newbury, Massachusetts" label="Newbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="1196" end="1212" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q370619" start="1216" end="1238" title="Andover, Massachusetts" label="Andover, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="1264" end="1276" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054106" start="1286" end="1306" title="religious philosophy" label="religious philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817692" start="1390" end="1407" title="Benjamin Silliman" label="Benjamin Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180805" start="1412" end="1424" title="Jeremiah Day" label="Jeremiah Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975704" start="1460" end="1477" title="Brothers in Unity" label="Brothers in Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="1550" end="1564" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="1640" end="1662" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="1834" end="1849" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q468272" start="2309" end="2327" title="Washington Allston" label="Washington Allston"/>
<link wikidata="Q313498" start="2397" end="2410" title="Benjamin West" label="Benjamin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="2707" end="2720" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2769" end="2780" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="2822" end="2834" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="2839" end="2846" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436786" start="2879" end="2891" title="Figure drawing" label="life drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="3178" end="3198" title="Federalist Party" label="American Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="3410" end="3421" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="3994" end="4004" title="British Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="4475" end="4482" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="4523" end="4528" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932325" start="4601" end="4609" title="Marpessa of Aetolia" label="Marpessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4789" end="4795" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914621" start="4975" end="4985" title="infidelity" label="infidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="5040" end="5057" title="eternal salvation" label="eternal salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="5871" end="5881" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="5940" end="5957" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081324" start="5986" end="5999" title="Francis Brown (1784–1820)" label="Francis Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196738" start="6085" end="6103" title="Dartmouth College v. Woodward" label="the Dartmouth case"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6115" end="6133" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="6185" end="6211" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131100" start="6458" end="6471" title="Panic of 1819" label="Panic of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="6516" end="6528" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="6641" end="6650" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="6742" end="6762" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q964812" start="6901" end="6923" title="François Marius Granet" label="François Marius Granet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7131" end="7155" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q369263" start="8028" end="8041" title="John Trumbull" label="John Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173195" start="8055" end="8082" title="Declaration of Independence (painting)" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="8345" end="8365" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="8403" end="8422" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="8666" end="8683" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="8696" end="8713" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="9067" end="9093" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q167856" start="9449" end="9470" title="James Fenimore Cooper" label="James Fenimore Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="9527" end="9533" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="9862" end="9881" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="9994" end="10008" title="Louis Daguerre" label="Louis Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="10052" end="10065" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038698" start="10142" end="10159" title="New York Observer" label="New York Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187850" start="10293" end="10305" title="Mathew Brady" label="Mathew Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="10395" end="10404" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666117" start="10540" end="10552" title="Locust Grove (Samuel F. B. Morse House)" label="Locust Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="10563" end="10585" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q715644" start="10689" end="10711" title="Charles Thomas Jackson" label="Charles Thomas Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="10754" end="10770" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="10823" end="10836" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10871" end="10892" title="Electrical telegraph#Morse system" label="single-wire telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022019" start="11032" end="11050" title="patent application" label="patent application"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="11086" end="11121" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="11129" end="11152" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="11167" end="11177" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409652" start="11330" end="11343" title="William Fothergill Cooke" label="William Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="11358" end="11376" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="11396" end="11409" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Wilhelm Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="11414" end="11424" title="Carl Gauss" label="Carl Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="11909" end="11916" title="electric battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q157043" start="12123" end="12135" title="Joseph Henry" label="Joseph Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="12295" end="12316" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207136" start="12835" end="12847" title="Leonard Gale" label="Leonard Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="12873" end="12892" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q157043" start="12922" end="12934" title="Joseph Henry" label="Joseph Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="12995" end="13000" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q454292" start="13165" end="13176" title="Alfred Vail" label="Alfred Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575705" start="13256" end="13275" title="Speedwell Ironworks" label="Speedwell Ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="13279" end="13301" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="Morristown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13580" end="13588" title="Relay#History" label="repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14033" end="14049" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1441675" start="14361" end="14390" title="Francis Ormand Jonathan Smith" label="Francis Ormand Jonathan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="14905" end="14914" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="14945" end="14972" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="15044" end="15054" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="15076" end="15086" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q805753" start="15425" end="15444" title="B&amp;amp;O Railroad Museum" label="Mount Clare Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q43099" start="15509" end="15516" title="Book of Numbers" label="Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q738941" start="15562" end="15585" title="Henry Leavitt Ellsworth" label="Henry Leavitt Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="15833" end="15845" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="15847" end="15853" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="15855" end="15862" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="15872" end="15883" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589207" start="15903" end="15946" title="Timeline of North American telegraphy" label="rapidly spread throughout the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q707106" start="16052" end="16077" title="Carl August von Steinheil" label="Carl August von Steinheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q454292" start="16369" end="16380" title="Alfred Vail" label="Alfred Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="16437" end="16447" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q794349" start="16622" end="16639" title="Beylerbeyi Palace" label="Beylerbeyi Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="16718" end="16735" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Sultan Abdülmecid"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="16820" end="16857" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992413" start="17009" end="17028" title="Thorvaldsens Museum" label="Thorvaldsens Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="17108" end="17126" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="King Frederick VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="17155" end="17177" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q47812" start="17236" end="17247" title="Bertel Thorvaldsen" label="Thorvaldsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102139" start="17330" end="17353" title="Margrethe II of Denmark" label="Margrethe II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="17504" end="17519" title="British Empire" label="overseas empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="17678" end="17689" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870997" start="17878" end="17885" title="Guayama, Puerto Rico" label="Guayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q425678" start="18030" end="18036" title="Arroyo, Puerto Rico" label="Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="18753" end="18766" title="anti-Catholic" label="anti-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="18857" end="18874" title="mayor of New York" label="mayor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q550678" start="18900" end="18914" title="Know Nothing party" label="Nativist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q695599" start="19673" end="19692" title="Austrian government" label="Austrian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q212452" start="20073" end="20079" title="Popery" label="Popery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146929" start="20639" end="20651" title="Patrick Kelly (bishop of Waterford and Lismore)" label="Bishop Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146929" start="20788" end="20801" title="Patrick Kelly (bishop of Waterford and Lismore)" label="Patrick Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613857" start="20971" end="20987" title="Ambrose Maréchal" label="Ambrose Maréchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721275" start="21052" end="21080" title="Bishop of Waterford and Lismore" label="See of Waterford and Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="21173" end="21180" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071946" start="21488" end="21538" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly v. Morse" label="The Telegraph Patent case – O&amp;#x27;Reilly v. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="21561" end="21579" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="21635" end="21649" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="21701" end="21708" title="electric battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="21710" end="21726" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="21732" end="21745" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071946" start="24043" end="24065" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly v. Morse" label="O&amp;#x27;Reilly v. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="24494" end="24513" title="U.S. Ambassador to France" label="American ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="24761" end="24773" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="24882" end="24890" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="24908" end="24915" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24925" end="24939" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="25097" end="25130" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148998" start="25185" end="25201" title="Cyrus West Field" label="Cyrus West Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040990" start="25382" end="25408" title="Atlantic Telegraph Company" label="Atlantic Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q613322" start="25543" end="25565" title="Charles Tilston Bright" label="Charles Tilston Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468548" start="25570" end="25587" title="Edward Whitehouse" label="Edward Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="26202" end="26219" title="three-dimensional" label="three-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787689" start="26312" end="26328" title="Thomas Blanchard (inventor)" label="Thomas Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657375" start="26719" end="26728" title="Morsemere, New Jersey" label="Morsemere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="26874" end="26883" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239043" start="26939" end="26958" title="Green-Wood Cemetery" label="Green-Wood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="27523" end="27535" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189454" start="27618" end="27647" title="United States two-dollar bill" label="United States two-dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417454" start="27648" end="27666" title="Silver certificate (United States)" label="silver certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="27710" end="27723" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657981" start="27770" end="27807" title="Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco" label="Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="27874" end="27885" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="28031" end="28061" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515028" start="28199" end="28221" title="Order of Glory (Ottoman Empire)" label="Atiq Nishan-i-Iftikhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="28347" end="28364" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Sultan Abdülmecid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627855" start="28568" end="28587" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Imperial Germany" label="King of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="28660" end="28678" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="28715" end="28736" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="28806" end="28828" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="28899" end="28929" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93932" start="29095" end="29123" title="Order of the Tower and Sword" label="Order of the Tower and Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422957" start="29221" end="29256" title="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus" label="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851148" start="29310" end="29324" title="List of IEEE milestones" label="IEEE Milestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="29372" end="29403" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="29482" end="29503" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216928" start="30447" end="30463" title="Daniel Davis Jr." label="Daniel Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q354669" start="30466" end="30482" title="Seconds pendulum" label="Seconds pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q117802038" start="30485" end="30519" title="Telegraph in United States history" label="Telegraph in United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="30760" end="30792" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="31108" end="31113" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="31300" end="31324" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411766" start="31681" end="31696" title="Samuel I. Prime" label="Samuel I. Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176977" start="32725" end="32737" title="William Tulloch Jeans" label="Jeans, W. T."/>
</links>
</doc>
